
  Aug. 19, 2019
  
    
      
      
      Title 45
      Public Welfare
      Parts 1 to 139
      Revised as of October 1, 2019
      Containing a codification of documents of general applicability and future effect
      As of October 1, 2019
      
        Published by the Office of the Federal National Archives and Records Administration as a Special Edition of the Federal Register
      
    
    
      
        
        U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE
        Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
        
          archives.ai
        
        The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as the official codification of Federal regulations established under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is prima facie evidence of the original documents published in the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).
        It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this material without the express, written permission of the Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 1017.
        Use of ISBN Prefix
        This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Publishing Office Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the U.S. Government Publishing Office requests that any reprinted edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work with a new ISBN.
      
      
        
          gpologo2.eps
        
        U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P U B L I S H I N G O F F I C E
      
      
        U.S. Superintendent of Documents • Washington, DC 20402-0001
        http://bookstore.gpo.gov
        Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800
      
      
        
        As of October 1, 2019
        Title 45, Parts 1 to 199
        Revised as of October 1, 2018
        Is Replaced by
        Title 45, Parts 1 to 139
        and
        Parts 140 to 199
      
    
    
    
      
      Table of Contents
      Page
      
        Explanation
        vii
      
      
        Title 45:
        
          SUBTITLE A—Department of Health and Human Services
          
          3
        
      
      
        Finding Aids:
        Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
        821
        Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
        841
        List of CFR Sections Affected
        851
      
    
    
      
      Cite this Code: CFR
      

      To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part and section number. Thus, 45 CFR 2.1 refers to title 45, part 2, section 1.
    
    
      
      Explanation
      The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into parts covering specific regulatory areas.
      Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:
      
        Title 1 through Title 16 
        as of January 1
        Title 17 through Title 27 
        as of April 1
        Title 28 through Title 41 
        as of July 1
        Title 42 through Title 50 
        as of October 1
      
      The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each volume.
      
        LEGAL STATUS
        The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).
      
      
        HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS
        The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
        To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its revision date (in this case, October 1, 2019), consult the “List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA),” which is issued monthly, and the “Cumulative List of Parts Affected,” which appears in the Reader Aids section of the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.
      
      
        EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES
        Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be inserted following the text.
      
      
        OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

        The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information collection request. Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting requirements.
      
      
        PAST PROVISIONS OF THE CODE
        Provisions of the Code that are no longer in force and effect as of the revision date stated on the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text of provisions in effect on any given date in the past by using the appropriate List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA). For the convenience of the reader, a “List of CFR Sections Affected” is published at the end of each CFR volume. For changes to the Code prior to the LSA listings at the end of the volume, consult previous annual editions of the LSA. For changes to the Code prior to 2001, consult the List of CFR Sections Affected compilations, published for 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000.
      
      
        “[RESERVED]” TERMINOLOGY
        The term “[Reserved]” is used as a place holder within the Code of Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a “[Reserved]” location at any time. Occasionally “[Reserved]” is used editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and not dropped in error.
      
      
        INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
        
          What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force of law.
        
          What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which approval is based are:
        (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of material published in the Federal Register.
        (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative process.
        (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
        
          What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001, or call 202-741-6010.
      
      
        CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

        A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in this volume.

        An index to the text of “Title 3—The President” is carried within that volume.
        
        The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. This index is based on a consolidation of the “Contents” entries in the daily Federal Register.
        A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.
      
      
        REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL
        There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing in the Code of Federal Regulations.
      
      
        INQUIRIES
        For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at the top of odd-numbered pages.

        For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001 or e-mail fedreg.info@nara.gov.
        
      
      
        SALES
        The Government Publishing Office (GPO) processes all sales and distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2104, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, write to: US Government Publishing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO 63197-9000.
      
      
        ELECTRONIC SERVICES

        The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal Register, Public Laws, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Compilation of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic format via www.govinfo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-mail, ContactCenter@gpo.gov.
        

        The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) website for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related information. Connect to NARA's website at www.archives.gov/federal-register.
        

        The e-CFR is a regularly updated, unofficial editorial compilation of CFR material and Federal Register amendments, produced by the Office of the Federal Register and the Government Publishing Office. It is available at www.ecfr.gov.
          
        
        
          Oliver A. Potts,
        
        
          Director,
        
        
          Office of the Federal Register
        
        
          October 1, 2019
        
      
      
         
         
         
      
       
    
    
      
      THIS TITLE
      Title 45—Public Welfare is composed of five volumes. The parts in these volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-139, 140-199, 200-499, 500-1199, and 1200 to end. Volumes one and two (parts 1-139 and parts 140-199) contain all current regulations issued under subtitle A—Department of Health and Human Services. Volume three (parts 200-499) contains all current regulations issued under subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Public Welfare, chapter II—Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services, chapter III—Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support Enforcement Program), Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services, and chapter IV—Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services. Volume four (parts 500-1199) contains all current regulations issued under chapter V—Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States, Department of Justice, chapter VI—National Science Foundation, chapter VII—Commission on Civil Rights, chapter VIII—Office of Personnel Management, chapter IX—Denali Commission, chapter X—Office of Community Services, Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services, and chapter XI—National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities. Volume five (part 1200 to end) contains all current regulations issued under chapter XII—Corporation for National and Community Service, chapter XIII—Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services, chapter XVI—Legal Services Corporation, chapter XVII—National Commission on Libraries and Information Science, chapter XVIII—Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation, chapter XXI—Commission of Fine Arts, chapter XXIII—Arctic Research Commission, chapter XXIV—James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation, and chapter XXV—Corporation for National and Community Service. The contents of these volumes represent all of the current regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of October 1, 2019.
      For this volume, Ann Worley was Chief Editor. The Code of Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of John Hyrum Martinez, assisted by Stephen J. Frattini.
    
  
  
    45 CFR Subtitle A (10-1-19 Edition)
    Department of Health and Human Services
    
      
        
        Title 45—Public Welfare
        (This book contains parts 1 to 139)
      
      
        Part
        
          SUBTITLE A—Department of Health and Human Services
          
          2
        
      
    
    
      
        
          
          Subtitle A—Department of Health and Human Services
        
        
          Editorial Note:
          Nomenclature changes to subtitle A appear at 66 FR 39452, July 31, 2001.
        
        
          SUBCHAPTER A—GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
        
        Part
        Page
        
          1
          [Reserved]
          2
          Testimony by employees and production of documents in proceedings where the United States is not a party
          7
          3
          Conduct of persons and traffic on the National Institutes of Health Federal enclave
          10
          4
          Service of process
          16
          5
          Freedom of Information regulations
          17
          5a
          [Reserved]
          5b
          Privacy Act regulations
          34
          6
          [Reserved]
          7
          Employee inventions
          48
          8
          [Reserved]
          9
          Use of HHS research facilities by academic scientists, engineers, and students
          50
          12
          Disposal and utilization of surplus real property for public health purposes
          51
          12a
          Use of Federal real property to assist the homeless
          58
          13
          Implementation of the Equal Access to Justice Act in agency proceedings
          67
          15
          Uniform relocation assistance and real property acquisition for Federal and federally assisted programs
          76
          16
          Procedures of the Departmental Grant Appeals Board
          76
          17
          Release of adverse information to news media
          84
          18
          Official symbol, logo, and seal
          85
          30
          Claims collection
          87
          31
          Tax refund offset
          106
          32
          Administrative wage garnishment
          109
          33
          Salary offset
          114
          
          34
          Claims filed under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees Act
          124
          35
          Tort claims against the Government
          127
          36
          Indemnification of HHS employees
          131
          46
          Protection of human subjects
          131
          50
          U.S. Exchange Visitor Program—request for waiver of the two-year foreign residence requirement
          159
          51
          Criteria for evaluating comprehensive plan to reduce reliance on alien physicians
          162
          57
          Volunteer services
          164
          60
          National Practitioner Data Bank
          165
          63
          Grant programs administered by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
          185
          73
          Standards of conduct
          193
          73a
          Standards of conduct: Food and Drug Administration supplement
          226
          73b
          Debarment or suspension of former employees
          231
          74
          [Reserved]
          75
          Uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audit requirements for HHS awards
          234
          77
          Remedial actions applicable to letter of credit administration
          401
          78
          Conditions for waiver of denial of Federal benefits
          403
          79
          Program fraud civil remedies
          404
          80
          Nondiscrimination under programs receiving Federal assistance through the Department of Health and Human Services effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
          420
          81
          Practice and procedure for hearings under part 80 of this title
          445
          83
          Regulation for the administration and enforcement of sections 799A and 845 of the Public Health Service Act
          456
          84
          Nondiscrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance
          461
          85
          Enforcement of nondiscrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or activities conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services
          502
          86
          Nondiscrimination on the basis of sex in education programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance
          519
          87
          Equal treatment for faith-based organizations
          537
          88
          Protecting statutory conscience rights in health care; delegations of authority
          541
          
          89
          Organizational integrity of entities implementing programs and activities under the Leadership Act
          558
          90
          Nondiscrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance
          559
          91
          Nondiscrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance from HHS
          567
          92
          Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, Age, or Disability in Health Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance and Health Programs or Activities Administered by the Department of Health and Human Services or Entities Established Under Title I of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
          575
          93
          New restrictions on lobbying
          589
          94
          Responsible prospective contractors
          600
          95
          General administration—grant programs (public assistance, medical assistance and State children's health insurance programs)
          609
          96
          Block grants
          631
          97
          Consolidation of grants to the insular areas
          689
          98
          Child care and development fund
          690
          99
          Procedure for hearings for the child care and development fund
          748
          100
          Intergovernmental review of Department of Health and Human Services programs and activities
          753
          101
          Describing agency needs
          756
          102
          Adjustment of civil monetary penalties for inflation
          774
        
      
      
        
        SUBCHAPTER A—GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
        
          PART 1 [RESERVED]
        
        
          Pt. 2
          PART 2—TESTIMONY BY EMPLOYEES AND PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS IN PROCEEDINGS WHERE THE UNITED STATES IS NOT A PARTY
          
            Sec.
            2.1
            Scope, purpose, and applicability.
            2.2
            Definitions.
            2.3
            Policy on presentation of testimony and production of documents.
            2.4
            Procedures when voluntary testimony is requested or when an employee is subpoenaed.
            2.5
            Subpoenas duces tecum.
            2.6
            Certification and authentication of records.
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301, 5 U.S.C. 552.
          
          
            Source:
            52 FR 37146, Oct. 5, 1987, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 2.1
            Scope, purpose, and applicability.
            (a) This part sets forth rules to be followed when an employee or former employee of the Department of Health and Human Services (“DHHS” or “Department”), other than an employee of the Food and Drug Administration, is requested or subpoenaed to provide testimony in a deposition, trial, or other similar proceeding concerning information acquired in the course of performing official duties or because of such person's official capacity with DHHS. This part also sets forth procedures for the handling of subpoenas duces tecum and other requests for any document in the possession of DHHS, other than the Food and Drug Administration, and for the processing of requests for certification of copies of documents. Separate regulations, 21 CFR part 20, govern the Food and Drug Administration, and those regulations are not affected by this part.

            (b) It is the policy of the DHHS to provide information, data, and records to non-federal litigants to the same extent and in the same manner that they are made available to the general public and, when subject to the jurisdiction of a court or other tribunal presiding over non-federal party litigation, to follow all applicable procedural and substantive rules relating to the production of information, data, and records by a non-party. The availability of Department employees to testify in litigation not involving federal parties is governed by the Department's policy to maintain strict impartiality with respect to private litigants and to minimize the disruption of official duties.
            (c) This part applies to state, local and tribal judicial, administrative, and legislative proceedings, and to federal judicial and administrative proceedings.
            (d) This part does not apply to:
            (1) Any civil or criminal proceedings where the United States, the Department of Health and Human Services, and any agency thereof, or any other Federal agency is a party.
            (2) Congressional requests or subpoenas for testimony or documents.
            (3) Consultative services and technical assistance provided by the Department of Health and Human Services, or any agency thereof, in carrying out its normal program activities.
            (4) Employees serving as expert witnesses in connection with professional and consultative services as approved outside activities in accordance with 5 CFR 2635.805 and 5 CFR 5501.106. (In cases where employees are providing such outside services, they must state for the record that the testimony represents their own views and does not necessarily represent the official position of the DHHS.)
            (5) Employees making appearances in their private capacity in legal or administrative proceedings that do not relate to the Department of Health and Human Services (such as cases arising out of traffic accidents, crimes, domestic relations, etc.) and not involving professional and consultative services.
            (6) Any matters covered in 21 CFR part 20-,involving the Food and Drug Administration.

            (7) Any civil or criminal proceedings in State court brought on behalf of the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
            
              
              Example (1):
              While on duty, an employee of the Department witnesses an incident in which a fellow employee trips on a loose piece of carpeting and sustains an injury. The injured employee brings a private tort action against the contractor installing the carpeting and the private landlord maintaining the building. The employee/witness is served with a subpoena to appear at a deposition to testify about the incident. The person seeking the testimony would not be required to obtain Agency head approval prior to requesting the testimony, because the subject of the testimony does not “relate to” the Department, within the meaning of § 2.1(d)(5).
            
            
              Example (2):
              While on duty, an employee of the Department witnesses a mugging while looking out the window to check the weather, and then notifies the local police of what she observed. She is subsequently subpoenaed to testify in a criminal proceeding. The local prosecutor would not be required to obtain Agency head approval prior to requiring the employee to testify, because the subject of the testimony does not “relate to” the Department, within the meaning of § 2.1(d)(5).
            
            
              Example (3):
              A nurse on duty at an Indian Health Service hospital emergency room treats a child who is brought in following a report of domestic violence. The nurse is subsequently served with a subpoena to testify in a criminal proceeding against one of the child's parents concerning the injuries to the child which he observed. The local prosecutor would be required to obtain Agency head approval prior to requiring the nurse to testify, because the subject of the testimony involves “information acquired in the course of performing official duties or because of the person's official capacity,” within the meaning of § 2.1(a).
            
            
              Example (4):
              A personnel specialist working for the Department is subpoenaed to testify concerning the meaning of entries on time and attendance records of an employee, which the requesting party received from the employee pursuant to discovery in a personal injury action brought by the employee. The party requesting the personnel specialist to appear would be required to obtain Agency head approval prior to compelling the personnel specialist to testify, because the testimony sought involves “information acquired in the course of performing official duties or because of the person's official capacity,” within the meaning of § 2.1(a).
            
            
              Example (5):
              A National Institutes of Health physician is subpoenaed in a private medical malpractice action to provide expert testimony in her specialty. The party requesting her testimony would be required to obtain Agency head approval prior to her testifying in response to the subpoena, because the expert testimony sought involves “information acquired in the course of performing official duties or because of the person's official capacity,” within the meaning of § 2.1(a).
            
            [52 FR 37146, Oct. 5, 1987, as amended at 55 FR 4611, Feb. 9, 1990; 68 FR 25838, May 14, 2003]
          
          
            § 2.2
            Definitions.
            
              Agency head refers to the head of the relevant operating division or other major component of the DHHS, or his or her delegatee.
            
              Agency head for the purposes of this part means the following officials for the components indicated:
            (1) Office of the Secretary—Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management;
            (2) Administration on Aging—Assistant Secretary for Aging;
            (3) Administration for Children and Families—Assistant Secretary for Children and Families;
            (4) Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality—Administrator;
            (5) Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry—Administrator;
            (6) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—Director;
            (7) Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services—Administrator;
            (8) Health Resources and Services Administration—Administrator;
            (9) Indian Health Service—Director;
            (10) National Institutes of Health—Director;
            (11) Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration—Administrator;
            (12) Office of Inspector General—Inspector General.
            
              Employee of the Department includes current and former:
            (1) Commissioned officers in the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, as well as regular and special DHHS employees (except employees of the Food and Drug Administration), when they are performing the duties of their regular positions, as well as when they are performing duties in a temporary assignment at DHHS or another organization.

            (2) Employees of intermediaries, carriers, Medicare Administrative Contractors, Program Safeguard Contractors, and Recovery Audit Contractors, and any successor entities, that perform one or more of the following functions described in section 1874A or 1893 of the Social Security Act relating to the administration of the Medicare program:
            (i) Determination of payment amounts; making payments; beneficiary education and assistance; providing consultative services; communication with providers; or, provider education and technical assistance; or,
            (ii) Other such functions as are necessary to carry out the Medicare program, including any of the following program integrity functions under section 1893 of the Social Security Act:
            (A) Review of activities of providers or suppliers, including medical and utilization review and fraud review;
            (B) Auditing of cost reports;
            (C) Determinations as to whether payment should not be, or should not have been, made because Medicare is the secondary payer, and recovery of payments that should not have been made;
            (D) Education of providers, beneficiaries, and other persons with respect to payment integrity and benefit quality assurance issues; or,
            (E) Developing (and periodically updating) a list of items of durable medical equipment which are subject to prior authorization.
            (3) Employees of a contractor, subcontractor, or state agency performing survey, certification, or enforcement functions under title XVIII of the Social Security Act or Section 353 of the Public Health Service Act but only to the extent the requested information was acquired in the course of performing those functions and regardless of whether documents are also relevant to the state's activities.
            (4) Employees and qualified contractors of an entity covered under the Federally Supported Health Centers Assistance Act of 1992, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 233(g)-(n), (FSHCAA), provided that the testimony is requested in medical malpractice tort litigation and relates to the performance of medical, surgical, dental or related functions which were performed by the entity, its employees and qualified contractors at a time when the DHHS deemed the entity and its employees and qualified contractors to be covered by the FSHCAA.
            
              Certify means to authenticate under seal, pursuant to 42 U.S.C 3505, official documents of the Department.
            
              Testify and testimony includes both in-person, oral statements before a court, legislative or administrative body and statements made pursuant to depositions, interrogatories, declarations, affidavits, or other formal participation.
            [68 FR 25839, May 14, 2003, as amended at 73 FR 53150, Sept. 15, 2008]
          
          
            § 2.3
            Policy on Presentation of testimony and production of documents.
            No employee or former employee of the DHHS may provide testimony or produce documents in any proceedings to which this part applies concerning information acquired in the course of performing official duties or because of the person's official relationship with the Department unless authorized by the Agency head pursuant to this part based on a determination by the Agency head, after consultation with the Office of the General Counsel, that compliance with the request would promote the objectives of the Department.
            [68 FR 25839, May 14, 2003]
          
          
            § 2.4
            Procedures when voluntary testimony is requested or when an employee is subpoenaed.
            (a) All requests for testimony by an employee or former employee of the DHHS in his or her official capacity and not subject to the exceptions set forth in § 2.1(d) of this part must be addressed to the Agency head in writing and must state the nature of the requested testimony, why the information sought is unavailable by any other means, and the reasons why the testimony would be in the interest of the DHHS or the federal government.

            (b) If the Agency head denies approval to comply with a subpoena for testimony, or if the Agency head has not acted by the return date, the employee will be directed to appear at the stated time and place, unless advised by the Office of the General Counsel that responding to the subpoena would be inappropriate (in such circumstances as, for example, an instance where the subpoena was not validly issued or served, where the subpoena has been withdrawn, or where discovery has been stayed), produce a copy of these regulations, and respectfully decline to testify or produce any documents on the basis of these regulations.
            [68 FR 25840, May 14, 2003]
          
          
            § 2.5
            Subpoenas duces tecum.
            (a) Whenever a subpoena duces tecum has been served upon a DHHS employee or former employee commanding the production of any record, such person shall refer the subpoena to the Office of the General Counsel (including regional chief counsels) for a determination of the legal sufficiency of the subpoena, whether the subpoena was properly served, and whether the issuing court or other tribunal has jurisdiction over the Department.) If the General Counsel or his designee determines that the subpoena is legally sufficient, the subpoena was properly served, and the tribunal has jurisdiction, the terms of the subpoena shall be complied with unless affirmative action is taken by the Department to modify or quash the subpoena in accordance with Fed. R. Civ. P. 45 (c).
            (b) If a subpoena duces tecum served upon a DHHS employee or former employee commanding the production of any record is determined by the Office of the General Counsel to be legally insufficient, improperly served, or from a tribunal not having jurisdiction, such subpoena shall be deemed a request for records under the Freedom of Information Act and shall be handled pursuant to the rules governing public disclosure established in 45 CFR part 5.
            [68 FR 25840, May 14, 2003]
          
          
            § 2.6
            Certification and authentication of records.
            Upon request, DHHS agencies will certify, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 3505, the authenticity of copies of records that are to be disclosed. Fees for copying and certification are set forth in 45 CFR 5.43.
            [68 FR 25840, May 14, 2003]
          
        
        
          Pt. 3
          PART 3—CONDUCT OF PERSONS AND TRAFFIC ON THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH FEDERAL ENCLAVE
          
            
              Subpart A—General
              Sec.
              3.1
              Definitions.
              3.2
              Applicability.
              3.3
              Compliance.
              3.4
              False reports and reports of injury or damage.
              3.5
              Lost and found, and abandoned property.
              3.6
              Nondiscrimination.
            
            
              Subpart B—Traffic Regulations
              3.21
              Emergency vehicles.
              3.22
              Request for identification.
              3.23
              Parking.
              3.24
              Parking permits.
              3.25
              Servicing of vehicles.
              3.26
              Speed limit.
              3.27
              Bicycles.
            
            
              Subpart C—Facilities and Grounds
              3.41
              Admission to facilities or grounds.
              3.42
              Restricted activities.
              3.43
              Removal of property.
              3.44
              Solicitation.
            
            
              Subpart D—Penalties
              3.61
              Penalties.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            40 U.S.C. 318-318d. 486; Delegation of Authority, 33 FR 604.
          
          
            Source:
            55 FR 2068, Jan. 22, 1990, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General
            
              § 3.1
              Definitions.
              
                Director means the Director or Acting Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), or other officer or employee of NIH to whom the authority involved has been delegated.
              
                Enclave means, unless the context requires a different meaning, the area, containing about 318 acres, acquired by the United States in several parcels in the years 1935 through 1983, and any further future acquisitions, comprising the National Institutes of Health located in Montgomery County, Maryland, over which the United States acquired exclusive jurisdiction under the Act of March 31, 1953, Chapter 158 (1953 Maryland Laws 311).
              
              
                Police officer means a uniformed or non-uniformed police officer appointed under a delegation of authority to the Director under Title 40 United States Code section 318 or 318d; any other Federal law enforcement officer; and any other person whose law enforcement services are secured by contract, or upon request or deputation from a State or local law enforcement agency.
            
            
              § 3.2
              Applicability.
              (a) The regulations in this part apply to all areas in the enclave and to all persons on or within the enclave, except as otherwise provided.
              (b) The regulations in this part do not apply to occupants, their visitors, and other authorized persons in areas used as living quarters:
              (1) When specifically made inapplicable, and
              (2) In the case of the following provisions: § 3.24 Parking permits; § 3.25 Servicing of vehicles; § 3.42 Hobbies and sports; and § 3.42(f) Smoking.
              (c) All regulations in this part are in addition to the provisions in the United States Code, including title 18 relating to crimes and criminal procedure, and title 21 relating to food and drugs, which apply:
              (1) Without regard to the place of the offense, or
              (2) To areas (such as the enclave) subject to the “special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States,” as defined in Title 18 United States Code section 7.
              (d) In accordance with the Assimilative Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. 13), whoever is found guilty of an offense which, although not made punishable by any act of Congress, nor any provision of these regulations, would be punishable if committed within the State of Maryland, shall be guilty of a like offense and subject to a like punishment. In the event of an irreconcilable conflict between a provision of this part and a Maryland statute governing the identical subject matter, this part shall control.
              (e) Federal criminal statutes which apply. The following Federal criminal statutes in the United States Code apply to Federal enclaves and elsewhere without regard to the place of the offense. This listing is provided solely for the information of the public and is not all-inclusive. The omission of other Federal statutes does not mean that such other statutes do not apply. In any given situation, the cited statutory provisions and any amendments in effect when the alleged offense occurred shall determine the specifics of the offense, applicability, and penalty.
              
                
                  Subject
                  U.S. Code
                  Provides generally
                  Maximum penalty
                
                
                  1. By force or threat of force, willful injury, intimidation or interference with, or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere with, a person from participating in or enjoying any benefit, service, privilege, program, facility, or activity, provided by or administered by the U.S., and engaging in certain other Federal protected activities
                  18 U.S.C. 245
                  Prohibits
                  Not involving death or bodily injury: Imprisonment one year and/or $1,000 fine.
                
                
                  2. Malicious destruction or damage, by an explosive, to a building or other property owned, possessed, used, or leased by the U.S., U.S. agency, or any organization receiving Federal financial assistance
                  18 U.S.C. 844(f)
                  Prohibits
                  First offense not involving death or personal injury: Imprisonment 10 years and/or $10,000 fine and seizure and forfeiture of explosive materials.
                
                
                  3. Possession of explosive in buildings owned, possessed, used, or leased by U.S. or U.S. agency
                  18 U.S.C. 844(g)
                  Prohibits, except with written consent of the agency
                  Imprisonment one year and/or $1,000 fine and seizure and forfeiture of explosive materials.
                
                
                  4. Use of or carrying an explosive to commit, or during commission of, a felony prosecutable in a U.S. court
                  18 U.S.C. 844(h)
                  Prohibits
                  First offense: Imprisonment 10 years and seizure and forfeiture of explosive materials.
                
                
                  
                  5. Use of or carrying a firearm during and in relation to any crime of violence prosecutable in a U.S. court
                  18 U.S.C. 924(c)
                  Prohibits
                  First offense: Imprisonment 5 years and $5,000 fine and seizure and forfeiture of firearm and ammunition.
                
                
                  6. Manufacture, distribution, dispensing, or possession with intent to do these acts, of narcotics and other controlled substances and counterfeit substances
                  21 U.S.C. 841, 842, 843, 845
                  Prohibits, except as authorized by the Controlled Substances Act (generally 21 U.S.C. 801-904)
                  First offense: Imprisonment 20 years and/or $250,000 fine depending on the amount and kind of substance (twice the above penalties for distribution by a person at least 18 years of age to one under age 21).
                
                
                  7. Simple possession of narcotics or other controlled substances
                  21 U.S.C. 844
                  Prohibits, unless substance obtained directly, or pursuant to prescription or order, from a practitioner, acting in the course of professional practice, or as otherwise authorized under the Controlled Substances Act
                  First offense: Imprisonment 1 year and/or $5,000 fine.
                
              
              (f) Maryland criminal statutes that apply. The matters described in this paragraph are governed, in whole or in part, by the current version of the cited Maryland criminal statutory provisions, which are made Federal criminal offenses under the Assimilative Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. 13). This listing sets forth areas of conduct particularly relevant to the enclave and is provided solely for the information of the public. The list is not all-inclusive and omission of other Maryland criminal statutes does not mean that such other statutes are not assimilated as Federal offenses under the Act. Generally, other Maryland criminal statutes will apply on the enclave, by force of the Act, unless superseded by Federal Law or a given provision of this part. In any given situation, the cited statutory provisions and any amendments in effect when the alleged offense occured shall determine the specifics of the offense, applicability, and penalty.
              
                
                  Subject
                  Maryland code annotated
                  Provides generally
                  Maximum penalty
                
                
                  1. Pedestrian right-of-way
                  Transportation, Sec. 21-502
                  Pedestrians have the right-of-way in crosswalks and certain other areas. Subject to certain limitations
                  Imprisonment 2 months and/or $500 fine.
                
                
                   
                  Sec. 21-511
                  Blind, partially blind, or hearing impaired pedestrians have the right-of-way at any crossing or intersection. Subject to certain limitations
                  $500 fine.
                
                
                  2. Drivers to exercise due care
                  Transportation, Sec. 21-504
                  Drivers shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with pedestrians, children and incapacitated individuals
                  $500 fine.
                
                
                  3. Driving while intoxicated, under the influence of alcohol and/or a drug or controlled substance
                  Transportation, Sec. 21-902
                  Prohibits
                  Sec. 21-902(a) (driving while intoxicated, first offense): Imprisonment 1 year and/or $1,000 fine.Sec. 21-902 (b), (c), (d) (driving under the influence): Imprisonment 2 months and/or $500 fine.
                  
                
                
                  4. Unattended motor vehicles
                  Transportation, Sec. 21-1101
                  Prohibits leaving motor vehicles unattended unless certain precautions are taken
                  $500 fine.
                
                
                  5. Carrying or wearing certain concealed weapons (other than handguns) or openly with intent to injure
                  Article 27, Sec. 36
                  Prohibits, except for law enforcement personnel or as a reasonable precaution against apprehended danger
                  Imprisonment 3 years or $1,000 fine.
                
                
                  6. Unlawful wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun, whether concealed or openly
                  Article 27, Sec. 36B
                  Prohibits except by law enforcement personnel or with permit
                  First offense and no prior related offense: Imprisonment 3 years and/or $2,500 fine.
                
                
                  
                  7. Use of handgun or concealable antique firearm in commission of felony or crime of violence
                  Article 27, Sec. 36B
                  Prohibits
                  Imprisonment 20 years.
                
                
                  8. Disturbance of the peace
                  Article 27, Sec. 122
                  Prohibits acting in a disorderly manner in public places
                  Imprisonment 30 days and/or $500 fine.
                
                
                  9. Gambling
                  Article 27, Secs. 240, 245
                  Prohibits betting, wagering and gambling, and certain games of chance (does not apply to vending or purchasing lottery tickets authorized under State law in accordance with approved procedures)
                  Sec. 240: Imprisonment one year and/or $1,000 fine. Sec. 245: Imprisonment 2 years and/or $100 fine.
                
              
            
            
              § 3.3
              Compliance.
              A person must comply with the regulations in this part; with all official signs; and with the lawful directions or orders of a police officer or other authorized person, including traffic and parking directions.
            
            
              § 3.4
              False reports and reports of injury or damage.
              A person may not knowingly give any false or fictitious report concerning an accident or violation of the regulations of this part or any applicable Federal or Maryland statute to any person properly investigating an accident or alleged violation. All incidents resulting in injury to persons or willful damage to property in excess of $100.00 (one hundred dollars) in value must be reported by the persons involved to the Police Office as soon as possible. The Police Office's main location and telephone number is: Building 31, Room B3BN10; (301) 496-5685.
            
            
              § 3.5
              Lost and found, and abandoned property.
              Lost articles which are found on the enclave, including money and other personal property, together with any identifying information, must be deposited at the Police Office or with an office (such as the place where found) which may likely have some knowledge of ownership. If the article is deposited with an office other than the Police Office and the owner does not claim it within 30 days, it shall be deposited at the Police Office for further disposition in accordance with General Services Administration regulations (41 CFR part 101-48). Abandoned, or other unclaimed property and, in the absence of specific direction by a court, forfeited property, may be so identified by the Police Office and sold and the proceeds deposited in accordance with 41 CFR 101-45.304 and 101-48.305.
              [57 FR 1874, Jan. 16, 1992]
            
            
              § 3.6
              Nondiscrimination.
              A person may not discriminate by segregation or otherwise against another person because of age, color, creed, handicap, national origin, race or sex, in furnishing or by refusing to furnish to that person the use of any facility of a public nature, including all services, privileges, accommodations, and activities provided within the enclave. (Title 18 United States Code section 245 prohibits, by use of force or threat of force, willful injury, intimidation, or interference with, a person from participating in or enjoying any benefit, service, privilege, program, facility, or activity provided by or administered by the United States, attempts to do these acts, and engaging in certain other activities.)
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Traffic Regulations
            
              § 3.21
              Emergency vehicles.
              A person must yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle operating its siren or flashing lights.
            
            
              § 3.22
              Request for identification.
              Upon request by a police officer, a person involved in any of the following situations must provide identification, for example, by exhibiting satisfactory credentials (such as an employment identification card or driver's license):
              (a) A traffic accident within the enclave;
              
              (b) The police officer reasonably believes that the individual is engaged in, or has engaged in, criminal conduct or a violation of the regulations of this part; or
              (c) The enclave or a portion of the enclave is not open to the public (see § 3.41).
              A driver of a motor vehicle involved in an accident within the enclave shall also exhibit, upon the request of a police officer, the owner's registration card or other satisfactory proof of ownership.
            
            
              § 3.23
              Parking.
              (a) A person may not stand (vehicle stopped, with or without, an occupant), or park a motor vehicle or other vehicle:
              (1) In a lane, space, or area not designated by a sign for parking, and/or standing;
              (2) On a sidewalk;
              (3) Within an intersection or crosswalk;
              (4) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, 5 feet of a driveway, or 20 feet of a stop sign, crosswalk, or traffic control signal;
              (5) In a double-parked position;
              (6) At a curb painted yellow;
              (7) On the side of a street facing oncoming traffic;
              (8) In a position that would obstruct traffic;
              (9) For a period in excess of 24 hours, except at living quarters, or with the approval of the Police Office.
              (b) A person must park bicycles, motorbikes, and similar vehicles only in designated areas, and may not bring these vehicles inside buildings.
              (c) A visitor must park in an area identified for that purpose by posted signs or similar instructions, such as “visitor parking” and “reserved for visitors”.
              (d) A person may not drive or park an unauthorized motor vehicle on a grassy, or any other unpaved, area without the approval of the Police Office.
            
            
              § 3.24
              Parking permits.
              Except for visitor parking, a person may not park a motor vehicle without displaying a parking permit, currently valid for that location. The Director may revoke or refuse to issue or renew any parking permit for violation of this section, or any provision of this part.
            
            
              § 3.25
              Servicing of vehicles.
              A person may not wash, polish, change oil, lubricate, or make nonemergency repairs on a privately owned vehicle.
            
            
              § 3.26
              Speed limit.
              The speed limit is 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. A driver of a vehicle may not exceed the speed limit.
            
            
              § 3.27
              Bicycles.
              A person may not operate a bicycle, motorbike, or similar vehicle without a horn or other warning device, and, if the vehicle is operated between dusk and dawn, it must be equipped with an operating headlight, and taillight or reflector.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Facilities and Grounds
            
              § 3.41
              Admission to facilities or grounds.
              The enclave is officially open to the public during normal working and visiting hours and for approved public events. The enclave is closed to the public at all other times, and the Director may also officially close all or part of the enclave, or any building, in emergency situations and at other times the Director deems necessary to ensure the orderly conduct of Government business. When all or part of the enclave is closed to the public, admission is restricted to employees and other authorized persons who may be required to display Government credentials or other identification when requested by a police officer and may be required to sign a register. The living quarters and adjacent areas are not open to the public but are open at all times to occupants and their visitors and business invitees, unless otherwise closed by the Director.
            
            
              § 3.42
              Restricted activities.
              (a) Hobbies and sports. A person may undertake hobbies and sports only in designated areas or as approved by the Director.
              
              (b) Pets and other animals. A person may not bring on the enclave any cat, dog, or other animal except for authorized purposes. This prohibition does not apply to domestic pets at living quarters or to the exercise of these pets under leash or other appropriate restraints. The use of a dog by a handicapped person to assist that person is authorized.
              (c) Photography. A person may take photographs, films or audiovisuals, for personal or news purposes on the grounds of the enclave or in entrances, lobbies, foyers, corridors, and auditoriums in use for public meetings, except when contrary to security regulations or Department of Health and Human Services policies, or where prohibited by appropriate signs. Photographs and similar activities for advertising or commercial purposes may be taken only with the advance written approval of the Director. A person may take photographs of a patient only with the informed consent of the patient (or the natural or legal guardian) and of the Director of the Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center or delegate.
              (d) Intoxicating beverages, narcotics, and other controlled substances. A person may not possess, sell, consume, or use alcohol or other intoxicating beverages, except in connection with official duties, as part of authorized research, or as otherwise authorized by the Director, or, in the case of possession, consumption or use only, in living quarters. (The sale, consumption, use, or possession of narcotics and other controlled substances is prohibited and shall be governed by the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 841-845); driving under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, drug or controlled substance is prohibited and shall be governed by the Maryland Transportation Code Annotated section 21-902.)
              (e) Nuisances and disturbances. The following acts by a person are prohibited: Unwarranted loitering, disorderly conduct (acting in a disorderly manner to the disturbance of the public peace is prohibited and shall be governed by Maryland Code Annotated, Article 27, section 122); littering or disposal of rubbish in an unauthorized manner, the creation of any hazard to persons or property; the throwing of articles of any kind from or at a building; the climbing upon any part of a building for other than an authorized purpose; the loud playing of radios or other similar devices; and rollerskating, skateboarding, sledding or similar activities, except in officially designated areas.
              (f) Smoking. Except as part of an approved medical research protocol, a person may not smoke in any building on the enclave.
              (g) Firearms, explosive, and other weapons. No person other than a specifically authorized police officer shall possess firearms, explosives, or other dangerous or deadly weapons or dangerous materials intended to be used as weapons either openly or concealed. Upon written request, the Director may permit possession in living quarters of antique firearms held for collection purposes, if the Director finds that the collection does not present any risk of harm.
              [55 FR 2068, Jan. 22, 1990, as amended at 57 FR 1874, Jan. 16, 1992]
            
            
              § 3.43
              Removal of property.
              A person may not remove Federal property from the enclave or any building on the enclave without a property pass, signed by an authorized property custodian, which specifically describes the items to be removed. In an emergency, or when the property custodian is not available, a police officer may approve removal of Federal property if, after consulting with the administrative officer or other appropriate official, the police officer is authorized by the official to do so. Privately-owned property, other than that ordinarily carried on one's person, may be removed only under this property pass procedure, or upon properly establishing ownership of the property to a police officer.
              Packages, briefcases, or other containers brought within the enclave are subject to inspection while on, or being removed from, the enclave.
            
            
              § 3.44
              Solicitation.

              It shall be unlawful for a person (other than an employee using authorized bulletin boards), without prior written approval of the Director, to offer or display any article or service for sale within the enclave buildings or grounds; or to display any sign, placard, or other form of advertisement; or to collect private debts; or to solicit business, alms, subscriptions or contributions, except in connection with approved national or local campaigns for funds for welfare, health and other public interest purposes, or solicitation of labor organization membership or dues as authorized under the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-454).
              This provision shall not apply to authorized lessees and their agents and employees with regard to space leased for commercial, cultural, educational, or recreational purposes, under the Public Buildings Cooperative Use Act of 1976 (40 U.S.C. 490(A)(16)).
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Penalties
            
              § 3.61
              Penalties.
              (a) A person found guilty of violating any provision of the regulations in this part is subject to a fine of not more than $50 or imprisonment of not more than thirty days or both, for each violation (40 U.S.C. 318c).
              (b) Penalties for violation of offenses proscribed by Federal statutes (generally codified in title 18 of the United States Code) and Maryland criminal statutes which are made Federal offenses under the Assimilative Crimes Act and are prescribed in the applicable provisions of those statutes.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 4
          PART 4—SERVICE OF PROCESS
          
            Sec.
            4.1
            Suits against the Department and its employees in their official capacities.
            4.2
            Other process directed to the Department or Secretary.
            4.3
            Process against Department officials in their individual capacities.
            4.4
            Acknowledgment of mailed process.
            4.5
            Effect of regulations.
            4.6
            Materials related to petitions under the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program.
            4.7
            Congressional subpoenas directed to the Department or Secretary.
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301, 42 U.S.C. 300aa-11.
          
          
            Source:
            48 FR 24079, May 31, 1983, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 4.1
            Suits against the Department and its employees in their official capacities.
            Summonses and complaints to be served by mail on the Department of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or other employees of the Department in their official capacities should be sent to the General Counsel, Department of Health and Human Services, 200 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, DC 20201.
          
          
            § 4.2
            Other process directed to the Department or Secretary.
            Subpoenas and other process (other than summonses and complaints) that are required to be served on the Department of Health and Human Services or the Secretary of Health and Human Services in his official capacity should be served as follows:
            (a) If authorized by law to be served by mail, any mailed process should be sent to the General Counsel, Department of Health and Human Services, 200 Independence, S.W., Washington, DC 20201.
            (b) If served by an individual, the process should be delivered to the staff in the Office of Legal Resources, Office of the General Counsel, Room 700E, 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20201, or in the absence of that staff, to any staff member of or individual assigned to the Immediate Office of the General Counsel, up to and including any Deputy General Counsel.
            [48 FR 24079, May 31, 1983,as amended at 73 FR 48151, Aug. 18, 2008]
          
          
            § 4.3
            Process against Department officials in their individual capacities.
            Process to be served on Department officials in their individual capacities must be served in compliance with the requirements for service of process on individuals who are not governmental officials. The Office of the General Counsel is authorized but not required to accept process to be served on Departmental officials in their individual capacities if the suit relates to an employee's official duties.
          
          
            
            § 4.4
            Acknowledgement of mailed process.
            The Department will not provide a receipt or other acknowledgement of process received, except for a return receipt associated with certified mail and, where required, the acknowledgement specified by Rule 4(c)(2)(C) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
          
          
            § 4.5
            Effect of regulations.
            The regulations in this part are intended solely to identify Department officials who are authorized to accept service of process. Litigants must comply with all requirements pertaining to service of process that are established by statute and court rule even though they are not repeated in these regulations.
          
          
            § 4.6
            Materials related to petitions under the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program.
            Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3, service of the Secretary's copies of petitions for compensation under the VICP and of related filings, by mail, shall be served upon the Director, Division of Vaccine Injury Compensation, Office of Special Programs, Health Resources and Services Administration 5600 Fishers Lane, Parklawn Building, Room 16C-17, Rockville, Maryland 20857, or in person, shall be served upon the Director, Division of Vaccine Injury Compensation, Office of Special Programs, Health Resources and Services Administration, 4350 East West Highway, 10th Floor, Bethesda, Maryland 20814.
            [67 FR 78990, Dec. 27, 2002]
          
          
            § 4.7
            Congressional subpoenas directed to the Department or Secretary.
            Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3, service of Congressional subpoenas shall be delivered to the staff in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health and Human Services, 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20201.
            [73 FR 48151, Aug. 18, 2008]
          
        
        
          Pt. 5
          PART 5—FREEDOM OF INFORMATION REGULATIONS
          
            
              Subpart A—General Information About Freedom of Information Act Requests
              Sec.
              5.1
              Purpose.
              5.2
              Presumption of openness and proactive disclosures.
              5.3
              Definitions.
              5.4
              Regulatory scope.
              5.5
              Interrelationship between the FOIA and the Privacy Act of 1974.
            
            
              Subpart B—How to Request Records under FOIA
              5.21
              Who can file a FOIA request?
              5.22
              What do I include in my FOIA request?
              5.23
              Where do I send my FOIA request?
              5.24
              How does HHS process my FOIA request?
              5.25
              How does HHS handle requests that involve more than one OpDiv, StaffDiv, or Federal agency?
              5.26
              How does HHS determine estimated completion dates for FOIA requests?
              5.27
              How do I request expedited processing?
              5.28
              How does HHS respond to my request?
              5.29
              How may I request assistance with the FOIA process?
            
            
              Subpart C —Exemptions to Disclosure
              5.31
              What are the reasons records may be withheld?
              5.32
              Records not subject to the requirements of the FOIA—law enforcement exclusions.
            
            
              Subpart D—Confidential Commercial Information
              5.41
              How does a submitter identify records containing confidential commercial information?
              5.42
              How does HHS process FOIA requests for confidential commercial information?
            
            
              Subpart E—Fees
              5.51
              General information on fees for all FOIA requests.
              5.52
              What is the FOIA fee schedule for obtaining records?
              5.53
              How does HHS calculate FOIA fees for different categories of requesters?
              5.54
              How may I request a fee waiver?
            
            
              Subpart F—Appeals
              5.61
              When may I appeal HHS's FOIA determination?
              5.62
              How do I file an appeal?
              5.63
              How does HHS process appeals?
              
              5.64
              What avenues are available to me if I disagree with HHS's appeal decision?
            
            
              Subpart G—Records Retention
              5.71
              How does HHS retain FOIA records?
            
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 552, 18 U.S.C. 1905, 31 U.S.C. 9701, 42 U.S.C. 1306(c), E.O. 12600, E.O.13392
          
          
            Source:
            81 FR 74939, Oct. 28, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Information About Freedom of Information Act Requests
            
              § 5.1
              Purpose.
              This part implements the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. 552, as amended, for Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) records that are subject to the FOIA. This part should be read in conjunction with the text of the FOIA and the Uniform Freedom of Information Fee Schedule and Guidelines published by the Office of Management and Budget. This part contains the rules that we follow to process FOIA requests, such as the amount of time we have to make a determination regarding the release of records, who can decide to release records and who can decide not to release them, the fees we may charge, if applicable, the reasons why some records are exempt from disclosure under the FOIA, and the administrative and legal remedies available should a requester disagree with our initial disclosure determination.
              (a) The FOIA provides a right of access to agency records, except to the extent that any portions of the records are protected from public disclosure by an exemption or exclusion in the statute. The FOIA does not require us to perform research for you or to answer your questions. The FOIA does not require agencies to create new records or to perform analysis of existing records; for example, by extrapolating information from existing agency records, reformatting publicly available information, preparing new electronic programs or databases, or creating data through calculations of ratios, proportions, percentages, trends, frequency distributions, correlations, or comparisons. However, at our discretion and if it would conserve government resources, we may decide to supply requested information by consolidating information from various records.
              (b) This part does not apply to data generated by an agency grant recipient under the provisions of 45 CFR part 75 to the extent the requirements of 45 CFR 75.322(e) do not apply to the data. We will not process your request under the FOIA or these regulations if that data is already available to the public through an archive or other source. In that situation, we will refer you to that other source. The procedures for requesting research data made available under the provisions of 45 CFR 75.322(e) are referenced in § 5.23(a).
            
            
              § 5.2
              Presumption of openness and proactive disclosures.
              (a) We will administer the FOIA with a presumption of openness. In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(8) we will disclose records or information exempt from disclosure under the FOIA whenever disclosure would not foreseeably harm an interest protected by a FOIA exemption and disclosure is not prohibited by law. We also will consider whether partial disclosure of information is possible whenever we determine that a full disclosure of a requested record is not possible. This includes taking reasonable steps to segregate and release nonexempt information.

              (b) Records that the FOIA requires agencies to make available for public inspection in an electronic format may be accessed through each OpDiv's and Staff Div's Web site. Each OpDiv and StaffDiv is responsible for determining which of its records must be made publicly available (including frequently requested records), for identifying additional records of interest to the public that are appropriate for public disclosure, and for posting and indexing such records. Each OpDiv and StaffDiv must ensure that its Web site of posted records and indices is reviewed and updated on an ongoing basis. Each OpDiv and StaffDiv has a FOIA Requester Service Center or FOIA Public Liaison who can assist individuals in locating records. A list of agency FOIA Public Liaisons is available at http://www.foia.gov/report-makerequest.html.
              
            
            
              
              § 5.3
              Definitions.
              The following definitions apply to this part:
              
                Agency is defined at 5 U.S.C. 551(1). HHS is an agency. Private entities performing work under a contractual agreement with the government are not agencies for the purpose of this definition. However, information maintained on behalf of an agency under Government contract, for the purposes of records management, is considered an agency record.
              
                Chief FOIA Officer means a senior official of HHS, at the Assistant Secretary or equivalent level, who has agency-wide responsibility for ensuring efficient and appropriate compliance with the FOIA, monitoring implementation of the FOIA throughout the agency, and making recommendations to the head of the agency to improve the agency's implementation of the FOIA. The Secretary of HHS has designated the Assistant Secretary, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA), as the Agency Chief FOIA Officer (ACFO); that official may be contacted at HHS.ACFO@hhs.gov.
              
                Commercial use means a use or purpose that furthers a commercial, trade, or profit interest of the requester or the person or entity on whose behalf the request is made.
              
                Department or HHS means the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
              
                Deputy Agency Chief FOIA Officer (DACFO) means a designated official within the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, who has been authorized by the Chief FOIA Officer to act upon their behalf to implement compliance with the FOIA, as described above. This official is also the approving review authority for FOIA administrative appeals.
              
                Direct costs mean those expenses that an agency incurs in searching for and duplicating (and, in the case of commercial use requests, reviewing) records in order to respond to a FOIA request. For example, direct costs include the salary of the employee performing the work (i.e., the basic rate of pay for the employee, plus 16 percent of that rate to cover benefits) and the cost of operating computers and other electronic equipment, such as photocopiers and scanners. Direct costs do not include overhead expenses such as the costs of space, and of heating or lighting a facility.
              
                Duplication means the process of making a copy of a record and sending it to the requester, to the extent necessary to respond to the request. Such copies include both paper copies and electronic records. Fees for duplication are further explained within § 5.52.
              
                Educational institution means any school that operates a program of scholarly research. A requester in this fee category must show that the request is made in connection with his or her role at the educational institution. Agencies may seek assurance from the requester that the request is in furtherance of scholarly research.
              
              
                Example 1.
                A request from a professor of geology at a university for records relating to soil erosion, written on letterhead of the Department of Geology, would be presumed to be from an educational institution.
              
              
                Example 2.
                A request from the same professor of geology seeking drug information from the Food and Drug Administration in furtherance of a murder mystery he is writing would not be presumed to be an institutional request, regardless of whether it was written on institutional stationery.
              
              
                Example 3.
                A student who makes a request in furtherance of their coursework or other school-sponsored activities and provides a copy of a course syllabus or other reasonable documentation to indicate the research purpose for the request, would qualify as part of this fee category.
              
              
              
                Expedited processing means the process set forth in the FOIA that allows requesters to request faster processing of their FOIA request, if they can demonstrate a specific compelling need.
              
                Fee category means one of the four categories established by the FOIA to determine whether a requester will be charged fees for search, review, and duplication. The categories are: commercial use requests; non-commercial scientific or educational institutions requests; news media requests; and all other requests. Fee categories are further explained within § 5.53.
              
                Fee waiver means the waiver or reduction of fees if a requester is able to demonstrate that certain standards set forth in the FOIA and this part are satisfied, including that disclosure of the records is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.
              
                First-party request means a request by an individual for records pertaining to that individual, or an authorized representative acting on such an individual's behalf.
              
                FOIA Public Liaison means an agency official who reports to the agency Chief FOIA Officer and serves as a supervisory official to whom a requester can raise concerns about the service the requester has received from the FOIA Requester Service Center. This individual is responsible for assisting in reducing delays, increasing transparency and understanding of the status of requests, and assisting in the resolution of disputes.
              
                FOIA request means a written request that reasonably describes the records sought.
              
                FOIA library records are records that are required to be made available to the public without a specific request under 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(2). We make FOIA library records available to the public electronically through our Web pages (http://www.hhs.gov/foia/reading/index.html) and at certain physical locations. A list of the physical locations is available at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/contacts/index.html. Other records may also be made available at our discretion through our Web pages (http://www.hhs.gov).
              
                Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) means the law codified at 5 U.S.C. 552 that provides the public with the right to request agency records from Federal executive branch agencies. A link to the text of the FOIA is at https://www.justice.gov/oip/freedom-information-act-5-usc-552.
              
              
                Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Officer means an HHS official who has been delegated the authority to release or withhold records; to assess, waive, or reduce fees in response to FOIA requests; and to determine whether to grant expedited processing. In that capacity, the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Officer has the authority to task agency organizational components to search for records in response to a FOIA request, and to provide records located in their offices. Apart from records subject to proactive disclosure pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of the FOIA, only FOIA Officers have the authority to release or withhold records or to waive fees in response to a FOIA request. Our FOIA operations are decentralized, and each FOIA Requester Service Center has a designated official with this authority; the contact information for each FOIA Requester Service Center is available at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/contacts/index.html.
              (1) The HHS Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Officer in the Office of the Secretary means the HHS official who in addition to overseeing the daily operations of the FOIA program in that office and having the authority of a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Officer, is also responsible for the Department-wide administration and coordination of the FOIA and its implementing regulations and policies as they pertain to the programs and activities of the Department. This individual serves as the principal resource with respect to the articulation of procedures designed to implement and ensure compliance with the FOIA and its implementing regulations and policies as they pertain to the Department. This individual reports through the DACFO to the ACFO to support oversight and compliance with the OPEN Government Act.
              (2) [Reserved]
              
                Frequently requested records means records, regardless of form or format, that have been released to any person under the FOIA and that have been requested 3 or more times or because of the nature of their subject matter, the agency determines have become or are likely to become the subject of subsequent requests for substantially the same records.
              
                Immediate Office of the Secretary (IOS) means offices within the Office of the Secretary, responsible for operations and work of the Secretary. It includes the Office of the Deputy Secretary, Office of the Chief of Staff, the Secretary's Counselors, the Executive Secretariat, the Office of Health Reform, and the Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs.
              
              
                Non-commercial scientific institution means an institution that is not operated to further a commercial, trade, or profit interest and that is operated solely for the purpose of conducting scientific research the results of which are not intended to promote any particular product or industry. A requester in this category must show that the request is authorized by and is made under the auspices of a qualifying institution and that the records are sought to further scientific research and are not for a commercial use.
              
                Office of the Inspector General (OIG) means the Staff Division within the Office of the Secretary (OS), which is responsible for protecting the integrity of HHS programs and the health and welfare of the beneficiaries of those programs. OIG is responsible for processing FOIA requests for the records it maintains.
              
                Office of the Secretary (OS) means the HHS's chief policy officer and general manager, who administers and oversees the organization, its programs and activities. The Deputy Secretary and a number of Assistant Secretaries and Staff Divisions support OS. The HHS FOIA Office within ASPA processes FOIA requests for records maintained by OS Staff Divisions other than the OIG. In certain circumstances and at the HHS FOIA Office's discretion, the HHS FOIA office may also process FOIA requests involving other HHS OpDivs, as further described in § 5.28(a).
              
                Operating Division (OpDiv) means any of the following divisions within HHS which are subject to this regulation:
              
              
                Office of the Secretary (OS)
                Administration for Children and Families (ACF) Administration for Community Living (ACL)
                Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
                Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
                (ATSDR) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
                Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
                Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
                Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
                Indian Health Service (IHS)
                National Institutes of Health (NIH)
                Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
              
              
              
                Operating Division and Staff Division Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Officers means the officials who are responsible for overseeing the daily operations of their FOIA programs in their respective Operating Divisions or Staff Divisions, with the full authority as described in the definition of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Officer. These individuals serve as the principal resource and authority for FOIA operations and implementation within their respective Operating Divisions or Staff Divisions.
              
                Other requester means any individual or organization whose request does not qualify as a commercial-use request, representative of the news media request (including a request made by a freelance journalist), or an educational or non-commercial scientific institution request.
              
                Record means any information that would be an agency record when maintained by an agency in any format, including an electronic format; and any information that is maintained for an agency by an entity under Government contract, for the purposes of records management.
              
                Redact means delete or mark over.
              
                Representative of the news media means any person or entity that actively gathers information of potential interest to a segment of the public, uses its editorial skills to turn raw materials into a distinct work, and distributes that work to an audience. The term “news” means information that is about current events or that would be of current interest to the public. Examples of news media entities include television or radio stations that broadcast news to the public at large and publishers of periodicals, including print and online publications that disseminate news and make their products available through a variety of means to the general public. We do not consider requests for records that support the news-dissemination function of the requester to be a commercial use. We consider “freelance” journalists who demonstrate a solid basis for expecting publication through a news media entity as working for that entity. A publishing contract provides the clearest evidence that a journalist expects publication; however, we also consider a requester's past publication record.
              
                Review means examining records responsive to a request to determine whether any portions are exempt from disclosure. Review time includes processing a record for disclosure (i.e., doing all that is necessary to prepare the record for disclosure), including redacting the record and marking the appropriate FOIA exemptions.
              
                Search means the process of identifying, locating, and retrieving records to find records responsive to a request, whether in hard copy or in electronic form or format.
              
                Staff Division (StaffDiv) means an organization component that provides leadership, direction, and policy and management guidance to the Office of the Secretary and the Department. The following StaffDivs are subject to the regulations in this part:
              
              
                Immediate Office of the Secretary (IOS)
                Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA)
                Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources (ASFR)
                Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH)
                Assistant Secretary for Legislation (ASL)
                Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA)
                Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR)
                Departmental Appeals Board (DAB)
                Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
                Office of the General Counsel (OGC) Office of Global Affairs (OGA)
                Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
                Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals (OMHA)
                Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)
              
              
              
                Submitter means any person or entity, including a corporation, State, or foreign government, but not including another Federal Government entity, that provides commercial or financial information, either directly or indirectly to the Federal Government.
              
                Tolling means temporarily stopping the running of a time limit. We may toll a request to seek clarification or to address fee issues, as further described in § 5.24.
            
            
              § 5.4
              Regulatory scope.

              The requirements in this part apply to all OpDivs and StaffDivs of HHS. Some OpDivs and StaffDivs may establish or continue to maintain additional rules because of unique program requirements, but such rules must be consistent with this part and the FOIA. If additional rules are issued, they must be published in the Federal Register and you may get copies online at https://www.federalregister.gov/, http://www.regulations.gov/or by contacting one of our FOIA Requester Service Centers.
            
            
              § 5.5
              Interrelationship between the FOIA and the Privacy Act of 1974.
              The FOIA allows any person (whether an individual or entity) to request access to records. The Privacy Act, at 5 U.S.C. 552a(d), provides an additional right of access, allowing individuals to request records about themselves, if the records are maintained in a system of records (defined in 5 U.S.C. 552a(a)(5)).
              (a) Requesting records about you. If any part of your request includes records about yourself that are maintained within a system of records as defined by the Privacy Act at 5 U.S.C. 552a(a)(5), you should make your request in accordance with the Privacy Act and the Department's implementing regulations at 45 CFR part 5b. This includes requirements to verify your identity. We will process the request under the Privacy Act and, if it is not fully granted under the Privacy Act, we will process it under the FOIA. You may obtain, under the FOIA, information that is exempt from access under the Privacy Act, if the information is not excluded or exempt under the FOIA. If you request records about yourself that are not maintained within a system of records, we will process your request under the FOIA only.
              (b) Requesting records about another individual. If you request records about another individual, we will process your request under the FOIA. You may receive greater access by following the procedures described in § 5.22(g).
            
          
          
            Subpart B—How to Request Records under FOIA
            
              § 5.21
              Who can file a FOIA request?

              Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or public or private organization other than a Federal agency, regardless of nationality, may submit a FOIA request to us. This includes state and local governments.
              
            
            
              § 5.22
              What do I include in my FOIA request?
              In your FOIA request:
              (a) Provide a written description of the records you seek in sufficient detail to enable our staff to locate them with a reasonable amount of effort. The more information you provide, the better possibility we have of finding the records you are seeking. Information that will help us find the records would include:
              (1) The agencies, offices, or individuals involved;
              (2) The approximate date(s) when the records were created;
              (3) The subject, title, or description of the records sought; and
              (4) Author, recipient, case number, file designation, or other reference number, if available.
              (b) Include your name, full mailing address, and phone number and if available, your email address. This information allows us to reach you faster if we have any questions about your request. It is your responsibility to keep your current mailing address up to date with the office where you have filed the FOIA request.
              (c) State your willingness to pay all fees, or the maximum amount of fees you are willing to pay, and/or include a request for a fee waiver/reduction.
              (d) Mark both your letter and envelope, or the subject line of your email, with the words “FOIA Request.”
              (e) If you are unable to submit a written request to us due to circumstances such as disability or literacy, you may make a request orally to a FOIA Officer. FOIA Officers will put in writing an oral request made directly to them.
              (f) If you are making a first-party request, you must comply with the verification of identity procedures set forth in 45 CFR part 5b.

              (g) Where your request for records pertains to another individual, you may receive greater access by submitting either a notarized authorization signed by that individual or a declaration made in compliance with the requirements set forth in 28 U.S.C. 1746 by that individual authorizing disclosure of the records to the requester, or by submitting proof that the individual is deceased (e.g., a copy of a death certificate or an obituary). At our discretion, we may require you to supply additional information if necessary to verify that a particular individual has consented to disclosure of records about them.

              (h) If you are requesting the medical records of an individual other than yourself from a government program that pays or provides for health care (e.g. Medicare, Indian Health Service) and you are not that individual's legally authorized representative, you should submit a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliant release authorization form signed by the subject of records or the individual's legally authorized representative. The HIPAA Privacy Rule requires that an authorization form contain certain core elements and statements which are described in the Privacy Rule's requirements at 45 CFR 164.508. If you are submitting a request for Medicare records to CMS, CMS has a release authorization form at the following link: ttps://www.cms.gov/Medicare/CMS-Forms/CMS-Forms/Downloads/CMS10106.pdf.
              

              (i) Before filing your request, you may find it helpful to consult the HHS FOIA Requester Service Centers online at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/contacts/index.html, which provides additional guidance to assist in submitting a FOIA request to a specific OpDiv or StaffDiv or to regional offices or divisions within an OpDiv or StaffDiv. You may also wish to check in the agency's electronic FOIA libraries available online at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/reading/index.html, to see if the information you wish to obtain is already available.
            
            
              § 5.23
              Where do I send my FOIA request?

              We have several FOIA Requester Service Centers (FOIA offices) that process FOIA requests. You should send your FOIA request to the appropriate FOIA Requester Service Center that you believe would have the records you seek. An up-to-date listing is maintained online at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/contacts/index.html.
                You also may submit your request electronically by emailing it to the appropriate FOIA Requester Service Center or by submitting it to the Department's web portal located at https://requests.publiclink.hhs.gov/palMain.aspx.
              
              (a) If you are requesting research data made available under the provisions of 45 CFR 75.322(e), requests for such data should be addressed to the OpDiv that made the award under which the data were first produced. That OpDiv will process your request in accordance with established procedures consistent with the FOIA and 45 CFR 75.322(e).
              (b) We officially receive your request when it reaches the FOIA Requester Service Center with responsibility for the OpDiv or StaffDiv where requested records are likely to be located, but no later than 10 working days after the request first arrives at any of our FOIA Requester Service Centers.

              (c) If you have questions concerning the processing of your FOIA request, you may contact the FOIA Requester Service Center processing your request. If that initial contact does not resolve your concerns, you may wish to contact the designated FOIA Public Liaison for the OpDiv or StaffDiv processing your request. You can find a list of our FOIA Requester Service Centers and Public Liaisons at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/contacts/index.html.
              
            
            
              § 5.24
              How does HHS process my FOIA request?
              (a) Acknowledgement. We acknowledge all FOIA requests in writing within 10 working days after receipt by the appropriate office. The acknowledgement letter or email informs you of your request tracking number, provides contact information, and informs you of any complexity we are aware of in processing that may lengthen the time required to reach a final decision on the release of the records. In addition, the acknowledgement letter or email or a subsequent communication may also seek additional information to clarify your request.
              (b) Perfected requests. (1) A request is considered to be perfected (i.e., the 20 working day statutory response time begins to run) when—
              (i) The request either has been received by the responsible FOIA office, or, in any event, not later than 10 working days after the request has been received by any HHS FOIA office;
              (ii) The requested records are reasonably described; and
              (iii) The request contains sufficient information to enable the FOIA office to contact you and transmit records to you.
              (2) We provide at least 20 working days for you to respond to a request to perfect your request, after notification. Requests must reasonably describe the records sought and contain sufficient information to enable the FOIA office to contact you and transmit records to you. If we determine that a request does not meet these requirements, we will attempt to contact you if possible. Should you not answer any correspondence, or should the correspondence be returned as undeliverable, we reserve the right to administratively close the FOIA request.
              (c) Stops in processing time (tolling). We may stop the processing of your request one time if we require additional information regarding the specifics of the request. The processing time resumes upon our receipt of your response. We also may stop the processing of your request if we require clarification regarding fee assessments. If additional information or clarification is required, we will attempt to contact you using the contact information you have provided. The processing time will resume upon our receipt of your response. We will provide at least 20 working days after notification for you to respond to a request for additional information or clarification regarding the specifics of your request or fee assessment. Should you not answer any correspondence, or should the correspondence be returned as undeliverable, we may administratively close the FOIA request.
              (d) Search cut-off date. As the end or cut-off date for a records search, we use the date on which we first begin our search for documents responsive to your request, unless you specify an earlier cut-off date, or a specific date range for the records search. We will use the date of the first search in those cases when you request records “through the present,” “through today,” or similar language. The FOIA allows you to request existing agency records. The FOIA cannot be used to request records which the agency may create in the future in the course of carrying out its mission.
              (e) Processing queues. We place FOIA requests in simple or complex processing queues to be processed in the order received, on a first-in, first-out basis, absent approval for expedited processing based upon a compelling need, as further explained and defined in § 5.27. We will place your request in the simple or complex processing queue based on the estimated amount of work or time needed to process the request. Among the factors we may consider are the number of records requested, the number of pages involved in processing the request, and the need for consultations or referrals. We will advise requesters of potential complicating factors in our acknowledgement letter or email, or in subsequent communications regarding your request and, when appropriate, we will offer requesters an opportunity to narrow or modify their request so that it can be placed in the simple processing track.
              (f) Unusual Circumstances. Whenever we cannot meet the statutory time limit for processing a request because of “unusual circumstances,” as defined in the FOIA, and we extend the time limit on that basis, we will notify you, before expiration of the 20-day period to respond and in writing of the unusual circumstances involved and of the date by which we estimate processing of the request will be completed. Where the extension exceeds 10 working days, we will provide you, as described by the FOIA, with an opportunity to modify the request or arrange an alternative time period for processing the original or modified request. We will make available a designated FOIA contact in the appropriate FOIA Requester Service Center or the appropriate FOIA Public Liaison for this purpose. In addition, we will inform you of the right to seek dispute resolution services from the Office of Government Information Services (OGIS).
              (g) Aggregating requests. For the purposes of satisfying unusual circumstances, we may aggregate requests in cases where it reasonably appears that multiple requests, submitted either by a requester or by a group of requesters acting in concert, constitute a single request, involving clearly related matters, that would otherwise involve unusual circumstances. In the event that requests are aggregated, they will be treated as one request for the purposes of calculating both response time and fees.
            
            
              § 5.25
              How does HHS handle requests that involve more than one OpDiv, StaffDiv, or Federal agency?
              (a) Re-routing of misdirected requests. When a FOIA Requester Service Center determines that a request was misdirected within HHS, the receiving FOIA Requester Service Center must route the request to the FOIA Requester Service Center of the proper OpDiv or StaffDiv within HHS.
              (b) Consultation, referral, and coordination. When reviewing records located by an OpDiv or StaffDiv in response to a request, the OpDiv or StaffDiv will determine whether another agency of the Federal Government is better able to determine whether the record is exempt from disclosure under the FOIA. As to any such record, the OpDiv or StaffDiv must proceed in one of the following ways:
              (1) Consultation. When records originated with an OpDiv or StaffDiv processing the request, but contain within them information of interest to another OpDiv, StaffDiv, agency or other Federal Government office, the OpDiv or StaffDiv processing the request should typically consult with that other entity prior to making a release determination.
              (2) Referral. (i) When the OpDiv or StaffDiv processing the request believes that a different OpDiv, StaffDiv, or agency is best able to determine whether to disclose the record, the OpDiv or StaffDiv typically should refer the responsibility for responding to the request regarding that record to that other entity. Ordinarily, the entity that originated the record is presumed to be the best entity to make the disclosure determination. However, if the OpDiv or StaffDiv processing the request and the originating entity jointly agree that the OpDiv or StaffDiv processing the request is in the best position to respond regarding the record, then the record may be handled as a consultation.
              (ii) Whenever an OpDiv or StaffDiv refers any part of the responsibility for responding to a request to another OpDiv, StaffDiv, or federal agency, it must document the referral, maintain a copy of the record that it refers, and notify the requester of the referral; informing the requester of the name(s) of the entity to which the record was referred, including that entity's FOIA contact information.
              (3) Coordination. The standard referral procedure is not appropriate where disclosure of the identity of the OpDiv, StaffDiv, or federal agency to which the referral would be made could harm an interest protected by an applicable exemption, such as the exemptions that protect personal privacy or national security interests. In such instances, in order to avoid harm to an interest protected by an applicable exemption, the OpDiv or StaffDiv that received the request should coordinate with the originating entity to seek its views on the disclosability of the record. The release determination for the record that is the subject of the coordination should then be conveyed to the requester by the OpDiv or StaffDiv that originally received the request.
              (c) Classified information. On receipt of any request involving classified information, the OpDiv or StaffDiv must determine whether the information is currently and properly classified in accordance with applicable classification rules. Whenever a request involves a record containing information that has been classified or may be appropriate for classification by another agency under any applicable executive order concerning the classification of records, the OpDiv or StaffDiv must refer the responsibility for responding to the request regarding that information to the agency that classified the information, or which should consider the information for classification. Whenever an OpDiv's or StaffDiv's record contains information that has been derivatively classified (for example, when it contains information classified by another agency), the OpDiv or StaffDiv must refer the responsibility for responding to that portion of the request to the agency that classified the underlying information.
              (d) Timing of responses to consultations and referrals. All consultations and referrals received by the Department will be handled according to the date that the FOIA request initially was received by the first OpDiv, StaffDiv, or federal agency.
              (e) Agreements regarding consultations and referrals. OpDivs or StaffDivs may establish agreements with other OpDivs, StaffDivs, or federal agencies to eliminate the need for consultations or referrals with respect to particular types of records.
            
            
              § 5.26
              How does HHS determine estimated completion dates for FOIA requests?
              (a) When we provide an estimated completion date, in accordance with § 5.24(f) and upon request, for the processing of records that do not require consultation with another agency, we estimate the completion date on the basis of our reasonable judgment as to how long it will take to complete the request. Given the uncertainty inherent in establishing any estimate, the estimated completion date is subject to change at any time.
              (b) When we provide an estimated completion date, in accordance with § 5.24(f) and upon request, for records that must be reviewed by another agency, our estimate may also be based on information from the other agency.
            
            
              § 5.27
              How do I request expedited processing?

              (a) To request expedited processing, you must submit a statement, certified to be true and correct, explaining the basis for your need for expedited processing. You must send the request to the appropriate FOIA Officer at the address listed at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/contacts/index.html. You may request expedited processing when you first request records or at any time during our processing of your request or appeal.

              (b) We process requests on an expedited basis whenever we determine that one or more of the following criteria exist:
              
              (1) That a failure to obtain requested records on an expedited basis could reasonably be expected to pose an imminent threat to the life or physical safety of an individual; or
              (2) There is an urgent need to inform the public about an actual or alleged Federal Government activity (this criterion applies only to those requests made by a person primarily engaged in disseminating information to the public).
              (c) We will respond to your request for expedited processing within 10 calendar days of our receipt of your request to expedite. If we grant your request, the OpDiv or StaffDiv responsible for the review of the requested records will process your request as a priority, and it will be processed as soon as practicable. We will inform you if we deny your request for expedited processing and provide you with appeal rights. If you decide to appeal that denial, we will expedite our review of your appeal.
              (d) If we must refer records to another agency, we will inform you and suggest that you seek expedited review from that agency.
            
            
              § 5.28
              How does HHS respond to my request?
              (a) The appropriate FOIA Officer will send you a response informing you of our release determination, including whether any responsive records were located, how much responsive material was located, whether the records are being released in full or withheld in full or in part, any fees you must pay for processing of the request, and your right to seek assistance from the appropriate FOIA Public Liaison.
              (b) If we deny any part of your request, our response will explain the reasons for the denial, which FOIA exemptions apply to the withheld records, your right to appeal that determination, and your right to seek dispute resolution services from the appropriate FOIA Public Liaison or the Office of Government Information Services (OGIS). We will advise you of the number of pages withheld or the estimated volume of withheld records, unless providing such information would harm an interest protected by an applicable FOIA exemption.
              (c) Records may be withheld in full or in part if any of the nine FOIA exemptions apply. If we determine to withhold part of a record pursuant to an exemption, we will provide access to reasonably segregable non-exempt information contained in the record. On the released portion of the record, we indicate where the information has been redacted and the exemption(s) we applied, unless including that indication would harm an interest the exemption protects. In Subpart C of this part, we list the exemptions to disclosure that may apply to agency records.
              (d) We also may deny your request for other reasons, including that a request does not reasonably describe the records sought; the information requested is not a record subject to the FOIA; the requested records do not exist, cannot be located, or have been destroyed; or that the requested records are not readily reproducible in the form or format requested.
              (e) If a request involves a voluminous amount of material or searches in multiple locations, we may provide you with interim responses if feasible and reasonably possible, releasing the records on a rolling basis.
              (f) Copies of records in the format you request will be provided if the records already exist in that format or if they are reasonably and readily reproducible in the format you request.
            
            
              § 5.29
              How may I request assistance with the FOIA process?

              (a) If you have questions concerning the processing of your FOIA request, you should first contact the FOIA Requester Service Center processing your request. Additionally, for assistance at any point in the FOIA process, you may contact the FOIA Public Liaison at the FOIA Requester Service Center processing your request. The FOIA Public Liaison is responsible for assisting you to reduce delays, increasing transparency and understanding of the status of requests, and assisting to resolve any FOIA disputes. Some FOIA Requester Service Centers allow you to check the status of your request online. You can find a list of our FOIA Requester Service Centers and Public Liaisons at http://www.hhs.gov/foia/contacts/index.html.
                
              

              (b) The Office of Government Information Services (OGIS), which is part of the National Archives and Records Administration, serves as the Federal FOIA ombudsman and assists requesters and agencies to prevent and resolve FOIA disputes through mediation. Mediation is a voluntary process. If we participate in the dispute resolution services provided by OGIS, we will actively engage as a partner to the process in an attempt to resolve the dispute and will follow the principles of confidentiality in accordance with the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act, 5 U.S.C. 571-8. You may contact OGIS at the following address: National Archives and Records Administration, Office of Government Information Services, 8601 Adelphi Road—OGIS, College Park, MD 20740-6001, or by email at ogis@nara.gov, or by telephone at 202-741-5770 or 1-877-684-6448 (toll free).
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Exemptions to Disclosure
            
              § 5.31
              What are the reasons records may be withheld?
              While we are committed to providing public access to as many of our records as possible, there are instances in which information falls within one or more of the FOIA's nine exemptions and disclosure would either foreseeably harm an interest protected by a FOIA exemption or disclosure is prohibited by law. We review all records and weigh and assess all legal and policy requirements prior to making a final disclosure determination. A description of the nine FOIA exemptions is provided in paragraphs (a) through (i) of this section.
              (a) Exemption 1. Exemption 1 protects from disclosure information specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive order to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy and are in fact properly classified pursuant to such Executive order.
              (b) Exemption 2. Exemption 2 authorizes our agency to withhold records that are related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency.
              (c) Exemption 3. Exemption 3 authorizes our agency to withhold records which are specifically exempted from disclosure by statute (other than 5 U.S.C. 552(b)) provided that such statute requires that the matters be withheld from the public in such a manner as to leave no discretion on the issue; or establishes particular criteria for withholding or refers to particular types of matters to be withheld; and if enacted after the date of enactment of the OPEN FOIA Act of 2009, October 28, 2009, specifically cites to 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(3).
              (d) Exemption 4. Exemption 4 authorizes our agency to withhold trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a person and privileged or confidential.
              (e) Exemption 5. Exemption 5 authorizes our agency to withhold inter-agency or intra agency memorandums or letters that would not be available by law to a party other than an agency in litigation with the agency, provided that the deliberative process privilege shall not apply to records created 25 years or more before the date on which the records were requested.
              (f) Exemption 6. Exemption 6 authorizes our agency to protect information in personnel and medical files and similar files when the disclosure of such information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
              (g) Exemption 7. Exemption 7 authorizes our agency to withhold records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes, but only to the extent that the production of such law enforcement records or information would cause the following harm(s):
              (1) Could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement proceedings;
              (2) Would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an impartial adjudication;
              (3) Could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;

              (4) Could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity of a confidential source, including a state, local, or foreign agency or authority, or any private institution which furnished information on a confidential basis, and, in the case of a record or information compiled by a criminal law enforcement authority in the course of a criminal investigation, or by an agency conducting lawful national security intelligence investigation, information furnished by a confidential source;
              (5) Would disclose techniques and procedures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions, or would disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions, if such disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law; or
              (6) Could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or physical safety of any individual.
              (h) Exemption 8. Exemption 8 authorizes our agency to withhold records that are contained in or related to examination, operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of an agency responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions.
              (i) Exemption 9. Exemption 9 authorizes our agency to withhold geological and geophysical information and data, including maps, concerning wells.
            
            
              § 5.32
              Records not subject to the requirements of the FOIA—law enforcement exclusions.
              Under the FOIA, there is special protection for narrow categories of law enforcement and national security records. The provisions protecting those records are known as “exclusions” and are described in 5 U.S.C. 552(c). These exclusions expressly authorize Federal law enforcement agencies, under these exceptional circumstances, to treat the records as not subject to the requirements of the FOIA.
              (a) Should an HHS OpDiv or StaffDiv maintain records which are subject to a FOIA exclusion, and consider employing an exclusion or have a question as to the implementation of an exclusion, the OpDiv or StaffDiv will consult with the Office of Information Policy, U.S. Department of Justice.
              (b) Because records falling within an exclusion are not subject to the requirements of the FOIA, should any HHS OpDiv or StaffDiv maintain such excluded records, the OpDiv or StaffDiv will limit its response to those records that are subject to the FOIA.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Confidential Commercial Information
            
              § 5.41
              How does a submitter identify records containing confidential commercial information?
              A person who submits records to the government may designate part or all of the information in such records that they may consider to be exempt from disclosure under Exemption 4 of the FOIA. The person may make this designation either at the time the records are submitted to the government or within a reasonable time thereafter. The designation must be in writing. Any such designation will expire 10 years after the records were submitted to the government.
            
            
              § 5.42
              How does HHS process FOIA requests for confidential commercial information?
              (a) Predisclosure notification. The procedures in this section apply to records on which the submitter has designated information as provided in § 5.41. They also apply to records that were submitted to the government where we have substantial reason to believe that information in the records could reasonably be considered exempt under Exemption 4. Certain exceptions to these procedures are stated in paragraph (b) of this section.
              (1) When we receive a request for such records, and we determine that we may be required to disclose them, we will make reasonable efforts to notify the submitter about these facts. The notice will include a copy of the request, and it will inform the submitter about the procedures and time limits for submission and consideration of objections to disclosure. If we must notify a large number of submitters, we may do this by posting or publishing a notice in a place where the submitters are reasonably likely to become aware of it.

              (2) The submitter has 10 working days from the date of the notice to object to disclosure of any part of the records and to state all bases for its objections. FOIA Offices in HHS and its organizational components may extend this period as appropriate and necessary.
              (3) We review and consider all objections to release that we receive within the time limit. If a submitter fails to respond within the time period specified in the notice, we will consider the submitter to have no objection to disclosure of the information. If we decide to release the records, we inform the submitter in writing, along with our reasons for the decision to release. We include with the notice a description of the information to be disclosed or copies of the records as we intend to release them. We also provide the submitter with a specific date that we intend to disclose the records, which must be at least 5 working days after the date of the notice. We do not consider any information we receive after the date of a disclosure decision.
              (4) If the requester files a lawsuit under the FOIA for access to records submitted to HHS, we promptly notify the submitter.
              (5) We will notify the requester in these circumstances:
              (i) When we notify a submitter that we may be required to disclose information under the FOIA, we will also notify the requester that notice and opportunity to comment are being provided to the submitter;
              (ii) When the agency notifies a submitter of a final disclosure decision under the FOIA,
              and;
              (iii) When a submitter files a lawsuit to prevent the disclosure of the information.
              (b) Exceptions to predisclosure notification. The notice requirements in paragraph (a) of this section do not apply in the following situations:
              (1) We determine that we should withhold the information under a FOIA exemption;
              (2) The information has been lawfully published or made available to the public
              (3) We are required by a statute (other than the FOIA), or by a regulation issued in accordance with the requirements of Executive Order 12600, to disclose the information; or
              (4) The designation made by the submitter appears obviously frivolous. However, in such a case, the agency must provide the submitter with written notice of any final disclosure determination and intent to release, at least 5 working days prior to the specified disclosure date. We will notify the submitter as referenced in § 5.42(a)(3).
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Fees
            
              § 5.51
              General information on fees for all FOIA requests.
              (a) We generally assume that when you request records you are willing to pay the fees we charge for services associated with your request. You may specify a limit on the amount you are willing to spend. We will notify you if it appears that the fees will exceed $25.00 or your specified limit and ask whether you nevertheless want us to proceed with the search.
              (b) If you have failed to pay FOIA fees in the past, we will require you to pay your past due bill and we may also require you to pay the anticipated fee before we begin processing your current request. If we estimate that your fees may be greater than $250.00, we also may require advance payment or a deposit before we begin processing your request. If you fail to make an advance payment within 20 working days after the date of our fee letter, we will close the request.
              (c) We may charge interest on unpaid bills beginning on the 31st calendar day following the day the FOIA fee invoice was sent. We may assess interest, administrative costs, and penalties for overdue FOIA fee costs.
              (d) If we determine that you (either acting alone or with a group of requesters) are breaking down a single request into a series of requests in order to avoid or reduce fees, we may aggregate all of these requests when calculating the fees. In aggregating requests, we may consider the subject matter of the requests and whether the requests were filed close in time to one another.
              (e) If, in the course of negotiating fees, you do not respond to the agency within 20 working days of our last communication, your request will be closed.

              (f) We may stop the processing of your request, if necessary, to clarify fee issues with you, and to confirm your willingness to pay applicable fees. Fee related issues may arise sequentially over the course of processing a request, and the FOIA allows agencies to stop the processing time as many times as necessary in order to clarify issues regarding fee assessment and willingness to pay fees.
              (g) We may charge search fees even if the records are exempt from disclosure, or if we do not find any responsive records during our search.
              (h) We do not send an invoice to requesters if assessable processing fees are less than $25.00.
            
            
              § 5.52
              What is the FOIA fee schedule for obtaining records?
              In responding to FOIA requests for records, we charge the following fees, where applicable, unless we have given you a reduction or waiver of fees. The fees we charge for search and review are three-tiered, and the hourly charge is determined by the classification and grade level of the employee performing the search or review. When the search or review is performed by employees at grade GS-1 through GS-8 (or equivalent), an hourly rate will be charged based on the salary of a GS-5, step 7, employee; when done by a GS-9 through GS-14 (or equivalent), an hourly rate will be charged based on the salary of a GS-12, step 4,employee; and when done by a GS-15 or above (or equivalent), an hourly rate will be charged based on the salary of a GS-15, step 7, employee. In each case, the hourly rate will be computed by taking the current hourly rate listed for the specified grade and step in the General Schedule Locality Pay Table for the Locality of Washington-Baltimore-Northern Virginia, DC-MD-VA-WV-PA, adding 16% of that rate to cover benefits, and rounding to the nearest whole dollar.
              (a) Search fees—(1) Manual searches. Fees will be assessed to search agency files and records in both hardcopy and electronic format. Such fees will be at the rate or rates for the classification of the employee(s) performing the search, as established in this section.
              (2) Computer searches. We base the fees for computer searches on the actual cost to our agency of operating the computer and the salary of the operator.
              (b) Review fees. (1) We charge review fees for time we spend examining documents that are responsive to a request to determine whether we must apply any FOIA exemptions to withhold information. Review time includes processing any record for disclosure (i.e., doing all that is necessary to prepare the record for disclosure), including redacting the record and marking the appropriate FOIA exemptions. We charge review fees even if we ultimately are unable to disclose a record.
              (2) We do not charge review fees for time we spend resolving general legal or policy issues regarding the application of exemptions. However, we do charge review fees for time we spend obtaining and considering any formal objection to disclosure made by a confidential commercial information submitter.
              (c) Duplication fees—(1) Photocopying standard-sized pages. The current charge for photocopying records is $0.10 per page.
              (2) Reproduction of electronic records. We will attempt to provide records in the format you sought, if the records are reasonably and readily reproducible in the requested format. We charge you for our direct costs for staff time and to organize, convert, and format data for release, per requester instructions, and for printouts or electronic media necessary to reproduce electronic records requested under the FOIA.
              (3) Copying other media. We will charge you the direct cost of copying other media.
              (d) Mailing and special delivery fees. We release records by United States Postal Service or, when appropriate, by electronic means, such as electronic mail or web portal. If a requester seeks special delivery, such as overnight shipping, we reserve the right to pass on the actual costs of special delivery to the requester. Requesters may provide their mailing account and billing information to the agency, so that they may pay directly for special delivery options.
              (e) Certification of records. The FOIA does not require agencies to certify records as true copies. We may elect, as a matter of administrative discretion, to certify records upon request; however, such a request must be submitted in writing. Further, we will only certify as true copies records that have not left the agency's chain of custody. The charge for certification is $25.00 per record certified.
              (f) Other statutes specifically providing for fees. The fee schedule of this section does not apply to fees charged under any statute that specifically requires an OpDiv or StaffDiv to set and collect fees for particular types of records. In instances where records responsive to a request are subject to a statutorily-based fee schedule program, the OpDiv or StaffDiv must inform the requester of the contact information for that program.
            
            
              § 5.53
              How does HHS calculate FOIA fees for different categories of requesters?
              (a) If you are a commercial use requester, we charge you fees for searching, reviewing, and duplicating responsive records.
              (b) If you are an educational or noncommercial scientific institution requester, or a member of the news media, you are entitled to search time, review time, and up to 100 pages of duplication (or the cost equivalent for other media) without charge. We charge duplication fees after the first 100 pages (or its cost equivalent).

              (c) If you do not fall into either of the categories in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section (i.e. you are an “other requester”), you are entitled to two hours of free search time, up to 100 pages of duplication (or the cost equivalent of other media) without charge, and you will not be charged for review time. We may charge for search time beyond the first two hours and for duplication beyond the first 100 pages (or its cost equivalent).
              (d)(1) If we fail to comply with the FOIA's time limits in which to respond to a request, we may not charge search fees, or, in the instances of the requester categories referenced in paragraph (b) of this section, may not charge duplication fees, except as described in (d)(2)-(4).
              (2) If we have determined that unusual circumstances as defined by the FOIA apply and we provided timely written notice to the requester in accordance with the FOIA, a failure to comply with the time limit shall be excused for an additional 10 days.
              (3) If we have determined that unusual circumstances, as defined by the FOIA, apply and more than 5,000 pages are necessary to respond to the request, we may charge search fees, or, in the instances of requests from requesters described in paragraph (b) of this section, may charge duplication fees if the following steps are taken: we must have provided timely written notice to the requester in accordance with the FOIA and must have discussed with the requester via written mail, email, or telephone (or made not less than three good-faith attempts to do so) how the requester could effectively limit the scope of the request in accordance with 5. U.S.C. 552(a)(6)(B)(ii). If this exception is satisfied, we may charge all applicable fees incurred in the processing of the request.
              (4) If a court has determined that exceptional circumstances exist, as defined by the FOIA, a failure to comply with the time limits shall be excused for the length of time provided by the court order.
            
            
              § 5.54
              How may I request a fee waiver?
              (a) Requesters may seek a waiver of fees by submitting a written application demonstrating how disclosure of the requested information is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.
              (b) We must furnish records responsive to a request without charge or at a reduced rate when we determine, based on all available information, that the following three factors are satisfied:
              (1) Disclosure of the requested information would shed light on the operations or activities of the government. The subject of the request must concern identifiable operations or activities of the Federal Government with a connection that is direct and clear, not remote or attenuated.

              (2) Disclosure of the requested information would be likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of those operations or activities. This factor is satisfied when the following criteria are met:
              (i) Disclosure of the requested records must be meaningfully informative about government operations or activities. The disclosure of information that already is in the public domain, in either the same or a substantially identical form, would not be meaningfully informative if nothing new would be added to the public's understanding.
              (ii) The disclosure must contribute to the understanding of a reasonably broad audience of persons interested in the subject, as opposed to the individual understanding of the requester. A requester's expertise in the subject area as well as the requester's ability and intention to effectively convey information to the public must be considered. We will presume that a representative of the news media will satisfy this consideration.
              (3) The disclosure must not be primarily in the commercial interest of the requester. To determine whether disclosure of the requested information is primarily in the commercial interest of the requester, we will consider the following criteria:
              (i) We will identify whether the requester has any commercial interest that would be furthered by the requested disclosure. A commercial interest includes any commercial, trade, or profit interest. Requesters will be given an opportunity to provide explanatory information regarding this consideration.
              (ii) If there is an identified commercial interest, we will determine whether that is the primary interest furthered by the request. A waiver or reduction of fees is justified when the requirements of paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section are satisfied and any commercial interest is not the primary interest furthered by the request. We ordinarily will presume that when a news media requester has satisfied factors (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the request is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester. Disclosure to data brokers or others who merely compile and market government information for direct economic return will not be presumed to primarily serve the public interest.
              (c) You should ask for waiver or reduction of fees when you first submit your request to HHS, and should address the criteria referenced in this section.
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Appeals
            
              § 5.61
              When may I appeal HHS's FOIA determination?
              In order to fully exhaust all of your administrative remedies, you must file an appeal of an adverse agency determination in writing, and to be considered timely it must be postmarked, or in the case of electronic submissions, transmitted within 90 calendar days from the date of such determination. Any electronic transmission made after normal business hours will be considered to have been transmitted on the next calendar day. If a postmark is not legible, the timeliness of a submission will be based on the date that we receive the appeal. Adverse determinations include:
              (a) Refusal to release a record, either in whole or in part;
              (b) Determination that a record does not exist or cannot be found;
              (c) Determination that a request does not reasonably describe the records sought;
              (d) Determination that the record you sought was not subject to the FOIA;
              (e) Denial of a request for expedited processing;
              (f) Denial of a fee waiver request; or
              (g) Fee category determination.
            
            
              § 5.62
              How do I file an appeal?
              (a) You have the right to appeal an adverse agency determination of your FOIA request.
              (b) You may submit your appeal via mail or electronically.
              (1) Please send your appeal to the review official at the address provided in your denial letter. If you are unsure who is the appropriate review official, please contact the FOIA Requester Service Center that processed your request to obtain that information.

              (2) The addresses to mail FOIA appeals for CMS and OS are, respectively: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Attn: Principal Deputy Administrator, Room C5-16- 03, 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244; and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Deputy Agency Chief FOIA Officer, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, Room 729H, 200 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20201. Additionally, information, including how to submit a FOIA appeal electronically, can be found at the following online locations for CMS and OS: https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/FOIA/filehow.html and https://requests.publiclink.hhs.gov/palMain.aspx.
              
              (3) When submitting an appeal, you should mark both your letter and envelope with the words “FOIA Appeal” or include the words “FOIA Appeal” in the subject line of your email. You should also include your FOIA request tracking number, a copy of your initial request, and a copy of our final determination letter.
              (c) Your appeal should clearly identify the agency determination that is being appealed. It would be helpful if you provide specific reasons explaining why you believe the agency's adverse determination should be reconsidered.
            
            
              § 5.63
              How does HHS process appeals?
              (a) We respond to your appeal within 20 working days after the appeal official designated in your appeal letter receives it. If, however, your appeal is based on a denial of a request for expedited processing, we will act on your appeal of that decision expeditiously. Before making a decision on an appeal of an adverse determination, the designated review official will consult with the Office of the General Counsel. Also, the concurrence of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs is required in all appeal decisions, including those on fees. When the review official responds to an appeal, that constitutes the Department's final action on the request.
              (b) If we reverse or modify the initial decision, we will inform you in writing and, if applicable, reprocess your request. If we do not change our initial decision, we will respond in writing to you, explain the reasons for the decision, set out any FOIA exemptions that apply, and inform you of the provisions for judicial review. If a requester files a FOIA lawsuit in reference to an appeal, we will cease processing the appeal.
            
            
              § 5.64
              What avenues are available to me if I disagree with HHS's appeal decision?
              (a) In our response letter, we notify you of your right to seek judicial review of an adverse determination as set forth in the FOIA at 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(4)(B). Before seeking review by a court of an adverse determination, you generally must first submit a timely administrative appeal.
              (b) We also inform you that the Office of Government Information Services (OGIS) offers mediation services to resolve disputes between FOIA requesters and Federal agencies as a non-exclusive alternative to litigation. As referenced in § 5.29(b) you may contact OGIS via mail, email, or telephone for assistance.
            
          
          
            Subpart G—Records Retention
            
              § 5.71
              How does HHS retain FOIA records?
              We will preserve records created in administering the Department's Freedom of Information program until disposition is authorized under an applicable General Records Schedule or other records schedule duly approved by the Archivist of the United States.
            
          
        
        
          PART 5a [RESERVED]
        
        
          Pt. 5b
          PART 5b—PRIVACY ACT REGULATIONS
          
            Sec.
            5b.1
            Definitions.
            5b.2
            Purpose and scope.
            5b.3
            Policy.
            5b.4
            Maintenance of records.
            5b.5
            Notification of or access to records.
            5b.6
            Special procedures for notification of or access to medical records.
            5b.7
            Procedures for correction or amendment of records.
            5b.8
            Appeals of refusals to correct or amend records.
            5b.9
            Disclosure of records.
            5b.10
            Parents and guardians.
            5b.11
            Exempt systems.
            5b.12
            Contractors.
            
            5b.13
            Fees.
            Appendix A to Part 5b—Employee Standards of Conduct
            Appendix B to Part 5b—Routine Uses Applicable to More Than One System of Records Maintained by HHS
            Appendix C to Part 5b—Delegations of Authority [Reserved]
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301, 5 U.S.C. 552a.
          
          
            Source:
            40 FR 47409, Oct. 8, 1975, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5b.1
            Definitions.
            As used in this part:
            (a) Access means availability of a record to a subject individual.
            (b) Agency means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            (c) Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            (d) Disclosure means the availability or release of a record to anyone other than the subject individual.
            (e) Individual means a living person who is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. It does not include persons such as sole proprietorships, partnerships, or corporations. A business firm which is identified by the name of one or more persons is not an individual within the meaning of this part.
            (f) Maintain means to maintain, collect, use, or disseminate when used in connection with the term “record”; and, to have control over or responsibility for a system of records when used in connection with the term “system of records.”
            (g) Notification means communication to an individual whether he is a subject individual.
            (h) Record means any item, collection, or grouping of information about an individual that is maintained by the Department, including but not limited to the individual's education, financial transactions, medical history, and criminal or employment history and that contains his name, or an identifying number, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to the individual, such as a finger or voice print or a photograph. When used in this part, record means only a record which is in a system of records.
            (i) Responsible Department official means that officer who is listed in a notice of a system of records as the system manager for a given system of records or another individual listed in the notice of a system of records to whom requests may be made, or the designee of either such officer or individual.
            (j) Routine use means the disclosure of a record outside the Department, without the consent of the subject individual, for a purpose which is compatible with the purpose for which the record was collected. It includes disclosures required to be made by statute other than the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552. It does not include disclosures which are permitted to be made without the consent of the subject individual which are not compatible with the purpose for which it was collected such as disclosures to the Bureau of the Census, the General Accounting Office, or to Congress.
            (k) Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or his designee.
            (l) Statistical record means a record maintained for statistical research or reporting purposes only and not maintained to make determinations about a particular subject individual.
            (m) Subject individual means that individual to whom a record pertains.
            (n) System of records means any group of records under the control of the Department from which a record is retrieved by personal identifier such as the name of the individual, number, symbol or other unique retriever assigned to the individual. Single records or groups of records which are not retrieved by a personal identifier are not part of a system of records. Papers maintained by individual employees of the Department which are prepared, maintained, or discarded at the discretion of the employee and which are not subject to the Federal Records Act, 44 U.S.C. 2901, are not part of a system of records; Provided, That such personal papers are not used by the employee or the Department to determine any rights, benefits, or privileges of individuals.
          
          
            § 5b.2
            Purpose and scope.

            (a) This part implements section 3 of the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a (hereinafter referred to as the Act), by establishing agency policies and procedures for the maintenance of records. This part also establishes agency policies and procedures under which a subject individual may be given notification of or access to a record pertaining to him and policies and procedures under which a subject individual may have his record corrected or amended if he believes that his record is not accurate, timely, complete, or relevant or necessary to accomplish a Department function.
            (b) All components of the Department are governed by the provisions of this part. Also governed by the provisions of this part are:
            (1) Certain non-Federal entities which operate as agents of the Department for purposes of carrying out Federal functions, such as intermediaries and carriers performing functions under contracts and agreements entered into pursuant to sections 1816 and 1842 of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 1395h and 1395u.
            (2) Advisory committees and councils within the meaning of the Federal Advisory Committee Act which provide advice to (i) any official or component of the Department or (ii) the President and for which the Department has been delegated responsibility for providing services.
            (c) Employees of the Department governed by this part include all regular and special government employees of the Department; members of the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps; experts and consultants whose temporary (not in excess of 1 year) or intermittent services have been procured by the Department by contract pursuant to 3109 of Title 5, United States Code; volunteers where acceptance of their services are authorized by law; those individuals performing gratuitous services as permitted under conditions prescribed by the Civil Service Commission; and, participants in work-study or training programs.
            (d) Where other statutes mandate procedures which are inconsistent with the procedures set forth in this part, components of the Department may issue supplementary regulations containing procedures necessary to comply with such statutes. In addition, components of the Department may supplement by regulation the policies and procedures set forth in this part to meet particular needs of the programs administered by such components.
            (e) This part does not:
            (1) Make available to a subject individual records which are not retrieved by that individual's name or other personal identifier.
            (2) Make available to the general public records which are retrieved by a subject individual's name or other personal identifier or make available to the general public records which would otherwise not be available to the general public under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, and part 5 of this title.
            (3) Govern the maintenance or disclosure of, notification of or access to, records in the possession of the Department which are subject to regulations of another agency, such as personnel records subject to the regulations of the Civil Service Commission.
            (4) Apply to grantees, including State and local governments or subdivisions thereof, administering federally funded programs.
            (5) Make available records compiled by the Department in reasonable anticipation of court litigation or formal administrative proceedings. The availability of such records to the general public or to any subject individual or party to such litigation or proceedings shall be governed by applicable constitutional principles, rules of discovery, and applicable regulations of the Department and any of its components.
          
          
            § 5b.3
            Policy.
            It is the policy of the Department to protect the privacy of individuals to the fullest extent possible while nonetheless permitting the exchange of records required to fulfill the administrative and program responsibilities of the Department, and responsibilities of the Department for disclosing records which the general public is entitled to have under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, and part 5 of this title.
          
          
            § 5b.4
            Maintenance of records.

            (a) No record will be maintained by the Department unless:
            
            (1) It is relevant and necessary to accomplish a Department function required to be accomplished by statute or Executive Order;
            (2) It is acquired to the greatest extent practicable from the subject individual when maintenance of the record may result in a determination about the subject individual's rights, benefits or privileges under Federal programs;
            (3) The individual providing the record is informed of the authority for providing the record (including whether the providing of the record is mandatory or voluntary, the principal purpose for maintaining the record, the routine uses for the record, what effect his refusal to provide the record may have on him), and if the record is not required by statute or Executive Order to be provided by the individual, he agrees to provide the record.
            (b) No record will be maintained by the Department which describes how an individual exercises rights guaranteed by the First Amendment unless expressly authorized (1) by statute, or (2) by the subject individual, or (3) unless pertinent to and within the scope of an authorized law enforcement activity.
          
          
            § 5b.5
            Notification of or access to records.
            (a) Times, places, and manner of requesting notification of or access to a record. (1) Subject to the provisions governing medical records in § 5b.6 of this part, any individual may request notification of a record. He may at the same time request access to any record pertaining to him. An individual may be accompanied by another individual of his choice when he requests access to a record in person; Provided, That he affirmatively authorizes the presence of such other individual during any discussion of a record to which access is requested.
            (2) An individual making a request for notification of or access to a record shall address his request to the responsible Department official and shall verify his identity when required in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section. At the time the request is made, the individual shall specify which systems of records he wishes to have searched and the records to which he wishes to have access. He may also request that copies be made of all or any such records. An individual shall also provide the responsible Department official with sufficient particulars to enable such official to distinguish between records on subject individuals with the same name. The necessary particulars are set forth in the notices of systems of records.

            (3) An individual who makes a request in person may leave with any responsible Department official a request for notification of or access to a record under the control of another responsible Department official; Provided, That the request is addressed in writing to the appropriate responsible Department official.
            (b) Verification of identity—(1) When required. Unless an individual, who is making a request for notification of or access to a record in person, is personally known to the responsible Department official, he shall be required to verify his identity in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section if:
            (i) He makes a request for notification of a record and the responsible Department official determines that the mere disclosure of the existence of the record would be a clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy if disclosed to someone other than the subject individual; or,
            (ii) He makes a request for access to a record which is not required to be disclosed to the general public under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, and part 5 of this title.
            (2) Manner of verifying identity. (i) An individual who makes a request in person shall provide to the responsible Department official at least one piece of tangible identification such as a driver's license, passport, alien or voter registration card, or union card to verify his identity. If an individual does not have identification papers to verify his identity, he shall certify in writing that he is the individual who he claims to be and that he understands that the knowing and willful request for or acquisition of a record pertaining to an individual under false pretenses is a criminal offense under the Act subject to a $5,000 fine.

            (ii) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2)(v) of this section, an individual who does not make a request in person shall submit a notarized request to the responsible Department official to verify his identity or shall certify in his request that he is the individual who he claims to be and that he understands that the knowing and willful request for or acquisition of a record pertaining to an individual under false pretenses is a criminal offense under the Act subject to a $5,000 fine.

            (iii) An individual who makes a request on behalf of a minor or legal incompetent as authorized under § 5b.10 of this part shall verify his relationship to the minor or legal incompetent, in addition to verifying his own identity, by providing a copy of the minor's birth certificate, a court order, or other competent evidence of guardianship to the responsible Department official; except that, an individual is not required to verify his relationship to the minor or legal incompetent when he is not required to verify his own identity or when evidence of his relationship to the minor or legal incompetent has been previously given to the responsible Department official.
            (iv) An individual shall further verify his identity if he is requesting notification of or access to sensitive records such as medical records. Any further verification shall parallel the record to which notification or access is being sought. Such further verification may include such particulars as the individual's years of attendance at a particular educational institution, rank attained in the uniformed services, date or place of birth, names of parents, an occupation or the specific times the individual received medical treatment.
            (v) An individual who makes a request by telephone shall verify his identity by providing to the responsible Department official identifying particulars which parallel the record to which notification or access is being sought. If the responsible Department official determines that the particulars provided by telephone are insufficient, the requester will be required to submit the request in writing or in person. Telephone requests will not be accepted where an individual is requesting notification of or access to sensitive records such as medical records.
            (c) Granting notification of or access to a record. (1) Subject to the provisions governing medical records in § 5b.6 of this part and the provisions governing exempt systems in § 5b.11 of this part, a responsible Department official, who receives a request for notification of or access to a record and, if required, verification of an individual's identity, will review the request and grant notification or access to a record, if the individual requesting access to the record is the subject individual.
            (2) If the responsible Department official determines that there will be a delay in responding to a request because of the number of requests being processed, a breakdown of equipment, shortage of personnel, storage of records in other locations, etc., he will so inform the individual and indicate when notification or access will be granted.
            (3) Prior to granting notification of or access to a record, the responsible Department official may at his discretion require an individual making a request in person to reduce his request to writing if the individual has not already done so at the time the request is made.
          
          
            § 5b.6
            Special procedures for notification of or access to medical records.
            (a) General. An individual in general has a right to notification of or access to his medical records, including psychological records, as well as to other records pertaining to him maintained by the Department. This section sets forth special procedures as permitted by the Act for notification of or access to medical records, including a special procedure for notification of or access to medical records of minors. The special procedures set forth in paragraph (b) of this section may not be suitable for use by every component of the Department. Therefore, components may follow the paragraph (b) procedure for notification of or access to medical records, or may issue regulations establishing special procedures for such purposes. The special procedure set forth in paragraph (c) of this section relating to medical records of minors is mandatory.
            (b) Medical records procedures—(1) Notification of or access to medical records.
              (i) Any individual may request notification of or access to a medical record pertaining to him. Unless the individual is a parent or guardian requesting notification of or access to a minor's medical record, an individual shall make a request for a medical record in accordance with this section and the procedures in § 5b.5 of this part.
            (ii) An individual who requests notification of or access to a medical record shall, at the time the request is made, designate a representative in writing. The representative may be a physician, other health professional, or other responsible individual, who would be willing to review the record and inform the subject individual of its contents at the representative's discretion.
            (2) Utilization of the designated representative. A subject individual will be granted direct access to a medical record if the responsible official determines that direct access is not likely to have an adverse effect on the subject individual. If the responsible Department official believes that he is not qualified to determine, or if he does determine, that direct access to the subject individual is likely to have an adverse effect on the subject individual, the record will be sent to the designated representative. The subject individual will be informed in writing that the record has been sent.
            (c) Medical records of minors—(1) Requests by minors; notification of or access to medical records to minors. A minor may request notification of or access to a medical record pertaining to him in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
            (2) Requests on a minor's behalf; notification of or access to medical records to an individual on a minor's behalf. (i) In order to protect the privacy of a minor, a parent or guardian, authorized to act on a minor's behalf as provided in § 5b.10 of this part, who makes a request for notification of or access to a minor's medical record will not be given direct notification of or access to such record.
            (ii) A parent or guardian shall make all requests for notification of or access to a minor's medical record in accordance with this paragraph and the procedures in § 5b.5 of this part. A parent or guardian shall at the time he makes a request designate a family physician or other health professional (other than a family member) to whom the record, if any, will be sent.

            (iii) Where a medical record on the minor exists, it will be sent to the physician or health professional designated by the parent or guardian in all cases. If disclosure of the record would constitute an invasion of the minor's privacy, that fact will be brought to the attention of the physician or health professional to whom the record is sent. The physician or health professional will be asked to consider the effect that disclosure of the record to the parent or guardian would have on the minor in determining whether the minor's medical record should be made available to the parent or guardian. Response to the parent or guardian making the request will be made in substantially the following form:
            
            
              We have completed processing your request for notification of or access to
              
              ____________________'s
              
                 (Name of minor)
              
              medical records. Please be informed that if any medical record were found pertaining to that individual, they have not been sent to your designated physician or health professional.
            
            
            In each case where a minor's medical record is sent to a physician or health professional, reasonable efforts will be made to so inform the minor.
          
          
            § 5b.7
            Procedures for correction or amendment of records.

            (a) Any subject individual may request that his record be corrected or amended if he believes that the record is not accurate, timely, complete, or relevant or necessary to accomplish a Department function. A subject individual making a request to amend or correct his record shall address his request to the responsible Department official in writing; except that, the request need not be in writing if the subject individual makes his request in person and the responsible Department official corrects or amends the record at that time. The subject individual shall specify in each request:

            (1) The system of records from which the record is retrieved;
            
            (2) The particular record which he is seeking to correct or amend;
            (3) Whether he is seeking an addition to or a deletion or substitution of the record; and,
            (4) His reasons for requesting correction or amendment of the record.
            (b) A request for correction or amendment of a record will be acknowledged within 10 working days of its receipt unless the request can be processed and the subject individual informed of the responsible Department official's decision on the request within that 10 day period.
            (c) If the responsible Department official agrees that the record is not accurate, timely, or complete based on a preponderance of the evidence, the record will be corrected or amended. The record will be deleted without regard to its accuracy, if the record is not relevant or necessary to accomplish the Department function for which the record was provided or is maintained. In either case, the subject individual will be informed in writing of the correction, amendment, or deletion and, if accounting was made of prior disclosures of the record, all previous recipients of the record will be informed of the corrective action taken.
            (d) If the responsible Department official does not agree that the record should be corrected or amended, the subject individual will be informed in writing of the refusal to correct or amend the record. He will also be informed that he may appeal the refusal to correct or amend his record to the appropriate appeal authority listed in § 5b.8 of this part. The appropriate appeal authority will be identified to the subject individual by name, title, and business address.

            (e) Requests to correct or amend a record governed by the regulation of another government agency, e.g., Civil Service Commission, Federal Bureau of Investigation, will be forwarded to such government agency for processing and the subject individual will be informed in writing of the referral.
          
          
            § 5b.8
            Appeals of refusals to correct or amend records.
            (a) Processing the appeal. (1) A subject individual who disagrees with a refusal to correct or amend his record may appeal the refusal in writing. All appeals shall be made to the following appeal authorities, or their designees, or successors in function:
            (i) Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management for records of the Office of the Secretary, or where the initial refusal to correct or amend was made by another appeal authority. The appeal authority for an initial refusal by the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management is the Under Secretary.
            (ii) Assistant Secretary for Health for records of the Public Health Service including Office of Assistant Secretary for Health; Health Resources Administration; Health Services Administration; Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration; Center for Disease Control; National Institutes of Health; and Food and Drug Administration.
            (iii) Assistant Secretary for Education for records of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Education, National Center for Education Statistics, National Institute of Education, and Office of Education.
            (iv) Assistant Secretary for Human Development for records of the Office of Human Development.
            (v) Commissioner of Social Security for records of the Social Security Administration.
            (vi) Administrator, Social and Rehabilitation Service for the records of the Social and Rehabilitation Service.

            (2) An appeal will be completed within 30 working days from its receipt by the appeal authority; except that, the appeal authority may for good cause extend this period for an additional 30 days. Should the appeal period be extended, the subject individual appealing the refusal to correct or amend the record will be informed in writing of the extension and the circumstances of the delay. The subject individual's request to amend or correct the record, the responsible Department official's refusal to correct or amend, and any other pertinent material relating to the appeal will be reviewed. No hearing will be held.

            (3) If the appeal authority agrees that the record subject to the appeal should be corrected or amended, the record will be amended and the subject individual will be informed in writing of the correction or amendment. Where an accounting was made of prior disclosures of the record, all previous recipients of the record will be informed of the corrective action taken.
            (4) If the appeal is denied, the subject individual will be informed in writing:
            (i) Of the denial and the reasons for the denial;
            (ii) That he has a right to seek judicial review of the denial; and,
            (iii) That he may submit to the responsible Department official a concise statement of disagreement to be associated with the disputed record and disclosed whenever the record is disclosed.
            (b) Notation and disclosure of disputed records. Whenever a subject individual submits a statement of disagreement to the responsible Department official in accordance with paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this section, the record will be noted to indicate that it is disputed. In any subsequent disclosure, a copy of the subject individual's statement of disagreement will be disclosed with the record. If the responsible Department official deems it appropriate, a concise statement of the appeal authority's reasons for denying the subject individual's appeal may also be disclosed with the record. While the subject individual will have access to this statement of reasons, such statement will not be subject to correction or amendment. Where an accounting was made of prior disclosures of the record, all previous recipients of the record will be provided a copy of the subject individual's statement of disagreement, as well as the statement, if any, of the appeal authority's reasons for denying the subject individual's appeal.
          
          
            § 5b.9
            Disclosure of records.
            (a) Consent to disclosure by a subject individual. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section authorizing disclosures of records without consent, no disclosure of a record will be made without the consent of the subject individual. In each case the consent, whether obtained from the subject individual at the request of the Department or whether provided to the Department by the subject individual on his own initiative, shall be in writing. The consent shall specify the individual, organizational unit or class of individuals or organizational units to whom the record may be disclosed, which record may be disclosed and, where applicable, during which time frame the record may be disclosed (e.g., during the school year, while the subject individual is out of the country, whenever the subject individual is receiving specific services). A blanket consent to disclose all of a subject individual's records to unspecified individuals or organizational units will not be honored. The subject individual's identity and, where applicable (e.g., where a subject individual gives consent to disclosure of a record to a specific individual), the identity of the individual to whom the record is to be disclosed shall be verified.
            (2) A parent or guardian of any minor is not authorized to give consent to a disclosure of the minor's medical record.
            (b) Disclosures without the consent of the subject individual. The disclosures listed in this paragraph may be made without the consent of the subject individual. Such disclosures are:
            (1) To those officers and employees of the Department who have a need for the record in the performance of their duties. The responsible Department official may upon request of any officer or employee, or on his own initiative, determine what constitutes legitimate need.
            (2) Required to be disclosed under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, and part 5 of this title.
            (3) For a routine use as defined in paragraph (j) of § 5b.1 of this part. Routine uses will be listed in any notice of a system of records. Routine uses published in appendix B are applicable to more than one system of records. Where applicable, notices of systems of records may contain references to the routine uses listed in appendix B. Appendix B will be published with any compendium of notices of systems of records.

            (4) To the Bureau of the Census for purposes of planning or carrying out a census or survey or related activity pursuant to the provisions of Title 13 U.S.C.
            

            (5) To a recipient who has provided the agency with advance written assurance that the record will be used solely as a statistical research or reporting record; Provided, That, the record is transferred in a form that does not identify the subject individual.
            (6) To the National Archives of the United States as a record which has sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued preservation by the United States Government, or for evaluation by the Administrator of General Services or his designee to determine whether the record has such value.
            (7) To another government agency or to an instrumentality of any governmental jurisdiction within or under the control of the United States for a civil or criminal law enforcement activity if the activity is authorized by law, and if the head of such government agency or instrumentality has submitted a written request to the Department specifying the record desired and the law enforcement activity for which the record is sought.
            (8) To an individual pursuant to a showing of compelling circumstances affecting the health or safety of any individual if a notice of the disclosure is transmitted to the last known address of the subject individual.
            (9) To either House of Congress, or to the extent of matter within its jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, any joint committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee.
            (10) To the Comptroller General, or any of his authorized representatives, in the course of the performance of the duties of the General Accounting Office.
            (11) Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
            (c) Accounting of disclosures. (1) An accounting of all disclosures of a record will be made and maintained by the Department for 5 years or for the life of the record, whichever is longer; except that, such an accounting will not be made:
            (i) For disclosures under paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this section; and,
            (ii) For disclosures made with the written consent of the subject individual.
            (2) The accounting will include:
            (i) The date, nature, and purpose of each disclosure; and
            (ii) The name and address of the person or entity to whom the disclosure is made.
            (3) Any subject individual may request access to an accounting of disclosures of a record. The subject individual shall make a request for access to an accounting in accordance with the procedures in § 5b.5 of this part. A subject individual will be granted access to an accounting of the disclosures of a record in accordance with the procedures of this part which govern access to the related record. Access to an accounting of a disclosure of a record made under paragraph (b)(7) of this section may be granted at the discretion of the responsible Department official.
          
          
            § 5b.10
            Parents and guardians.
            For the purpose of this part, a parent or guardian of any minor or the legal guardian or any individual who has been declared incompetent due to physical or mental incapacity or age by a court of competent jurisdiction is authorized to act on behalf of an individual or a subject individual. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of § 5b.5, of this part governing procedures for verifying an individual's identity, and paragraph (c) (2) of § 5b.6 of this part governing special procedures for notification of or access to a minor's medical records, an individual authorized to act on behalf of a minor or legal incompetent will be viewed as if he were the individual or subject individual.
          
          
            § 5b.11
            Exempt systems.
            (a) General policy. The Act permits certain types of specific systems of records to be exempt from some of its requirements. It is the policy of the Department to exercise authority to exempt systems of records only in compelling cases.
            (b) Specific systems of records exempted. (1) Those systems of records listed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section are exempt from the following provisions of the Act and this part:

            (i) 5 U.S.C. 552a(c)(3) and paragraph (c)(2) of § 5b.9 of this part which require a subject individual to be granted access to an accounting of disclosures of a record.
            (ii) 5 U.S.C. 552a(d) (1) through (4) and (f) and §§ 5b.6, 5b.7, and 5b.8 of this part relating to notification of or access to records and correction or amendment of records.
            (iii) 5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4) (G) and (H) which require inclusion of information about Department procedures for notification, access, and correction or amendment of records in the notice for the systems of records.
            (iv) 5 U.S.C. 552(e)(3) and paragraph (a)(3) of § 5b.4 of this part which require that an individual asked to provide a record to the Department be informed of the authority for providing the record (including whether the providing of the record is mandatory or voluntary, the principal purposes for maintaining the record, the routine uses for the record, and what effect his refusal to provide the record may have on him), and if the record is not required by statute or Executive Order to be provided by the individual, he agrees to provide the record. This exemption applies only to an investigatory record compiled by the Department for criminal law enforcement purposes in a system of records exempt under subsection (j)(2) of the Act to the extent that these requirements would prejudice the conduct of the investigation.
            (2) The following systems of records are exempt from those provisions of the Act and this part listed in paragraph (b) (1) of this section.
            (i) Pursuant to subsection (j)(2) of the Act:
            (A) The Saint Elizabeths Hospital's Court-Ordered Forensic Investigatory Materials Files; and
            (B) The Investigatory Material Compiled for Law Enforcement Purposes System, HHS.
            (ii) Pursuant to subsection (k)(2) of the Act:
            (A) The General Criminal Investigation Files, HHS/SSA;
            (B) The Criminal Investigations File, HHS/SSA; and,
            (C) The Program Integrity Case Files, HHS/SSA.
            (D) Civil and Administrative Investigative Files of the Inspector General, HHS/OS/OIG.
            (E) Complaint Files and Log. HHS/OS/OCR.
            (F) Investigative materials compiled for law enforcement purposes for the Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank (HIPDB), of the Office of Inspector General. (See § 61.15 of this title for access and correction rights under the HIPDB by subjects of the Data Bank.)
            (G) Investigative materials compiled for law enforcement purposes for the Program Information Management System, HHS/OS/OCR.
            (H) Investigative materials compiled for law enforcement purposes from the CMS Fraud Investigation Database (FID), HHS/CMS.
            (I) Investigative materials compiled for law enforcement purposes from the Automated Survey Processing Environment (ASPEN) Complaints/ Incidents Tracking System (ACTS), HHS/CMS.
            (J) Investigative materials compiled for law enforcement purposes from the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Information Tracking System (HITS), HHS/CMS.
            (K) Investigative materials compiled for law enforcement purposes from the Organ Procurement Organizations System (OPOS), HHS/CMS.
            (L) Investigative materials compiled for law enforcement purposes for the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB). (See § 60.21 of this subchapter for access and correction rights under the NPDB by subjects of the Data Bank.)
            (iii) Pursuant to subsection (k)(4) of the Act:
            (A) The Health and Demographic Surveys Conduct in Random Samples of the U.S. Population;
            (B) The Health Manpower Inventories and Surveys;
            (C) The Vital Statistics for Births, Deaths, Fetal Deaths, Marriages and Divorces Occurring in the U.S. during Each Year; and,
            (D) The Maryland Psychiatric Case Register.
            (E) The Health Resources Utilization Statistics, DHHS/OASH/NCHS.
            (F) National Medical Expenditure Survey Records. HHS/OASH/NCHSR.
            (iv) Pursuant to subsection (k)(5) of the Act:
            
            (A) The Investigatory Material Compiled for Security and Suitability Purposes System, HHS;
            (B) The Suitability for Employment Records, HHS; and
            (C) NIH Electronic Research Administration (eRA) Records, HHS/NIH/OD/OER, 09-25-0225.
            (v) Pursuant to subsections (j)(2), (k)(2), and (k)(5) of the Act:
            (A) The Clinical Investigatory Records, HHS/FDA;
            (B) The Regulated Industry Employee Enforcement Records, HHS/FDA;
            (C) The Employee Conduct Investigative Records, HHS/FDA; and,
            (D) The Service Contractor Employee Investigative Records, HHS/FDA.
            (vi) Pursuant to subsection (k)(6) of the Act:
            (A) The Personnel Research and Merit Promotion Test Records, HHS/SSA/OMA.
            (vii) Pursuant to subsections (k)(2) and (k)(5) of the Act:
            (A) Public Health Service Records Related to Investigations of Scientific Misconduct, HHS/OASH/ORI.
            (B) Administration: Investigative Records, HHS/NIH/OM/OA/OMA.
            (C) FDA Records Related to Research Misconduct Proceedings, HHS/FDA/OC, 09-10-0020.
            (D) NIH Records Related to Research Misconduct Proceedings, HHS/NIH, 09-25-0223.
            (viii)(A) HHS Insider Threat Program Records, 09-90-1701.
            (B) [Reserved]
            (c) Notification of or access to records in exempt systems of records. (1) Where a system of records is exempt as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, any individual may nonetheless request notification of or access to a record in that system. An individual shall make requests for notification of or access to a record in an exempt system of records in accordance with the procedures of §§ 5b.5 and 5b.6 of this part.
            (2) An individual will be granted notification of or access to a record in an exempt system but only to the extent such notification or access would not reveal the identity of a source who furnished the record to the Department under an express promise, and prior to September 27, 1975 an implied promise, that his identity would be held in confidence, if:
            (i) The record is in a system of records which is exempt under subsection (k)(2) of the Act and the individual has been, as a result of the maintenance of the record, denied a right, privilege, or benefit to which he would otherwise be eligible; or,
            (ii) The record is in a system of records which is exempt under subsection (k)(5) of the Act.
            (3) If an individual is not granted notification of or access to a record in a system of records exempt under subsections (k) (2) and (5) of the Act in accordance with this paragraph, he will be informed that the identity of a confidential source would be revealed if notification of or access to the record were granted to him.
            (d) Discretionary actions by the responsible Department official. Unless disclosure of a record to the general public is otherwise prohibited by law, the responsible Department official may in his discretion grant notification of or access to a record in a system of records which is exempt under paragraph (b) of this section. Discretionary notification of or access to a record in accordance with this paragraph will not be a precedent for discretionary notification of or access to a similar or related record and will not obligate the responsible Department official to exercise his discretion to grant notification of or access to any other record in a system of records which is exempt under paragraph (b) of this section.
            [40 FR 47409, Oct. 8, 1975, as amended at 43 FR 40229, Sept. 11, 1978; 47 FR 57040, Dec. 22, 1982; 49 FR 14108, Apr. 10, 1984; 51 FR 41352, Nov. 14, 1986; 59 FR 36717, July 19, 1994; 65 FR 34988, June 1, 2000; 65 FR 37289, June 14, 2000; 68 FR 62751, Nov. 6, 2003; 73 FR 55775, Sept. 26, 2008; 76 FR 72327, Nov. 23, 2011; 78 FR 39186, 39188, July 1, 2013; 78 FR 47211, Aug. 5, 2013; 83 FR 14185, Apr. 3, 2018; 84 FR 14624, Apr. 11, 2019]
          
          
            § 5b.12
            Contractors.

            (a) All contracts entered into on or after September 27, 1975 which require a contractor to maintain or on behalf of the Department to maintain, a system of records to accomplish a Department function must contain a provision requiring the contractor to comply with the Act and this part.
            
            (b) All unexpired contracts entered into prior to September 27, 1975 which require the contractor to maintain or on behalf of the Department to maintain, a system of records to accomplish a Department function will be amended as soon as practicable to include a provision requiring the contractor to comply with the Act and this part. All such contracts must be so amended by July 1, 1976 unless for good cause the appeal authority identified in § 5b.8 of this part authorizes the continuation of the contract without amendment beyond that date.
            (c) A contractor and any employee of such contractor shall be considered employees of the Department only for the purposes of the criminal penalties of the Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a(i), and the employee standards of conduct listed in appendix A of this part where the contract contains a provision requiring the contractor to comply with the Act and this part.

            (d) This section does not apply to systems of records maintained by a contractor as a result of his management discretion, e.g., the contractor's personnel records.
          
          
            § 5b.13
            Fees.
            (a) Policy. Where applicable, fees for copying records will be charged in accordance with the schedule set forth in this section. Fees may only be charged where an individual requests that a copy be made of the record to which he is granted access. No fee may be charged for making a search of the system of records whether the search is manual, mechanical, or electronic. Where a copy of the record must be made in order to provide access to the record (e.g., computer printout where no screen reading is available), the copy will be made available to the individual without cost. Where a medical record is made available to a representative designated by the individual or to a physician or health professional designated by a parent or guardian under § 5b.6 of this part, no fee will be charged.
            (b) Fee schedule. The fee schedule for the Department is as follows:
            (1) Copying of records susceptible to photocopying—$.10 per page.
            (2) Copying records not susceptible to photocopying (e.g., punch cards or magnetic tapes)—at actual cost to be determined on a case-by-case basis.
            (3) No charge will be made if the total amount of copying does not exceed $25.
          
          
            Pt. 5b, App. A
            Appendix A to Part 5b—Employee Standards of Conduct
            (a) General. All employees are required to be aware of their responsibilities under the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a. Regulations implementing the Act are set forth in 45 CFR 5b. Instruction on the requirements of the Act and regulation shall be provided to all new employees of the Department. In addition, supervisors shall be responsible for assuring that employees who are working with systems of records or who undertake new duties which require the use of systems of records are informed of their responsibilities. Supervisors shall also be responsible for assuring that all employees who work with such systems of records are periodically reminded of the requirements of the Act and are advised of any new provisions or interpretations of the Act.
            (b) Penalties. (1) All employees must guard against improper disclosure f records which are governed by the Act. Because of the serious consequences of improper invasions of personal privacy, employees may be subject to disciplinary action and criminal prosecution for knowing and willful violations of the Act and regulation. In addition, employees may also be subject to disciplinary action for unknowing or unwillful violations, where the employee had notice of the provisions of the Act and regulations and failed to inform himself sufficiently or to conduct himself in accordance with the requirements to avoid violations.
            (2) The Department may be subjected to civil liability for the following actions undertaken by its employees:
            (a) Making a determination under the Act and §§ 5b.7 and 5b.8 of the regulation not to amend an individual's record in accordance with his request, or failing to make such review in conformity with those provisions;
            (b) Refusing to comply with an individual's request for notification of or access to a record pertaining to hiem;

            (c) Failing to maintain any record pertaining to any individual with such accuracy, relevance, timeliness, and completeness as is necessary to assure fairness in any determination relating to the qualifications, character, rights, or opportunities of, or benefits to the individual that may be made on the basis of such a record, and consequently a determination is made which is adverse to the individual; or
            
            (d) Failing to comply with any other provision of the Act or any rule promulgated thereunder, in such a way as to have an adverse effect on an individual.
            (3) An employee may be personally subject to criminal liability as set forth below and in 5 U.S.C. 552a (i):
            (a) Any officer or employee of an agency, who by virtue of his employment or official position, has possession of, or access to, agency records which contain individually identifiable information the disclosure of which is prohibited by the Act or by rules or regulations established thereunder, and who, knowing that disclosure of the specific material is so prohibited, willfully discloses the material in any manner to any person or agency not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $5,000.
            (b) Any officer or employee of any agency who willfully maintains a system of records without meeting the notice requirements [of the Act] shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $5,000.
            (c) Rules Governing Employees Not Working With Systems of Records. Employees whose duties do not involve working with systems of records will not generally disclose to any one, without specific authorization from their supervisors, records pertaining to employees or other individuals which by reason of their official duties are available to them. Notwithstanding the above, the following records concerning Federal employees are a matter of public record and no further authorization is necessary for disclosure:
            (1) Name and title of individual.
            (2) Grade classification or equivalent and annual rate of salary.
            (3) Position description.
            (4) Location of duty station, including room number and telephone number.
            In addition, employees shall disclose records which are listed in the Department's Freedom of Information Regulation as being available to the public. Requests for other records will be referred to the responsible Department official. This does not preclude employees from discussing matters which are known to them personally, and without resort to a record, to official investigators of Federal agencies for official purposes such as suitability checks, Equal Employment Opportunity investigations, adverse action proceedings, grievance proceedings, etc.
            (d) Rules governing employees whose duties require use or reference to systems of records. Employees whose official duties require that they refer to, maintain, service, or otherwise deal with systems of records (hereinafter referred to as “Systems Employees”) are governed by the general provisions. In addition, extra precautions are required and systems employees are held to higher standards of conduct.
            (1) Systems Employees shall:
            (a) Be informed with respect to their responsibilities under the Act;
            (b) Be alert to possible misuses of the system and report to their supervisors any potential or actual use of the system which they believe is not in compliance with the Act and regulation;
            (c) Make a disclosure of records within the Department only to an employee who has a legitimate need to know the record in the course of his official duties;
            (d) Maintain records as accurately as practicable.
            (e) Consult with a supervisor prior to taking any action where they are in doubt whether such action is in conformance with the Act and regulation.
            (2) Systems Employees shall not:
            (a) Disclose in any form records from a system of records except (1) with the consent or at the request of the subject individual; or (2) where its disclosure is permitted under § 5b.9 of the regulation.
            (b) Permit unauthorized individuals to be present in controlled areas. Any unauthorized individuals observed in controlled areas shall be reported to a supervisor or to the guard force.
            (c) Knowingly or willfully take action which might subject the Department to civil liability.
            (d) Make any arrangements for the design development, or operation of any system of records without making reasonable effort to provide that the system can be maintained in accordance with the Act and regulation.
            (e) Contracting officers. In addition to any applicable provisions set forth above, those employees whose official duties involve entering into contracts on behalf of the Department shall also be governed by the following provisions:
            (1) Contracts for design, or development of systems and equipment. No contract for the design or development of a system of records, or for equipment to store, service or maintain a system of records shall be entered into unless the contracting officer has made reasonable effort to ensure that the product to be purchased is capable of being used without violation of the Act or regulation. Special attention shall be given to provision of physical safeguards.
            (2) Contracts for the operation of systems of records. A review by the Contracting Officer, in conjunction with other officials whom he feels appropriate, of all proposed contracts providing for the operation of systems of records shall be made prior to execution of the contracts to determine whether operation of the system of records is for the purpose of accomplishing a Department function. If a determination is made that the operation of the system is to accomplish a Department function, the contracting officer shall be responsible for including in the contract appropriate provisions to apply the provisions of the Act and regulation to the system, including prohibitions against improper release by the contractor, his employees, agents, or subcontractors.
            (3) Other service contracts. Contracting officers entering into general service contracts shall be responsible for determining the appropriateness of including provisions in the contract to prevent potential misuse (inadvertent or otherwise) by employees, agents, or subcontractors of the contractor.
            (f) Rules Governing Responsible Department Officials. In addition to the requirements for Systems Employees, responsible Department officials shall:
            (1) Respond to all requests for notification of or access, disclosure, or amendment of records in a timely fashion in accordance with the Act and regulation;
            (2) Make any amendment of records accurately and in a timely fashion;
            (3) Inform all persons whom the accounting records show have received copies of the record prior to the amendments of the correction; and
            (4) Associate any statement of disagreement with the disputed record, and
            (a) Transmit a copy of the statement to all persons whom the accounting records show have received a copy of the disputed record, and
            (b) Transmit that statement with any future disclosure.
          
          
            Pt. 5b, App. B
            Appendix B to Part 5b—Routine Uses Applicable to More Than One System of Records Maintained by HHS
            (1) In the event that a system of records maintained by this agency or carry out its functions indicates a violation or potential violation of law, whether civil, criminal or regulatory in nature, and whether arising by general statute or particular program statute, or by regulation, rule or order issued pursuant thereto, the relevant records in the system of records may be referred, as a routine use, to the appropriate agency, whether federal, or foreign, charged with the responsibility of investigating or prosecuting such violation or charged with enforcing or implementing the statute, or rule, regulation or order issued pursuant thereto.
            (2) Referrals may be made of assignments of research investigators and project monitors to specific research projects to the Smithsonian Institution to contribute to the Smithsonian Science Information Exchange, Inc.
            (3) In the event the Department deems it desirable or necessary, in determining whether particular records are required to be disclosed under the Freedom of Information Act, disclosure may be made to the Department of Justice for the purpose of obtaining its advice.
            (4) A record from this system of records may be disclosed as a “routine use” to a federal, state or local agency maintaining civil, criminal or other relevant enforcement records or other pertinent records, such as current licenses, if necessary to obtain a record relevant to an agency decision concerning the hiring or retention of an employee, the issuance of a security clearance, the letting of a contract, or the issuance of a license, grant or other benefit.
            A record from this system of records may be disclosed to a Federal agency, in response to its request, in connection with the hiring or retention of an employee, the issuance of a security clearance, the reporting of an investigation of an employee, the letting of a contract, or the issuance of a license, grant, or other benefit by the requesting agency, to the extent that the record is relevant and necessary to the requesting agency's decision on the matter.
            (5) In the event that a system of records maintained by this agency to carry out its function indicates a violation or potential violation of law, whether civil, criminal or regulatory in nature, and whether arising by general statute or particular program statute, or by regulation, rule or order issued pursuant thereto, the relevant records in the system of records may be referred, as a routine use, to the appropriate agency, whether state or local charged with the responsibility of investigating or prosecuting such violation or charged with enforcing or implementing the statute, or rule, regulation or order issued pursuant thereto.
            (6) Where Federal agencies having the power to subpoena other Federal agencies' records, such as the Internal Revenue Service or the Civil Rights Commission, issue a subpoena to the Department for records in this system of records, the Department will make such records available.
            (7) Where a contract between a component of the Department and a labor organization recognized under E.O. 11491 provides that the agency will disclose personal records relevant to the organization's mission, records in this system of records may be disclosed to such organization.
            (8) Where the appropriate official of the Department, pursuant to the Department's Freedom of Information Regulation determines that it is in the public interest to disclose a record which is otherwise exempt from mandatory disclosure, disclosure may be made from this system of records.
            (9) The Department contemplates that it will contract with a private firm for the purpose of collating, analyzing, aggregating or otherwise refining records in this system. Relevant records will be disclosed to such a contractor. The contractor shall be required to maintain Privacy Act safeguards with respect to such records.
            (10)-(99) [Reserved]
            
            (100) To the Department of Justice or other appropriate Federal agencies in defending claims against the United States when the claim is based upon an individual's mental or physical condition and is alleged to have arisen because of activities of the Public Health Service in connection with such individual.
            (101) To individuals and organizations, deemed qualified by the Secretary to carry out specific research solely for the purpose of carrying out such research.
            (102) To organizations deemed qualified by the Secretary to carry out quality assessment, medical audits or utilization review.
            (103) Disclosures in the course of employee discipline or competence determination proceedings.
          
          
            Appendix C to Part 5b—Delegations of Authority [Reserved]
          
        
        
          PART 6 [RESERVED]
        
        
          Pt. 7
          PART 7—EMPLOYEE INVENTIONS
          
            Sec.
            7.0
            Who are employees.
            7.1
            Duty of employee to report inventions.
            7.3
            Determination as to domestic rights.
            7.4
            Option to acquire foreign rights.
            7.7
            Notice to employee of determination.
            7.8
            Employee's right of appeal.
          
          
            Authority:
            Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1953, 18 FR 2053; 3 CFR 1953 Supp. E.O. 10096, 15 FR 391; 3 CFR. 1950 Supp. and E.O. 10930, 26 FR 2583; 3 CFR 1961 Supp.
          
          
            § 7.0
            Who are employees.
            As used in this part, the term Government employee means any officer or employee, civilian or military, except such part-time employees or part-time consultants as may be excluded therefrom by a determination made in writing by the head of the employee's office or constituent organization, pursuant to an exemption approved by the Commissioner of Patents that to include him or them would be impracticable or inequitable, given the reasons therefor. A person shall not be considered to be a part-time employee or part-time consultant for this purpose unless the terms of his employment contemplate that he shall work for less than the minimum number of hours per day, or less than a minimum number of days per week, or less than the minimum number of weeks per year, regularly required of full-time employees of his class.
            [27 FR 7986, Aug. 10, 1962]
          
          
            § 7.1
            Duty of employee to report inventions.
            Every Department employee is required to report to the Assistant Secretary (Health and Scientific Affairs) in accordance with the procedures established therefor, every invention made by him (whether or not jointly with others) which bears any relation to his official duties or which was made in whole or in any part during working hours, or with any contribution of Government facilities, equipment, material, funds, or information, or of time or services of other Government employees on official duty.
            [31 FR 12842, Oct. 1, 1966]
          
          
            § 7.3
            Determination as to domestic rights.
            The determination of the ownership of the domestic right, title, and interest in and to an invention which is or may be patentable, made by a Government employee while under the administrative jurisdiction of the Department, shall be made in writing by the Assistant Secretary (Health and Scientific Affairs), in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order 10096 and Government-wide regulations issued thereunder by the Commissioner of Patents as follows:
            (a) The Government as represented by the Assistant Secretary (Health and Scientific Affairs) shall obtain the entire domestic right, title and interest in and to all inventions made by any Government employee (1) during working hours, or (2) with a contribution by the Government of facilities, equipment, materials, funds, or information, or of time or services of other Government employees on official duty, or (3) which bear a direct relation to or are made in consequence of the official duties of the inventor.

            (b) In any case where the contribution of the Government, as measured by any one or more of the criteria set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, to the invention is insufficient equitably to justify a requirement of assignment to the Government of the entire domestic right, title and interest in and to such invention, or in any case where the Government has insufficient interest in an invention to obtain the entire domestic right, title, and interest therein (although the Government could obtain same under paragraph (a) of this section), the Department, subject to the approval of the Commissioner, shall leave title to such invention in the employee, subject, however, to the reservation to the Government of a nonexclusive, irrevocable, royalty-free license in the invention with power to grant licenses for all governmental purposes, such reservation to appear, where practicable, in any patent, domestic or foreign, which may issue on such invention.
            (c) In applying the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, to the facts and circumstances relating to the making of any particular invention, it shall be presumed that an invention made by an employee who is employed or assigned (1) to invent or improve or perfect any art, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, (2) to conduct or perform research, development work, or both, (3) to supervise, direct, coordinate, or review Government financed or conducted research, development work, or both, or (4) to act in a liaison capacity among governmental or nongovernmental agencies or individuals engaged in such work, falls within the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, and it shall be presumed that any invention made by any other employee falls within the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section. Either presumption may be rebutted by a showing of the facts and circumstances and shall not preclude a determination that these facts and circumstances justify leaving the entire right, title and interest in and to the invention in the Government employee, subject to law.
            (d) In any case wherein the Government neither (1) obtains the entire domestic right, title and interest in and to an invention pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, nor (2) reserves a nonexclusive, irrevocable, royalty-free license in the invention, with power to grant licenses for all governmental purposes, pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, the Government shall leave the entire right, title and interest in and to the invention in the Government employee, subject to law.
            [27 FR 7986, Aug. 10, 1962, as amended at 31 FR 12842, Nov. 1, 1966]
          
          
            § 7.4
            Option to acquire foreign rights.
            In any case where it is determined that all domestic rights should be assigned to the Government, it shall further be determined, pursuant to Executive Order 9865 and Government-wide regulations issued thereunder, that the Government shall reserve an option to require the assignment of such rights in all or in any specified foreign countries. In case where the inventor is not required to assign the patent rights in any foreign country or countries to the Government or the Government fails to exercise its option within such period of time as may be provided by regulations issued by the Commissioner of Patents, any application for a patent which may be filed in such country or countries by the inventor or his assignee shall nevertheless be subject to a nonexclusive, irrevocable, royalty-free license to the Government for all governmental purposes, including the power to issue sublicenses for use in behalf of the Government and/or in furtherance of the foreign policies of the Government.
            [27 FR 7987, Aug. 10, 1962]
          
          
            § 7.7
            Notice to employee of determination.
            The employee-inventor shall be notified in writing of the Department's determination of the rights to his invention and of his right of appeal, if any. Notice need not be given if the employee stated in writing that he would agree to the determination of ownership which was in fact made.
            [31 FR 12842, Oct. 1, 1966]
          
          
            § 7.8
            Employee's right of appeal.

            An employee who is aggrieved by a determination of the Department may appeal to the Commissioner of Patents, pursuant to section 4(d) of Executive Order 10096, as amended by Executive Order 10930, and regulations issued thereunder, by filing a written appeal with the Commissioner, in duplicate, and a copy of the appeal with the Assistant Secretary (Health and Scientific Affairs), within 30 days (or such longer period as the Commissioner may, for good cause, fix in any case) after receiving written notice of such determination.
            [27 FR 7986, Aug. 10, 1962, as amended at 31 FR 12842, Oct. 1, 1966]
          
        
        
          PART 8 [RESERVED]
        
        
          Pt. 9
          PART 9—USE OF HHS RESEARCH FACILITIES BY ACADEMIC SCIENTISTS, ENGINEERS, AND STUDENTS
          
            Sec.
            9.1
            Purpose.
            9.2
            Policy.
            9.3
            Delegations of authority.
            9.4
            Criteria.
            9.5
            Restrictions.
          
          
            Authority:
            27 Stat. 395, as amended; 20 U.S.C. 91.
          
          
            Source:
            34 FR 18938, Nov. 27, 1969, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 9.1
            Purpose.
            To enhance the availability of DHHS scientific research and study facilities to academic scientists, engineers, and qualified students.
          
          
            § 9.2
            Policy.
            It is the policy of the Department of Health and Human Services in accordance with the policy of the President announced on February 21, 1969, to make research and study facilities of the Department readily available to the scientific community, especially qualified academic scientists and engineers. Unique, unusual, and expensive-to-duplicate facilities at laboratories and other study and research facilities of the Department will be made available to the national scientific community, to the maximum extent practical without serious detriment to the missions of those facilities. It is also the policy of the Department to permit qualified students and graduates of institutions of learning in the several States, and territories, as well as the District of Columbia, to use study and research facilities of the Department. When such facilities are used by academic scientists, engineers, and students, the costs incurred for the operation of the unique or unusual research facilities, as well as of the other facilities, should be funded by the operating agency responsible for the operation of that facility, except for any significant incremental costs incurred in support of research not directly related to an HHS mission.
          
          
            § 9.3
            Delegations of authority.
            (a) The heads of operating agencies are delegated authority for negotiations and decisions as to the use of Department facilities by qualified academic scientists, engineers, and students.
            (b) The heads of operating agencies may (and are encouraged to) redelegate to the heads of their respective component organizations, with the power to further redelegate to laboratory directors, the authority for negotiations and decisions as to the use of departmental facilities. Appropriate use shall be made of advisory groups in formulating their decisions.
          
          
            § 9.4
            Criteria.
            (a) The official permitting use of Department facilities must determine that it would be consistent with the programs of his activity to participate. Facilities may be made available provided the use of such facilities will be of direct benefit to the objectives of the academic scientist, or engineer, or student, with the prospect of fruitful interchange of ideas and information between Department personnel and the academic scientist, or engineer, or student, and such use will not interfere with the Department program.
            (b) The official permitting use of Department facilities will furnish the non-Government user with safety requirements or operating procedures to be followed. Such requirements or procedures are to include the requirement to report to the permitting official any accident involving the non-Government user.

            (c) The official delegated authority for approving the use of Department facilities will not permit the use of laboratory facilities unless he determines:
            
            (1) That facilities are available for the period desired; and
            (2) That the proposed research will not interfere with regular Department functions or needs, nor require the subsequent acquisition of additional equipment by the Department.
          
          
            § 9.5
            Restrictions.
            (a) Each individual authorized to use Department facilities will be expected to use the facilities and equipment with customary care and otherwise conduct himself in such manner as to complete his research or study within any time limits prescribed.
            (b) Each individual authorized to use HHS facilities may not be authorized to sign requisitions for supplies and equipment.
            (c) Any official approving the use of HHS facilities should seek an agreement, executed by non-Government users, absolving the Federal agency of liability in case of personal injury, death, and failure or damage to the non-Government user's experiments or equipment. The agreement must also contain a statement that the non-Government user will comply with all safety regulations and procedures while using such facilities.
          
        
        
          Pt. 12
          PART 12—DISPOSAL AND UTILIZATION OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY FOR PUBLIC HEALTH PURPOSES
          
            Sec.
            12.1
            Definitions.
            12.2
            Scope.
            12.3
            General policies.
            12.4
            Limitations.
            12.5
            Awards.
            12.6
            Notice of available property.
            12.7
            Applications for surplus real property.
            12.8
            Assignment of surplus real property.
            12.9
            General disposal terms and conditions.
            12.10
            Compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and other related Acts (environmental impact).
            12.11
            Special terms and conditions.
            12.12
            Utilization.
            12.13
            Form of conveyance.
            12.14
            Compliance inspections and reports.
            12.15
            Reports to Congress.
            Exhibit A to Part 12—Public Benefit Allowance for Transfer of Real Property for Health Purposes
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 203, 63 Stat. 385, as amended; 40 U.S.C. 484; sec. 501 of Pub. L. 100-77, 101 Stat. 509-10, 42 U.S.C. 11411.
          
          
            Source:
            45 FR 72173, Oct. 31, 1980, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 12.1
            Definitions.
            (a) Act means the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949, 63 Stat. 377 (40 U.S.C. 471 et seq.). Terms defined in the Act and not defined in this section have the meanings given to them in the Act.
            (b) Accredited means having the approval of a recognized accreditation board or association on a regional, State, or national level, such as a State Board of Health. Approval as used above describes the formal process carried out by State Agencies and institutions in determining that health organizations or programs meet minimum acceptance standards.
            (c) Administrator means the Administrator of General Services.
            (d) Assigned property means real and related personal property which, in the discretion of the Administrator or his designee, has been made available to the Department for transfer for public health purposes.
            (e) Department means the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
            (f) Disposal agency means the executive agency of the Government which has authority to assign property to the Department for transfer for public health purposes.
            (g) Excess means any property under the control of any Federal agency which is not required for its needs and the discharge of its responsibilities, as determined by the head thereof.
            (h) Fair market value means the highest price which the property will bring by sale in the open market by a willing seller to a willing buyer.
            (i) Holding agency means the Federal agency which has control over and accountability for the property involved.
            (j) Nonprofit institution means any institution, organization, or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, no part of the net earnings of which inures or may lawfully inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and (except for institutions which lease property to assist the homeless under Title V of Pub. L. 100-77) which has been held to be tax-exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
            (k) Off-site property means surplus buildings, utilities and all other removable improvements, including related personal property, to be transferred by the Department for removal and use away from the site for public health purposes.
            (l) On-site means surplus real property, including related personal property, to be transferred by the Department for use in place for public health purposes.
            (m) Public benefit allowance means a discount on the sale or lease price of real property transferred for public health purposes, representing any benefit determined by the Secretary which has accrued or may accrue to the United States thereby.
            (n) Related personal property means any personal property: (1) Which is located on and is (i) an integral part of, or (ii) useful in the operation of real property; or (2) which is determined by the Administrator to be otherwise related to the real property.
            (o) Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
            (p) State means a State of the United States, and includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the Territories and possessions of the United States.
            (q) Surplus when used with respect to real property means any excess real property not required for the needs and the discharge of the responsibilities of all Federal agencies as determined by the Administrator.
            [45 FR 72173, Oct. 31, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 7745, Mar. 10, 1988]
          
          
            § 12.2
            Scope.
            This part is applicable to surplus real property located within any State which is appropriate for assignment to, or which has been assigned to, the Department for transfer for public health purposes, as provided for in section 203(k) of the Act.
          
          
            § 12.3
            General policies.
            (a) It is the policy of the Department to foster and assure maximum utilization of surplus real property for public health purposes, including research.
            (b) Transfers may be made only to States, their political subdivisions and instrumentalities, tax-supported public health institutions, and nonprofit public health institutions which (except for institutions which lease property to assist the homeless under Title V of Pub. L. 100-77) have been held tax-exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
            (c) Real property will be requested for assignment only when the Department has determined that the property is suitable and needed for public health purposes. The amount of real and related personal property to be transferred shall not exceed normal operating requirements of the applicant. Such property will not be requested for assignment unless it is needed at the time of application for public health purposes or will be so needed within the immediate or foreseeable future. Where construction or major renovation is not required or proposed, the property must be placed into use within twelve (12) months from the date of transfer. When construction or major renovation is contemplated at the time of transfer, the property must be placed in use within 36 months from the date of transfer. If the applicable time limitation is not met, the transferee shall either commence payments in cash to the Department for each month thereafter during which the proposed use has not been implemented or take such other action as set forth in § 12.12 as is deemed appropriate by the Department. Such monthly payments shall be computed on the basis of the current fair market value of the property at the time of the first payment by subtracting therefrom any portion of the purchase price paid in cash at the time of transfer, and by dividing the balance by the total number of months in the period of restriction. If the facility has not been placed into use within eight (8) years of the date of the deed, title to the property will be revested in the United States, or, at the discretion of the Department, the restrictions and conditions may be abrogated in accordance with § 12.9.

            (d) Transfers will be made only after the applicant has certified that the proposed program is not in conflict with State or local zoning restrictions, building codes, or similar limitations.
            (e) Organizations which may be eligible include those which provide care and training for the physically and mentally ill, including medical care of the aged and infirm; clinical services; services (including shelter) to homeless individuals; other public health services (including water and sewer); or similar services devoted primarily to the promotion and protection of public health. In addition, organizations which provide assistance to homeless individuals may be eligible for leases under title V of Public Law 100-77. Except for the provision of services (including shelter) to homeless individuals, organizations which have as their principal purpose the providing of custodial or domiciliary care are not eligible. The eligible organization must be authorized to carry out the activity for which it requests the property.
            (f) An applicant's plan of operation will not be approved unless it provides that the applicant will not discriminate because of race, color, sex, handicap, or national origin in the use of the property.
            [45 FR 72173, Oct. 31, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 7745, Mar. 10, 1988; 55 FR 32252, Aug. 8, 1990]
          
          
            § 12.4
            Limitations.
            (a) Surplus property transferred pursuant to this part will be disposed of on an “as is, where is,” basis without warranty of any kind.
            (b) Unless excepted by the General Services Administrator in his assignment, mineral rights will be conveyed together with the surface rights.
          
          
            § 12.5
            Awards.
            Where there is more than one applicant for the same property, it will be awarded to the applicant having a program of utilization which provides, in the opinion of the Department, the greatest public benefit. Where the property will serve more than one program, it will be apportioned to fit the needs of as many programs as is practicable.
          
          
            § 12.6
            Notice of available property.
            Reasonable publicity will be given to the availability of surplus real property which is suitable for assignment to the Department for transfer for public health uses. The Department will establish procedures reasonably calculated to afford all eligible users having a legitimate interest in acquiring the property for such uses an opportunity to make an application therefor. However, publicity need not be given to the availability of surplus real property which is occupied and being used for eligible public health purposes at the time the property is declared surplus, the occupant expresses interest in the property, and the Department determines that it has a continuing need therefor.
          
          
            § 12.7
            Applications for surplus real property.
            Applications for surplus real property for public health purposes shall be made to the Department through the office specified in the notice of availability.
            [55 FR 32252, Aug. 8, 1990]
          
          
            § 12.8
            Assignment of surplus real property.
            (a) Notice of interest in a specific property for public health purposes will be furnished the General Services Administrator by the Department at the earliest possible date.
            (b) Requests to the Administrator for assignment of surplus real property to the Department for transfer for public health purposes will be based on the following conditions:
            (1) The Department has an acceptable application for the property.
            (2) The applicant is willing, authorized, and in a position to assume immediate care, custody, and maintenance of the property.
            (3) The applicant is able, willing and authorized to pay the administrative expenses incident to the transfer.
            (4) The applicant has the necessary funds, or the ability to obtain such funds, to carry out the approved program of use of the property.
          
          
            § 12.9
            General disposal terms and conditions.

            (a) Surplus real property transfers under this part will be limited to public health purposes. Transferees shall be entitled to a public benefit allowance in terms of a percentage which will be applied against the value of the property to be conveyed. Such an allowance will be computed on the basis of benefits to the United States from the use of such property for public health purposes. The computation of such public benefit allowances will be in accordance with Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof.
            (b) A transfer of surplus real property for public health purposes is subject to the disapproval of the Administrator within 30 days after notice is given to him of the proposed transfer.
            (c) Transfers will be on the following terms and conditions:
            (1) The transferee will be obligated to utilize the property continuously in accordance with an approved plan of operation.
            (2) The transferee will not be permitted to sell, lease or sublease, rent, mortgage, encumber, or otherwise dispose of the property, or any part thereof, without the prior written authorization of the Department.
            (3) The transferee will file with the Department such reports covering the utilization of the property as may be required.
            (4) In the event the property is sold, leased or subleased, encumbered, disposed of, or is used for purposes other than those set forth in the approved plan without the consent of the Department, all revenues or the reasonable value of other benefits received by the transferee directly or indirectly from such use, as determined by the Department, will be considered to have been received and held in trust by the transferee for the account of the United States and will be subject to the direction and control of the Department. The provisions of this paragraph shall not impair or affect the rights reserved to the United States in paragraph (c)(6) of this section, or the right of the Department to impose conditions to its consent.
            (5) Lessees will be required to carry all perils and liability insurance to protect the Government and the Government's residual interest in the property. Transferees will be required to carry such flood insurance as may be required by the Department pursuant to Pub. L. 93-234. Where the transferee elects to carry insurance against damages to or loss of on-site property due to fire or other hazards, and where loss or damage to transferred Federal surplus real property occurs, all proceeds from insurance shall be promptly used by the transferee for the purpose of repairing and restoring the property to its former condition, or replacing it with equivalent or more suitable facilities. If not so used, there shall be paid to the United States that part of the insurance proceeds that is attributable to the Government's residual interest in the property lost, damaged, or destroyed in the case of leases, attributable to the fair market value of the leased facilities.
            (6) With respect to on-site property, in the event of noncompliance with any of the conditions of the transfer as determined by the Department, title to the property transferred and the right to immediate possession shall, at the option of the Department, revert to the Government. In the event title is reverted to the United States for noncompliance or voluntarily reconveyed, the transferee shall, at the option of the Department, be required to reimburse the Government for the decrease in value of the property not due to reasonable wear and tear or acts of God or attributable to alterations completed by the transferee to adapt the property to the public health use for which the property was transferred. With respect to leased property, in the event of noncompliance with any of the conditions of the lease, as determined by the Department, the right of occupancy and possession shall, at the option of the Department, be terminated. In the event a leasehold is terminated by the United States for noncompliance or is voluntarily surrendered, the lessee shall be required at the option of the Department to reimburse the Government for the decrease in value of the property not due to reasonable wear and tear or acts of God or attributable to alterations completed by the lessee to adapt the property to the public health use for which the property was leased.

            With respect to any reverter of title or termination of leasehold resulting from noncompliance, the Government shall, in addition thereto, be reimbursed for such costs as may be incurred in recovering title to or possession of the property.
            
            Any payments of cash made by the transferee against the purchase price of property transferred shall, upon a forfeiture of title to the property for breach of condition, be forfeited.
            (7) With respect to off-site property, in the event of noncompliance with any of the terms and conditions of the transfer, the unearned public benefit allowance shall, at the option of the Department, become immediately due and payable or, if the property or any portion thereof is sold, leased, or otherwise disposed of without authorization from the Department, such sale, lease or sublease, or other disposal shall be for the benefit and account of the United States and the United States shall be entitled to the proceeds. In the event the transferee fails to remove the property or any portion thereof within the time specified, then in addition to the rights reserved above, at the option of the Department, all right, title, and interest in and to such unremoved property shall be retransferred to other eligible applicants or shall be forfeited to the United States.
            (8) With respect only to on-site property which has been declared excess by the Department of Defense, such declaration having included a statement indicating the property has a known potential for use during a national emergency, the Department shall reserve the right during any period of emergency declared by the President of the United States or by the Congress of the United States to the full and unrestricted use by the Government of the surplus real property, or of any portion thereof, disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this part. Such use may be either exclusive or nonexclusive. Prior to the expiration or termination of the period of restricted use by the transferee, the Government will not be obligated to pay rent or any other fees or charges during the period of emergency, except that the Government will:
            (i) Bear the entire cost of maintenance of such portion of the property used by it exclusively or over which it may have exclusive possession or control;
            (ii) Pay the fair share, commensurate with the use of the cost of maintenance of such surplus real property as it may use nonexclusively or over which it may have nonexclusive possession or control;
            (iii) Pay a fair rental for the use of improvements or additions to the surplus real property made by the purchaser or lessee without Government aid; and
            (iv) Be responsible for any damage to the surplus real property caused by its use, reasonable wear and tear, the common enemy and acts of God excepted. Subsequent to the expiration or termination of the period of restricted use, the obligations of the Government will be as set forth in the preceding sentence and, in addition, the Government shall be obligated to pay a fair rental for all or any portion of the conveyed premises which it uses.
            (9) The restrictions set forth in paragraphs (c) (1) through (7) of this section will extend for thirty (30) years for land with or without improvements; and for facilities being acquired separately from land whether they are for use on-site or off-site, the period of limitations on the use of the structures will be equal to their estimated economic life. The restrictions set forth in paragraphs (c) (1) through (7) of this section will extend for the entire initial lease period and for any renewal periods for property leased from the Department.

            (d) Transferees, by obtaining the consent of the Department, may abrogate the restrictions set forth in paragraph (c) of this section for all or any portion of the property upon payment in cash to the Department of an amount equal to the then current fair market value of the property to be released, multiplied by the public benefit allowance granted at the time of conveyance, divided by the total number of months of the period of restriction set forth in the conveyance document and multiplied by the number of months that remain in the period of restriction as determined by the Department. For purposes of abrogation payment computation, the current fair market value shall not include the value of any improvements placed on the property by the transferee.
            (e) Related personal property will be transferred or leased as a part of the realty and in accordance with real property procedures. It will be subject to the same public benefit allowance granted for the real property. Where related personal property is involved in an on-site transfer, the related personal property may be transferred by a bill of sale imposing restrictions for a period not to exceed five years from the date of transfer, other terms and conditions to be the same as, and made a part of, the real property transaction.
          
          
            § 12.10
            Compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and other related Acts (environmental impact).
            (a) The Department will, prior to making a final decision to convey or lease, or to amend, reform, or grant an approval or release with respect to a previous conveyance or lease of, surplus real property for public health purposes, complete an environmental assessment of the proposed transaction in keeping with applicable provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, the National Archeological Data Preservation Act, and other related acts. No permit to use surplus real property shall allow the permittee to make, or cause to be made, any irreversible change in the condition of said property, and no use permit shall be employed for the purpose of delaying or avoiding compliance with the requirements of these Acts.
            (b) Applicants shall be required to provide such information as the Department deems necessary to make an assessment of the impact of the proposed Federal action on the human environment. Materials contained in the applicant's official request, responses to a standard questionnaire prescribed by the Public Health Service, as well as other relevant information, will be used by the Department in making said assessment.
            (c) If the assessment reveals (1) That the proposed Federal action involves properties of historical significance which are listed, or eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places, or (2) that a more than insignificant impact on the human environment is reasonably foreseeable as a result of the proposed action, or (3) that the proposed Federal action could result in irreparable loss or destruction of archeologically significant items or data, the Department will, except as provided for in paragraph (d) of this section, prepare and distribute, or cause to be prepared or distributed, such notices and statements and obtain such approvals as are required by the above cited Acts.
            (d) If a proposed action involves other Federal agencies in a sequence of actions, or a group of actions, directly related to each other because of their functional interdependence, the Department may enter into and support a lead agency agreement to designate a single lead agency which will assume primary responsibility for coordinating the assessment of environmental effects of proposed Federal actions, preparing and distributing such notices and statements, or obtaining such approvals, as are required by the above cited Acts. The procedures of the designated lead agency will be utilized in conducting the environmental assessment. In the event of disagreement between the Department and another Federal agency, the Department will reserve the right to abrogate its lead agency agreement with the other Federal Agency.
            [45 FR 72173, Oct. 31, 1980, as amended at 55 FR 32252, Aug. 8, 1990]
          
          
            § 12.11
            Special terms and conditions.
            (a) Applicants will be required to pay all external administrative costs which will include, but not be limited to, taxes, surveys, appraisals, inventory costs, legal fees, title search, certificate or abstract expenses, decontamination costs, moving costs, closing fees in connection with the transaction and service charges, if any, made by State Agencies for Federal Property Assistance under the terms of a cooperative agreement with the Department.

            (b) In the case of off-site property, applicants will be required to post performance bonds, make performance guarantee deposits, or give such other assurances as may be required by the Department or the holding agency to insure adequate site clearance and to pay service charges, if any, made by State Agencies for Federal Property Assistance under the terms of a cooperative agreement with the Department.
            (c) Whenever negotiations are undertaken for disposal to private nonprofit public health organizations of any surplus real property which cost the Government $1 million or more, the Department will give notice to the Attorney General of the United States of the proposed disposal and the terms and conditions thereof. The applicant shall furnish to the Department such information and documents as the Attorney General may determine to be appropriate or necessary to enable him to give the advice as provided for by section 207 of the Act.
            (d) Where an applicant proposes to acquire or lease and use in place improvements located on land which the Government does not own, he shall be required, before the transfer is consummated, to obtain a right to use the land commensurate with the duration of the restrictions applicable to the improvements, or the term of the lease. The applicant will be required to assume, or obtain release of, the Government's obligations respecting the land including but not limited to obligations relating to restoration, waste, and rent. At the option of the Department, the applicant may be required to post a bond to indemnify the Government against such obligations.
            (e) The Department may require the inclusion in the transfer or lease document of any other provision deemed desirable or necessary.
            (f) Where an eligible applicant for an on-site transfer proposes to construct new, or rehabilitate old, facilities, the financing of which must be accomplished through issuance of revenue bonds having terms inconsistent with the terms and conditions of transfer prescribed in § 12.9 (c), (d), and (e) of this chapter, the Department may, in its discretion, impose such alternate terms and conditions of transfer in lieu thereof as may be appropriate to assure utilization of the property for public health purposes.
          
          
            § 12.12
            Utilization.
            (a) Where property or any portion thereof is not being used for the purposes for which transferred, the transferee will be required at the direction of the Department:
            (1) To place the property into immediate use for an approved purpose;
            (2) To retransfer such property to such other public health user as the Department may direct;
            (3) To sell such property for the benefit and account of the United States;
            (4) To return title to such property to the United States or to relinquish any leasehold interest therein;
            (5) To abrogate the conditions and restrictions of the transfer, as set forth in § 12.9(d) of this chapter, except that, where property has never been placed in use for the purposes for which transferred, abrogation will not be permitted except under extenuating circumstances; or
            (6) To make payments as provided for in § 12.3(c) of this chapter.
            (b) Where the transferee or lessee desires to place the property in temporary use for a purpose other than that for which the property was transferred or leased, approval from the Department must be obtained, and will be conditioned upon such terms as the Department may impose.
          
          
            § 12.13
            Form of conveyance.
            (a) Transfers or leases of surplus real property will be on forms approved by the Office of General Counsel of the Department and will include such of the disposal or lease terms and conditions set forth in this part and such other terms and conditions as the Office of General Counsel may deem appropriate or necessary.
            (b) Transfers of on-site property will normally be by quitclaim deed without warranty of title.
          
          
            § 12.14
            Compliance inspections and reports.
            The Department will make or have made such compliance inspections as are necessary and will require of the transferee or lessee such compliance reports and actions as are deemed necessary.
          
          
            
            § 12.15
            Reports to Congress.
            The Secretary will make such reports of real property disposal activities as are required by section 203 of the Act and such other reports as may be required by law.
          
          
            Pt. 12, Exh. A
            Exhibit A to Part 12—Public Benefit Allowance for Transfer of Real Property for Health Purposes 1
            
            
              
                Classification
                Percent allowed
                Organization allowances
                Basic public benefit allowance
                Tax support
                Accreditation
                Hardship
                Unmet needs
                10 to 25%
                26 to 50%
                51 to 100%
                Utilization allowances
                Integrated research program
                Outpatient services
                Public services
                Training program
                Maximum public benefit allowance
              
              
                Hospitals
                50
                20
                20
                10
                10
                20
                30
                10
                10
                10
                10
                100
              
              
                Clinics
                50
                20
                20
                10
                10
                20
                30
                
                
                
                
                100
              
              
                Nursing Homes
                50
                20
                20
                10
                10
                20
                30
                
                
                
                10
                100
              
              
                Public Health Administration
                
                  2 100
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                  2 100
              
              
                Public Refuse Disposal and Water Systems
                
                  2 100
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                  2 100
              
              
                Research
                
                  2 100
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                  2 100
              
              
                Rehabilitation Facility
                50
                20
                20
                10
                10
                20
                30
                10
                10
                10
                10
                100
              
              
                Special Services
                50
                20
                20
                10
                10
                20
                30
                
                
                10
                
                100
              
              
                Assistance to the Homeless
                
                  2 100
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                  2 100
              
              
                1 This public benefit allowance applies only to surplus real property being sold for on-site use. When surplus real property is to be moved from the site, a basic public benefit allowance of 100% will be granted.
              
                2 Applicable when this is the primary use to be made of the property. The public benefit allowance for the overall health program is applicable when such facilities are conveyed as a minor component of other facilities.
            
            [45 FR 72173, Oct. 31, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 7745, Mar. 10, 1988]
          
        
        
          Pt. 12a
          PART 12a—USE OF FEDERAL REAL PROPERTY TO ASSIST THE HOMELESS
          
            Sec.
            12a.1
            Definitions.
            12a.2
            Applicability.
            12a.3
            Collecting the information.
            12a.4
            Suitability determination.
            12a.5
            Real property reported excess to GSA.
            12a.6
            Suitability criteria.
            12a.7
            Determination of availability.
            12a.8
            Public notice of determination.
            12a.9
            Application process.
            12a.10
            Action on approved applications.
            12a.11
            Unsuitable properties.
            12a.12
            No applications approved.
          
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 11411; 40 U.S.C. 484(k); 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
          
          
            Source:
            56 FR 23794, 23795, May 24, 1991, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 12a.1
            Definitions.
            
              Applicant means any representative of the homeless which has submitted an application to the Department of Health and Human Services to obtain use of a particular suitable property to assist the homeless.
            
              Checklist or property checklist means the form developed by HUD for use by landholding agencies to report the information to be used by HUD in making determinations of suitability.
            
              Classification means a property's designation as unutilized, underutilized, excess, or surplus.
            
              Day means one calendar day including weekends and holidays.
            
              Eligible organization means a State, unit of local government or a private non-profit organization which provides assistance to the homeless, and which is authorized by its charter or by State law to enter into an agreement with the Federal government for use of real property for the purposes of this subpart. Representatives of the homeless interested in receiving a deed for a particular piece of surplus Federal property must be section 501(c)(3) tax exempt.
            
            
              Excess property means any property under the control of any Federal executive agency that is not required for the agency's needs or the discharge of its responsibilities, as determined by the head of the agency pursuant to 40 U.S.C. 483.
            
              GSA means the General Services Administration.
            
              HHS means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              Homeless means:
            (1) An individual or family that lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence; and
            (2) An individual or family that has a primary nighttime residence that is:
            (i) A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations (including welfare hotels, congregate shelters, and transitional housing for the mentally ill);
            (ii) An institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized; or
            (iii) A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings. This term does not include any individual imprisoned or otherwise detained under an Act of the Congress or a State law.
            
              HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              ICH means the Interagency Council on the Homeless.
            
              Landholding agency means a Federal department or agency with statutory authority to control real property.
            
              Lease means an agreement between either the Department of Health and Human Services for surplus property, or landholding agencies in the case of non-excess properties or properties subject to the Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 U.S.C. 2687), and the applicant, giving rise to the relationship of lessor and lessee for the use of Federal real property for a term of at least one year under the conditions set forth in the lease document.
            
              Non-profit organization means an organization no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any member, founder, contributor, or individual; that has a voluntary board; that has an accounting system or has designated an entity that will maintain a functioning accounting system for the organization in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures; and that practices nondiscrimination in the provision of assistance.
            
              Permit means a license granted by a landholding agency to use unutilized or underutilized property for a specific amount of time under terms and conditions determined by the landholding agency.
            
              Property means real property consisting of vacant land or buildings, or a portion thereof, that is excess, surplus, or designated as unutilized or underutilized in surveys by the heads of landholding agencies conducted pursuant to section 202(b)(2) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 483(b)(2).)
            
              Regional Homeless Coordinator means a regional coordinator of the Interagency Council on the Homeless.
            
              Representative of the Homeless means a State or local government agency, or private nonprofit organization which provides, or proposes to provide, services to the homeless.
            
              Screen means the process by which GSA surveys Federal agencies, or State, local and non-profit entities, to determine if any such entity has an interest in using excess Federal property to carry out a particular agency mission or a specific public use.
            
              State Homeless Coordinator means a state contact person designated by a state to receive and disseminate information and communications received from the Interagency Council on the Homeless in accordance with section 210(a) of the Stewart B. McKinney Act of 1987, as amended.
            
              Suitable property means that HUD has determined that a particular property satisfies the criteria listed in § 12a.6.
            
              Surplus property means any excess real property not required by any Federal landholding agency for its needs or the discharge of its responsibilities, as determined by the Administrator of GSA.
            
              Underutilized means an entire property or portion thereof, with or without improvements which is used only at irregular periods or intermittently by the accountable landholding agency for current program purposes of that agency, or which is used for current program purposes that can be satisfied with only a portion of the property.
            
              Unsuitable property means that HUD has determined that a particular property does not satisfy the criteria in § 12a.6.
            
              Unutilized property means an entire property or portion thereof, with or without improvements, not occupied for current program purposes for the accountable executive agency or occupied in caretaker status only.
          
          
            § 12a.2
            Applicability.
            (a) This part applies to Federal real property which has been designated by Federal landholding agencies as unutilized, underutilized, excess or surplus and is therefore subject to the provisions of title V of the McKinney Act (42 U.S.C. 11411).
            (b) The following categories of properties are not subject to this subpart (regardless of whether they may be unutilized or underutilized).
            (1) Machinery and equipment.
            (2) Government-owned, contractor-operated machinery, equipment, land, and other facilities reported excess for sale only to the using contractor and subject to a continuing military requirement.
            (3) Properties subject to special legislation directing a particular action.
            (4) Properties subject to a Court Order.
            (5) Property not subject to survey requirements of Executive Order 12512 (April 29, 1985).
            (6) Mineral rights interests.
            (7) Air Space interests.
            (8) Indian Reservation land subject to section 202(a)(2) of the Federal Property and Administrative Service Act of 1949, as amended.
            (9) Property interests subject to reversion.
            (10) Easements.
            (11) Property purchased in whole or in part with Federal funds if title to the property is not held by a Federal landholding agency as defined in this part.
          
          
            § 12a.3
            Collecting the information.
            (a) Canvass of landholding agencies. On a quarterly basis, HUD will canvass landholding agencies to collect information about property described as unutilized, underutilized, excess, or surplus, in surveys conducted by the agencies under section 202 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act (40 U.S.C. 483), Executive Order 12512, and 41 CFR part 101-47.800. Each canvass will collect information on properties not previously reported and about property reported previously the status or classification of which has changed or for which any of the information reported on the property checklist has changed.
            (1) HUD will request descriptive information on properties sufficient to make a reasonable determination, under the criteria described below, of the suitability of a property for use as a facility to assist the homeless.
            (2) HUD will direct landholding agencies to respond to requests for information within 25 days of receipt of such requests.
            (b) Agency Annual Report. By December 31 of each year, each landholding agency must notify HUD regarding the current availability status and classification of each property controlled by the agency that:
            (1) Was included in a list of suitable properties published that year by HUD, and
            (2) Remains available for application for use to assist the homeless, or has become available for application during that year.
            (c) GSA Inventory. HUD will collect information, in the same manner as described in paragraph (a) of this section, from GSA regarding property that is in GSA's current inventory of excess or surplus property.
            (d) Change in Status. If the information provided on the property checklist changes subsequent to HUD's determination of suitability, and the property remains unutilized, underutilized, excess or surplus, the landholding agency shall submit a revised property checklist in response to the next quarterly canvass. HUD will make a new determination of suitability and, if it differs from the previous determination, republish the property information in the Federal Register. For example, property determined unsuitable for national security concerns may no longer be subject to security restrictions, or property determined suitable may subsequently be found to be contaminated.
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 56 FR 23794, 23795, May 24, 1991, part 12a was added, effective May 24, 1991, except for § 12a.3, which will not become effective until approved by the District Court for the District of Columbia, pending further proceedings.
            
          
          
            § 12a.4
            Suitability determination.
            (a) Suitability determination. Within 30 days after the receipt of information from landholding agencies regarding properties which were reported pursuant to the canvass described in § 12a.3(a), HUD will determine, under criteria set forth in § 12a.6, which properties are suitable for use as facilities to assist the homeless and report its determination to the landholding agency. Properties that are under lease, contract, license, or agreement by which a Federal agency retains a real property interest or which are scheduled to become unutilized or underutilized will be reviewed for suitability no earlier than six months prior to the expected date when the property will become unutilized or underutilized, except that properties subject to the Base Closure and Realignment Act may be reviewed up to eighteen months prior to the expected date when the property will become unutilized or underutilized.
            (b) Scope of suitability. HUD will determine the suitability of a property for use as a facility to assist the homeless without regard to any particular use.
            (c) Environmental information. HUD will evaluate the environmental information contained in property checklists forwarded to HUD by the landholding agencies solely for the purpose of determining suitability of properties under the criteria in § 12a.6.
            (d) Written record of suitability determination. HUD will assign an identification number to each property reviewed for suitability. HUD will maintain a written public record of the following:
            (1) The suitability determination for a particular piece of property, and the reasons for that determination; and
            (2) The landholding agency's response to the determination pursuant to the requirements of § 12a.7(a).
            (e) Property determined unsuitable. Property that is reviewed by HUD under this section and that is determined unsuitable for use to assist the homeless may not be made available for any other purpose for 20 days after publication in the Federal Register of a Notice of unsuitability to allow for review of the determination at the request of a representative of the homeless.
            (f) Procedures for appealing unsuitability determinations. (1) To request review of a determination of unsuitability, a representative of the homeless must contact HUD within 20 days of publication of notice in the Federal Register that a property is unsuitable. Requests may be submitted to HUD in writing or by calling 1-800-927-7588 (Toll Free). Written requests must be received no later than 20 days after notice of unsuitability is published in the Federal Register.
            
            (2) Requests for review of a determination of unsuitability may be made only by representatives of the homeless, as defined in § 12a.1.
            (3) The request for review must specify the grounds on which it is based, i.e., that HUD has improperly applied the criteria or that HUD has relied on incorrect or incomplete information in making the determination (e.g., that property is in a floodplain but not in a floodway).
            (4) Upon receipt of a request to review a determination of unsuitability, HUD will notify the landholding agency that such a request has been made, request that the agency respond with any information pertinent to the review, and advise the agency that it should refrain from initiating disposal procedures until HUD has completed its reconsideration regarding unsuitability.
            (i) HUD will act on all requests for review within 30 days of receipt of the landholding agency's response and will notify the representative of the homeless and the landholding agency in writing of its decision.

            (ii) If a property is determined suitable as a result of the review, HUD will request the landholding agency's determination of availability pursuant to § 12a.7(a), upon receipt of which HUD will promptly publish the determination in the Federal Register. If the determination of unsuitability stands, HUD will inform the representative of the homeless of its decision.
          
          
            § 12a.5
            Real property reported excess to GSA.
            (a) Each landholding agency must submit a report to GSA of properties it determines excess. Each landholding agency must also provide a copy of HUD's suitability determination, if any, including HUD's identification number for the property.
            (b) If a landholding agency reports a property to GSA which has been reviewed by HUD for homeless assistance suitability and HUD determined the property suitable, GSA will screen the property pursuant to § 12a.5(g) and will advise HUD of the availability of the property for use by the homeless as provided in § 12a.5(e). In lieu of the above, GSA may submit a new checklist to HUD and follow the procedures in § 12a.5(c) through § 12a.5(g).
            (c) If a landholding agency reports a property to GSA which has not been reviewed by HUD for homeless assistance suitability, GSA will complete a property checklist, based on information provided by the landholding agency, and will forward this checklist to HUD for a suitability determination. This checklist will reflect any change in classification, i.e., from unutilized or underutilized to excess.
            (d) Within 30 days after GSA's submission, HUD will advise GSA of the suitability determination.
            (e) When GSA receives a letter from HUD listing suitable excess properties in GSA's inventory, GSA will transmit to HUD within 45 days a response which includes the following for each identified property:
            (1) A statement that there is no other compelling Federal need for the property, and therefore, the property will be determined surplus; or
            (2) A statement that there is further and compelling Federal need for the property (including a full explanation of such need) and that, therefore, the property is not presently available for use to assist the homeless.

            (f) When an excess property is determined suitable and available and notice is published in the Federal Register, GSA will concurrently notify HHS, HUD, State and local government units, known homeless assistance providers that have expressed interest in the particular property, and other organizations, as appropriate, concerning suitable properties.
            (g) Upon submission of a Report of Excess to GSA, GSA may screen the property for Federal use. In addition, GSA may screen State and local governmental units and eligible nonprofit organizations to determine interest in the property in accordance with current regulations. (See 41 CFR 101-47.203-5, 101-47.204-1 and 101-47.303-2.)
            (h) The landholding agency will retain custody and accountability and will protect and maintain any property which is reported excess to GSA as provided in 41 CFR 101-47.402.
          
          
            § 12a.6
            Suitability criteria.
            (a) All properties, buildings and land will be determined suitable unless a property's characteristics include one or more of the following conditions:
            (1) National security concerns. A property located in an area to which the general public is denied access in the interest of national security (e.g., where a special pass or security clearance is a condition of entry to the property) will be determined unsuitable. Where alternative access can be provided for the public without compromising national security, the property will not be determined unsuitable on this basis.
            (2) Property containing flammable or explosive materials. A property located within 2000 feet of an industrial, commercial or Federal facility handling flammable or explosive material (excluding underground storage) will be determined unsuitable. Above ground containers with a capacity of 100 gallons or less, or larger containers which provide the heating or power source for the property, and which meet local safety, operation, and permitting standards, will not affect whether a particular property is determined suitable or unsuitable. Underground storage, gasoline stations and tank trucks are not included in this category and their presence will not be the basis of an unsuitability determination unless there is evidence of a threat to personal safety as provided in paragraph (a)(5) of this section.
            (3) Runway clear zone and military airfield clear zone. A property located within an airport runway clear zone or military airfield clear zone will be determined unsuitable.
            (4) Floodway. A property located in the floodway of a 100 year floodplain will be determined unsuitable. If the floodway has been contained or corrected, or if only an incidental portion of the property not affecting the use of the remainder of the property is in the floodway, the property will not be determined unsuitable.
            (5) Documented deficiencies. A property with a documented and extensive condition(s) that represents a clear threat to personal physical safety will be determined unsuitable. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, contamination, structural damage or extensive deterioration, friable asbestos, PCB's, or natural hazardous substances such as radon, periodic flooding, sinkholes or earth slides.
            (6) Inaccessible. A property that is inaccessible will be determined unsuitable. An inaccessible property is one that is not accessible by road (including property on small off-shore islands) or is land locked (e.g., can be reached only by crossing private property and there is no established right or means of entry).
          
          
            § 12a.7
            Determination of availability.
            (a) Within 45 days after receipt of a letter from HUD pursuant to § 12a.4(a), each landholding agency must transmit to HUD a statement of one of the following:
            (1) In the case of unutilized or underutilized property:
            (i) An intention to declare the property excess,
            (ii) An intention to make the property available for use to assist the homeless, or
            (iii) The reasons why the property cannot be declared excess or made available for use to assist the homeless. The reasons given must be different than those listed as suitability criteria in § 12a.6.
            (2) In the case of excess property which had previously been reported to GSA:
            (i) A statement that there is no compelling Federal need for the property, and that, therefore, the property will be determined surplus; or
            (ii) A statement that there is a further and compelling Federal need for the property (including a full explanation of such need) and that, therefore, the property is not presently available for use to assist the homeless.
          
          
            § 12a.8
            Public notice of determination.

            (a) No later than 15 days after the last 45 day period has elapsed for receiving responses from the landholding agencies regarding availability, HUD will publish in the Federal Register a list of all properties reviewed, including a description of the property, its address, and classification. The following designations will be made:
            (1) Properties that are suitable and available.
            (2) Properties that are suitable and unavailable.
            (3) Properties that are suitable and to be declared excess.
            (4) Properties that are unsuitable.
            (b) Information about specific properties can be obtained by contacting HUD at the following toll free number, 1-800-927-7588.

            (c) HUD will transmit to the ICH a copy of the list of all properties published in the Federal Register. The ICH will immediately distribute to all state and regional homeless coordinators area-relevant portions of the list. The ICH will encourage the state and regional homeless coordinators to disseminate this information widely.

            (d) No later than February 15 of each year, HUD shall publish in the Federal Register a list of all properties reported pursuant to § 12a.3(b).

            (e) HUD shall publish an annual list of properties determined suitable but which agencies reported unavailable including the reasons such properties are not available.
            
            (f) Copies of the lists published in the Federal Register will be available for review by the public in the HUD headquarters building library (room 8141); area-relevant portions of the lists will be available in the HUD regional offices and in major field offices.
          
          
            § 12a.9
            Application process.
            (a) Holding period. (1) Properties published as available for application for use to assist the homeless shall not be available for any other purpose for a period of 60 days beginning on the date of publication. Any representative of the homeless interested in any underutilized, unutilized, excess or surplus Federal property for use as a facility to assist the homeless must send to HHS a written expression of interest in that property within 60 days after the property has been published in the Federal Register.
            
            (2) If a written expression of interest to apply for suitable property for use to assist the homeless is received by HHS within the 60 day holding period, such property may not be made available for any other purpose until the date HHS or the appropriate landholding agency has completed action on the application submitted pursuant to that expression of interest.

            (3) The expression of interest should identify the specific property, briefly describe the proposed use, include the name of the organization, and indicate whether it is a public body or a private non-profit organization. The expression of interest must be sent to the Division of Health Facilities Planning (DHFP) of the Department of Health and Human Services at the following address:
            
            
              Director, Division of Health Facilities Planning, Public Health Service, Room 17A-10, Parklawn Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20857.
            
            
            HHS will notify the landholding agency (for unutilized and underutilized properties) or GSA (for excess and surplus properties) when an expression of interest has been received for a particular property.
            (4) An expression of interest may be sent to HHS any time after the 60 day holding period has expired. In such a case, an application submitted pursuant to this expression of interest may be approved for use by the homeless if:
            (i) No application or written expression of interest has been made under any law for use of the property for any purpose; and
            (ii) In the case of excess or surplus property, GSA has not received a bona fide offer to purchase that property or advertised for the sale of the property by public auction.
            (b) Application Requirements. Upon receipt of an expression of interest, DHFP will send an application packet to the interested entity. The application packet requires the applicant to provide certain information, including the following—
            (1) Description of the applicant organization. The applicant must document that it satisfies the definition of a “representative of the homeless,” as specified in § 12a.1 of this subpart. The applicant must document its authority to hold real property. Private non-profit organizations applying for deeds must document that they are section 501(c)(3) tax-exempt.
            (2) Description of the property desired. The applicant must describe the property desired and indicate that any modifications made to the property will conform to local use restrictions except for local zoning regulations.
            (3) Description of the proposed program. The applicant must fully describe the proposed program and demonstrate how the program will address the needs of the homeless population to be assisted. The applicant must fully describe what modifications will be made to the property before the program becomes operational.
            (4) Ability to finance and operate the proposed program. The applicant must specifically describe all anticipated costs and sources of funding for the proposed program. The applicant must indicate that it can assume care, custody, and maintenance of the property and that it has the necessary funds or the ability to obtain such funds to carry out the approved program of use for the property.
            (5) Compliance with non-discrimination requirements. Each applicant and lessee under this part must certify in writing that it will comply with the requirements of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and implementing regulations; and as applicable, Executive Order 11063 (Equal Opportunity in Housing) and implementing regulations; title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d to d-4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs) and implementing regulations; the prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of age under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107) and implementing regulations; and the prohibitions against otherwise qualified individuals with handicaps under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and implementing regulations. The applicant must state that it will not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, familial status, or handicap in the use of the property, and will maintain the required records to demonstrate compliance with Federal laws.
            (6) Insurance. The applicant must certify that it will insure the property against loss, damage, or destruction in accordance with the requirements of 45 CFR 12.9.
            (7) Historic preservation. Where applicable, the applicant must provide information that will enable HHS to comply with Federal historic preservation requirements.
            (8) Environmental information. The applicant must provide sufficient information to allow HHS to analyze the potential impact of the applicant's proposal on the environment, in accordance with the instructions provided with the application packet. HHS will assist applicants in obtaining any pertinent environmental information in the possession of HUD, GSA, or the landholding agency.
            (9) Local government notification. The applicant must indicate that it has informed the applicable unit of general local government responsible for providing sewer, water, police, and fire services, in writing of its proposed program.
            (10) Zoning and Local Use Restrictions. The applicant must indicate that it will comply with all local use restrictions, including local building code requirements. Any applicant which applies for a lease or permit for a particular property is not required to comply with local zoning requirements. Any applicant applying for a deed of a particular property, pursuant to § 12a. 9(b)(3), must comply with local zoning requirements, as specified in 45 CFR part 12.
            (c) Scope of evaluations. Due to the short time frame imposed for evaluating applications, HHS' evaluation will, generally, be limited to the information contained in the application.
            (d) Deadline. Completed applications must be received by DHFP, at the above address, within 90 days after an expression of interest is received from a particular applicant for that property. Upon written request from the applicant, HHS may grant extensions, provided that the appropriate landholding agency concurs with the extension. Because each applicant will have a different deadline based on the date the applicant submitted an expression of interest, applicants should contact the individual landholding agency to confirm that a particular property remains available prior to submitting an application.
            (e) Evaluations. (1) Upon receipt of an application, HHS will review it for completeness, and, if incomplete, may return it or ask the applicant to furnish any missing or additional required information prior to final evaluation of the application.
            (2) HHS will evaluate each completed application within 25 days of receipt and will promptly advise the applicant of its decision. Applications are evaluated on a first-come, first-serve basis. HHS will notify all organizations which have submitted expressions of interest for a particular property regarding whether the first application received for that property has been approved or disapproved. All applications will be reviewed on the basis of the following elements, which are listed in descending order of priority, except that paragraphs (e)(2)(iv) and (e)(2)(v) of this section are of equal importance.
            (i) Services offered. The extent and range of proposed services, such as meals, shelter, job training, and counseling.
            (ii) Need. The demand for the program and the degree to which the available property will be fully utilized.
            
            (iii) Implementation Time. The amount of time necessary for the proposed program to become operational.
            (iv) Experience. Demonstrated prior success in operating similar programs and recommendations attesting to that fact by Federal, State, and local authorities.
            (v) Financial Ability. The adequacy of funding that will likely be available to run the program fully and properly and to operate the facility.
            (3) Additional evaluation factors may be added as deemed necessary by HHS. If additional factors are added, the application packet will be revised to include a description of these additional factors.
            (4) If HHS receives one or more competing applications for a property within 5 days of the first application HHS will evaluate all completed applications simultaneously. HHS will rank approved applications based on the elements listed in § 12a.8(e)(2), and notify the landholding agency, or GSA, as appropriate, of the relative ranks.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 0937-0191)
          
          
            § 12a.10
            Action on approved applications.
            (a) Unutilized and underutilized properties. (1) When HHS approves an application, it will so notify the applicant and forward a copy of the application to the landholding agency. The landholding agency will execute the lease, or permit document, as appropriate, in consultation with the applicant.
            (2) The landholding agency maintains the discretion to decide the following:
            (i) The length of time the property will be available. (Leases and permits will be for a period of at least one year unless the applicant requests a shorter term.)
            (ii) Whether to grant use of the property via a lease or permit;
            (iii) The terms and conditions of the lease or permit document.
            (b) Excess and surplus properties. (1) When HHS approves an application, it will so notify the applicant and request that GSA assign the property to HHS for leasing. Upon receipt of the assignment, HHS will execute a lease in accordance with the procedures and requirements set out in 45 CFR part 12. In accordance with 41 CFR 101-47.402, custody and accountability of the property will remain throughout the lease term with the agency which initially reported the property as excess.
            (2) Prior to assignment to HHS, GSA may consider other Federal uses and other important national needs; however, in deciding the disposition of surplus real property, GSA will generally give priority of consideration to uses to assist the homeless. GSA may consider any competing request for the property made under section 203(k) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 484(k)) that is so meritorious and compelling that it outweighs the needs of the homeless, and HHS may likewise consider any competing request made under subsection 203(k)(1) of that law.
            (3) Whenever GSA or HHS decides in favor of a competing request over a request for property for homeless assistance use as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the agency making the decision will transmit to the appropriate committees of the Congress an explanatory statement which details the need satisfied by conveyance of the surplus property, and the reasons for determining that such need was so meritorious and compelling as to outweigh the needs of the homeless.
            (4) Deeds. Surplus property may be conveyed to representatives of the homeless pursuant to section 203(k) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 484(k)(1), and section 501(f) of the McKinney Act as amended, 42 U.S.C. 11411. Representatives of the homeless must complete the application packet pursuant to the requirements of § 12a.9 of this part and in accordance with the requirements of 45 CFR part 12.
            (c) Completion of Lease Term and Reversion of Title. Lessees and grantees will be responsible for the protection and maintenance of the property during the time that they possess the property. Upon termination of the lease term or reversion of title to the Federal government, the lessee or grantee will be responsible for removing any improvements made to the property and will be responsible for restoration of the property. If such improvements are not removed, they will become the property of the Federal government. GSA or the landholding agency, as appropriate, will assume responsibility for protection and maintenance of a property when the lease terminates or title reverts.
          
          
            § 12a.11
            Unsuitable properties.

            The landholding agency will defer, for 20 days after the date that notice of a property is published in the Federal Register, action to dispose of properties determined unsuitable for homeless assistance. HUD will inform landholding agencies or GSA if appeal of an unsuitability determination is filed by a representative of the homeless pursuant to § 12a.4(f)(4). HUD will advise the agency that it should refrain from initiating disposal procedures until HUD has completed its reconsideration process regarding unsuitability. Thereafter, or if no appeal has been filed after 20 days, GSA or the appropriate landholding agency may proceed with disposal action in accordance with applicable law.
          
          
            § 12a.12
            No applications approved.
            (a) At the end of the 60 day holding period described in § 12a.9(a), HHS will notify GSA, or the landholding agency, as appropriate, if an expression of interest has been received for a particular property. Where there is no expression of interest, GSA or the landholding agency, as appropriate, will proceed with disposal in accordance with applicable law.
            (b) Upon advice from HHS that all applications have been disapproved, or if no completed applications or requests for extensions have been received by HHS within 90 days from the date of the last expression of interest, disposal may proceed in accordance with applicable law.
          
        
        
          Pt. 13
          PART 13—IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EQUAL ACCESS TO JUSTICE ACT IN AGENCY PROCEEDINGS
          
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              Sec.
              13.1
              Purpose of these rules.
              13.2
              When these rules apply.
              13.3
              Proceedings covered.
              13.4
              Eligibility of applicants.
              13.5
              Standards for awards.
              13.6
              Allowable fees and expenses.
              13.7
              Studies, exhibits, analyses, engineering reports, tests and projects.
            
            
              Subpart B—Information Required from Applicants
              13.10
              Contents of application.
              13.11
              Net worth exhibits.
              13.12
              Documentation of fees and expenses.
            
            
              Subpart C—Procedures for Considering Applications
              13.21
              Filing and service of pleadings.
              13.22
              When an application may be filed.
              13.23
              Responsive pleadings.
              13.24
              Settlements.
              13.25
              Further proceedings.
              13.26
              Decisions.
              13.27
              Agency review.
              13.28
              Judicial review.
              13.29
              Payment of award.
              13.30
              Designation of adjudicative officer.
              Appendix A to Part 13
            
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 504(c)(1).
          
          
            Source:
            48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            
              § 13.1
              Purpose of these rules.

              These rules implement section 203 of the Equal Access to Justice Act, 5 U.S.C. 504 and 504 note, for the Department of Health and Human Services. They describe the circumstances under which the Department may award attorney fees and certain other expenses to eligible individuals and entities who prevail over the Department in certain administrative proceedings (called “adversary adjudications”). The Department may reimburse parties for expenses incurred in adversary adjudications if the party prevails in the proceeding and if the Department's position in the proceeding was not substantially justified or if the action is one to enforce compliance with a statutory or regulatory requirement and the Department's demand is substantially in excess of the ultimate decision and is unreasonable when compared with that decision. They also describe what proceedings constitute adversary adjudications covered by the Act, what types of persons and entities may be eligible for an award, and what procedures and standards the Department will use to make a determination as to whether a party may receive an award.
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2845, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.2
              When these rules apply.
              These rules apply to adversary adjudications before the Department.
              [69 FR 2845, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.3
              Proceedings covered.
              (a) These rules apply only to adversary adjudications. For the purpose of these rules, only an adjudication required to be under 5 U.S.C. 554, in which the position of the Department or one of its components is represented by an attorney or other representative (“the agency's litigating party”) who enters an appearance and participates in the proceeding, constitutes an adversary adjudication. These rules do not apply to proceedings for the purpose of establishing or fixing a rate or for the purpose of granting, denying, or renewing a license.
              (b) If the agency's litigating party enters an appearance, Department proceedings listed in appendix A to this part are covered by these rules. Also covered are any other proceedings under statutes that incorporate by reference the procedures of sections 1128(f), 1128A(c)(2), or 1842(j)(2) of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 1320a-7(f), 1320a-7a(c)(2), or 1395u(j)(2). If a proceeding is not covered under either of the two previous sentences, a party may file a fee application as otherwise required by this part and may argue that the Act covers the proceeding. Any coverage issue shall be determined by the adjudicative officer and, if necessary, by the appellate authority on review.
              (c) If a proceeding is covered by these rules, but also involves issues excluded under paragraph (a) of this section from the coverage of these rules, reimbursement is available only for fees and expenses resulting from covered issues.
              [45 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2845, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.4
              Eligibility of applicants.
              (a) To be eligible for an award of attorney fees and other expenses under these regulations, the applicant must be a party, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 551(3), to the adversary adjudication for which it seeks an award. An applicant must show that it meets all conditions of eligibility set out in this subpart and in Subpart B.
              (b) The categories of eligible applicants are as follows:
              (1) Charitable or other tax-exempt organizations described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)) with not more than 500 employees;
              (2) Cooperative associations as defined in section 15(a) of the Agricultural Marketing Act (12 U.S.C. 1141j(a)) with not more than 500 employees;
              (3) Individuals with a net worth of not more than $2 million;
              (4) Sole owners of unincorporated businesses if the owner has a net worth of not more than $7 million, including both personal and business interests, and if the business has not more than 500 employees;
              (5) All other partnerships, corporations, associations, local governmental units, and public and private organizations with a net worth of not more than $7 million and with not more than 500 employees; and
              (6) Where an award is sought on the basis stated in § 13.5(c) of this part, small entities as defined in 5 U.S.C. 601.
              (c) For the purpose of determining eligibility, the net worth and number of employees of an applicant is calculated as of the date the proceeding was initiated. The net worth of an applicant is determined by generally accepted accounting principles.
              (d) Whether an applicant who owns an unincorporated business will be considered as an “individual” or a “sole owner of an unincorporated business” will be determined by whether the applicant's participation in the proceeding is related primarily to individual interests or to business interests.

              (e) The employees of an applicant include all those persons regularly providing services for remuneration for the applicant, under the applicant's direction and control. Part-time employees shall be included on a proportional basis.
              
              (f) The net worth and number of employees of the applicant and all of its affiliates shall be aggregated to determine eligibility. Any individual, corporation or other entity that directly or indirectly controls or owns a majority of the voting shares or other interest of the applicant, or any corporation or other entity of which the applicant directly or indirectly owns or controls a majority of the voting shares or other interest, will be considered an affiliate for purposes of this part, unless the adjudicative officer determines that such treatment would be unjust and contrary to the purposes of the Act in light of the actual relationship between the affiliated entities. In addition, the adjudicative officer may determine that financial relationships of the applicant other than those described in this paragraph constitute special circumstances that would make an award unjust.
              (g) An applicant is not eligible if it appears from the facts and circumstances that it has participated in the proceedings only or primarily on behalf of other persons or entities that are ineligible.
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2846, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.5
              Standards for awards.
              (a) An award of fees and expenses may be made either on the basis that the Department's position in the proceeding was not substantially justified or on the basis that, in a proceeding to enforce compliance with a statutory or regulatory requirement, the Department's demand substantially exceeded the ultimate decision and was unreasonable when compared with that decision. These two bases are explained in greater detail in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
              (b) Awards where the Department's position was not substantially justified. (1) Awards will be made on this basis only where the Department's position in the proceeding was not substantially justified. The Department's position includes, in addition to the position taken by the agency in the proceeding, the agency action or failure to act that was the basis for the proceeding. Whether the Department's position was substantially justified is to be determined on the basis of the administrative record as a whole. The fact that a party has prevailed in a proceeding does not create a presumption that the Department's position was not substantially justified. The burden of proof as to substantial justification is on the agency's litigating party, which may avoid an award by showing that its position was reasonable in law and fact.
              (2) When two or more matters are joined together for one hearing, each of which could have been heard separately (without regard to laws or rules fixing a jurisdictional minimum amount for claims), and an applicant has prevailed with respect to one or several of the matters, an eligible applicant may receive an award for expenses associated only with the matters on which it prevailed if the Department's position on those matters was not substantially justified.
              (3) Awards for fees and expenses incurred before the date on which a proceeding was initiated will be made only if the applicant can demonstrate that they were reasonably incurred in preparation for the proceeding.
              (4) Awards will be reduced or denied if the applicant has unduly or unreasonably protracted the proceeding or if other special circumstances make an award unjust.
              (c) Awards where the Department's demand was substantially excessive and unreasonable. (1) Awards will be made on this basis only where the adversary adjudication arises from the Department's action to enforce a party's compliance with a statutory or regulatory requirement. An award may be made on this basis only if the Department's demand that led to the proceeding was substantially in excess of the ultimate decision in the proceeding, and that demand is unreasonable when compared with that decision, given all the facts and circumstances of the case.

              (2) Any award made on this basis shall be limited to the fees and expenses that are primarily related to defending against the excessive nature of the demand. An award shall not include fees and expenses that are primarily related to defending against the merits of charges, or fees and expenses that are primarily related to defending against the portion of the demand that was not excessive, to the extent that these fees and expenses are distinguishable from the fees and expenses primarily related to defending against the excessive nature of the demand.
              (3) Awards will be denied if the party has committed a willful violation of law or otherwise acted in bad faith, or if special circumstances make an award unjust.
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2846, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.6
              Allowable fees and expenses.
              (a) Awards will be limited to the rates customarily charged by persons engaged in the business of acting as attorneys, agents and expert witnesses. If a party has already received, or is eligible to receive, reimbursement for any expenses under another statutory provision or another program allowing reimbursement, its award under these rules must be reduced by the amount the prevailing party has already received, or is eligible to receive, from the Federal government.
              (b) An award for the fees of an attorney or agent may not exceed $125.00 per hour, regardless of the actual rate charged by the attorney or agent. An award for the fees of an expert witness may not exceed the highest rate at which the Department pays expert witnesses, which is $24.09 per hour, regardless of the actual rates charged by the witness. These limits apply only to fees; an award may include the reasonable expenses of the attorney, agent, or witness as a separate item, if the attorney, agent or witness ordinarily charges separately for such expenses.
              (c) In determining the reasonableness of the fees sought for attorneys, agents or expert witnesses, the adjudicative officer must consider factors bearing on the request, which include, but are not limited to:
              (1) If the attorney, agent or witness is in private practice, his or her customary fee for like services; if the attorney, agent or witness is an employee of the applicant, the fully allocated cost of service;
              (2) The prevailing rate for similar services in the community in which the attorney, agent or witness ordinarily performs services;
              (3) The time actually spent in the representation of the applicant;
              (4) The time reasonably spent in light of the difficulty or complexity of the issues in the proceeding; and
              (5) Such other factors as may bear on the value of the services provided.
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2846, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.7
              Studies, exhibits, analyses, engineering reports, tests and projects.
              The reasonable cost (or the reasonable portion of the cost) for any study, exhibit, analysis, engineering report, test, project or similar matter prepared on behalf of a party may be awarded to the extent that:
              (a) The charge for the service does not exceed the prevailing rate payable for similar services,
              (b) The study or other matter was necessary to the preparation for the administrative proceeding, and
              (c) The study or other matter was prepared for use in connection with the administrative proceeding. No award will be made for a study or other matter which was necessary to satisfy statutory or regulatory requirements, or which would ordinarily be conducted as part of the party's business irrespective of the administrative proceeding.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Information Required from Applicants
            
              § 13.10
              Contents of application.
              (a) Applications for an award of fees and expenses must include:
              (1) The name of the applicant and the identification of the proceeding;

              (2) Where an award is sought on the basis stated in § 13.5(b) of this part, a declaration that the applicant believes it has prevailed, and an identification of the position of the Department that the applicant alleges was not substantially justified. Where an award is sought on the basis stated in § 13.5(c) of this part, an identification of the statutory or regulatory requirement that the applicant alleges the Department was seeking to enforce, and an identification of the Department's demand and of the document or documents containing that demand;
              
              (3) Unless the applicant is an individual, a statement of the number of its employees on the date on which the proceeding was initiated, and a brief description of the type and purpose of its organization or business. However, where an award is sought solely on the basis stated in § 13.5(c) of this part, the applicant need not state the number of its employees;
              (4) A description of any affiliated individuals or entities, as the term “affiliate” is defined in § 13.4(f), or a statement that none exist;
              (5) A statement that the applicant's net worth as of the date on which the proceeding was initiated did not exceed the appropriate limits as stated in § 13.4(b) of this part. However, an applicant may omit this statement if:
              (i) It attaches a copy of a ruling by the Internal Revenue Service that it qualifies as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)) or, in the case of a tax-exempt organization not required to obtain a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service on its exempt status, a statement that describes the basis for the applicant's belief that it qualified under such section;
              (ii) It states that it is a cooperative association as defined in section 15(a) of the Agricultural Marketing Act (12 U.S.C. 1141j(a)); or
              (iii) It states that it is applying for an award solely on the basis stated in § 13.5(c) of this part, and that it is a small entity as defined in 5 U.S.C. 601, and it describes the basis for its belief that it qualifies as a small entity under that section.
              (6) A statement of the amount of fees and expenses for which an award is sought;
              (7) A declaration that the applicant has not received, has not applied for, and does not intend to apply for reimbursement of the cost of items listed in the Statement of Fees and Expenses under any other program or statute; or if the applicant has received or applied for or will receive or apply for reimbursement of those expenses under another program or statute, a statement of the amount of reimbursement received or applied for or intended to be applied for; and
              (8) Any other matters the applicant wishes the Department to consider in determining whether and in what amount an award should be made.
              (b) All applications must be signed by the applicant or by an authorized officer or attorney of the applicant. It shall also contain or be accompanied by a written verification under oath or under penalty of perjury that the information provided in the application is true and correct.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 0990-0118)
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2846, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.11
              Net worth exhibits.
              (a) Each applicant must provide with its application a detailed exhibit showing the net worth of the applicant and any affiliates (as defined in § 13.4(f) of this part) when the proceeding was initiated. This requirement does not apply to a qualified tax-exempt organization or cooperative association. Nor does it apply to a party that states that it is applying for an award solely on the basis stated in § 13.5(c) of this part. If any individual, corporation, or other entity directly or indirectly controls or owns a majority of the voting shares or other interest of the applicant, or if the applicant directly or indirectly owns or controls a majority of the voting shares or other interest of any corporation or other entity, the exhibit must include a showing of the net worth of all such affiliates or of the applicant including the affiliates. The exhibit may be in any form convenient to the applicant that provides full disclosure of the applicant's and its affiliates' assets and liabilities and is sufficient to determine whether the applicant qualifies under the standards in this part. The adjudicative officer may require an applicant to file additional information to determine its eligibility for an award.

              (b) The net worth exhibit shall describe any transfers of assets from, or obligations incurred by, the applicant or any affiliate, occurring in the one year period prior to the date on which the proceeding was initiated, that reduced the net worth of the applicant and its affiliates below the applicable net worth ceiling. If there were no such transactions, the applicant shall so state.
              (c) Ordinarily, the net worth exhibit will be included in the public record of the proceeding. However, an applicant that objects to public disclosure of information in any portion of the exhibit and believes there are legal grounds for withholding it from disclosure may submit that portion of the exhibit directly to the adjudicative officer in a sealed envelope labeled “Confidential Financial Information,” accompanied by a motion to withhold the information from public disclosure. The motion shall describe the information sought to be withheld and explain, in detail, why it falls within one or more of the specific exemptions from mandatory disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(1)-(9), why public disclosure of the information would adversely affect the applicant, and why disclosure is not required in the public interest. The material in question shall be served on counsel representing the agency against which the applicant seeks an award, but need not be served on any other party to the proceeding. If the adjudicative officer finds that the information should not be withheld from disclosure, it shall be placed in the public record of the proceeding. Otherwise, the officer will omit the material from the public record. In that case, any decision regarding disclosure of the material (whether in response to a request from an agency or person outside the Department or on the Department's own initiative) will be made in accordance with applicable statutes and Department rules and procedures for commercial and financial records which the submitter claims are confidential or privileged. In particular, this regulation is not a basis for a promise or obligation of confidentiality.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 0990-0118)
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2846, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.12
              Documentation of fees and expenses.
              (a) All applicants must be accompanied by full documentation of the fees and expenses, including the cost of any study, exhibit, analysis, report, test or other similar item, for which the applicant seeks reimbursement.
              (b) The documentation shall include an affidavit from each attorney, agent, or expert witness representing or appearing in behalf of the party, stating the actual time expended, the rate at which fees and other expenses were computed, a description of the specific services performed, the total amount claimed, and the total amount paid or payable by the applicant or by any other person or entity for the services provided. Where the adversary adjudication includes covered proceedings (as described in § 13.3) as well as excluded proceedings, or two or more matters, each of which could have been heard separately, the fees and expenses shall be shown separately for each proceeding or matter, and the basis for allocating expenses among the proceedings or matters shall be indicated.
              (1) The affidavit shall itemize in detail the services performed by the date, number of hours per date and the services performed during those hours. In order to establish the hourly rate, the affidavit shall state the hourly rate which is billed and paid by the majority of clients during the relevant time periods.
              (2) If no hourly rate is paid by the majority of clients because, for instance, the attorney or agent represents most clients on a contingency basis, the attorney or agent shall provide affidavits from two attorneys or agents with similar experience, who perform similar work, stating the hourly rate which they bill and are paid by the majority of their clients during a comparable time period.
              (c) If the applicant seeks reimbursement of any expenses not covered by the affidavit described in paragraph (b), the documentation must also include an affidavit describing all such expenses and stating the amounts paid or payable by the applicant or by any other person or entity for the services provided.

              (d) The adjudicative officer may require the applicant to provide vouchers, receipts, or other substantiation for any fees or expenses claimed, pursuant to § 13.25 of this part.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 0990-0118)
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2847, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Procedures for Considering Applications
            
              § 13.21
              Filing and service of pleadings.
              All pleadings, including applications for an award of fees, answers, comments, and other pleadings related to the applications, shall be filed in the same manner as other pleadings in the proceeding and served on all other parties and participants, except as provided in § 13.11(b) of this part concerning confidential financial information.
            
            
              § 13.22
              When an application may be filed.
              (a) The applicant must file and serve its application no later than 30 calendar days after the Department's final disposition of the proceeding which makes the applicant a prevailing party.
              (b) For purposes of this rule, final disposition means the date on which a decision or order disposing of the merits of the proceeding or any other complete resolution of the proceeding, such as a settlement or voluntary dismissal, becomes final and unappealable, both within the agency and to the courts.
              (c) For purposes of this rule, an applicant has prevailed when the agency has made a final disposition favorable to the applicant with respect to any matter which could have been heard as a separate proceeding, regardless of whether it was joined with other matters for hearing.
              (d) If review or reconsideration is sought or taken, whether within the agency or to the courts, of a decision as to which an applicant believes it has prevailed, proceedings on the application shall be stayed pending final disposition of the underlying controversy.
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2847, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.23
              Responsive pleadings.
              (a) The agency's litigating party shall file an answer within 30 calendar days after service of the application or, where the proceeding is stayed as provided in § 13.22(d) of this part, within 30 calendar days after the final disposition of the underlying controversy. The answer shall either consent to the award or explain in detail any objections to the award requested and identify the facts relied on in support of the agency's position. The adjudicative officer may for good cause grant an extension of time for filing an answer.
              (b) Within 15 calendar days after service of an answer, the applicant may file a reply. If the reply is based on any alleged facts not already in the record of the proceeding, the applicant shall include with the reply either supporting affidavits or a request for further proceedings under § 13.25.
              (c) Any party to or participant in a proceeding may file comments on an application within 30 calendar days, or on an answer within 15 calendar days after service of the application or answer.
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2847, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.24
              Settlements.
              The applicant and the agency's litigating party may agree on a proposed settlement of the award at any time prior to final action on the application. If the parties agree on a proposed settlement of an award before an application has been filed, the application shall be filed with the proposed settlement. All settlements must be approved by the adjudicative officer and the head of the agency or office or his or her designee before becoming final.
            
            
              § 13.25
              Further proceedings.

              (a) Ordinarily, a decision on an application will be made on the basis of the hearing record and pleadings related to the application. However, at the request of either the applicant or the agency's litigating party, or on his or her own initiative, the adjudicative officer may order further proceedings, including an informal conference, oral argument, additional written submissions, or an evidentiary hearing. Such further proceedings shall be held only when necessary for full and fair resolution of the issues arising from the application, and shall be conducted as promptly as possible. In no such further proceeding shall evidence be introduced from outside the administrative record in order to prove that the Department's position was, or was not, substantially justified.
              (b) A request that the adjudicative officer order additional written submissions or oral testimony shall identify the information sought and shall explain why the information is necessary to decide the issues.
              (c) The adjudicative officer may impose sanctions on any party for failure to comply with his or her order to file pleadings, produce documents, or present witnesses for oral examination. These sanctions may include but are not limited to granting the application partly or completely, dismissing the application, and diminishing the award granted.
              [48 FR 45252, Oct. 4, 1983, as amended at 69 FR 2847, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.26
              Decisions.
              The adjudicative officer shall issue an initial decision on the application as promptly as possible after the filing of the last document or conclusion of the hearing. The decision must include written findings and conclusions on the applicant's eligibility and status as a prevailing party, including a finding on the net worth of the applicant. Where the adjudicative officer has determined under § 13.11(b) that the applicant's net worth information is exempted from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, the finding on net worth shall be kept confidential. The decision shall also include, if at issue, findings on whether the agency's position was substantially justified, whether the applicant unduly protracted the proceedings, an explanation of any difference between the amount requested and the amount awarded, and whether any special circumstances make the award unjust.
            
            
              § 13.27
              Agency review.
              (a) The appellate authority for any proceedings shall be the official or component that would have jurisdiction over an appeal of the merits.
              (b) If either the applicant or the agency's litigating party seeks review of the adjudicative officer's decision on the fee application, it shall file and serve exceptions within 30 days after issuance of the initial decision. Within another 30 days after receipt of such exceptions, the opposing party, if it has not done so previously, may file its own exceptions to the adjudicative officer's decision. The appellate authority shall issue a final decision on the application as soon as possible or remand the application to the adjudicative officer for further proceedings. Any party that does not file and serve exceptions within the stated time limit loses the opportunity to do so.
              [69 FR 2847, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
            
              § 13.28
              Judicial review.
              Judicial review of final agency decisions on awards may be obtained as provided in 5 U.S.C. 504(c)(2).
            
            
              § 13.29
              Payment of award.
              The notification to an applicant of a final decision that an award will be made shall contain the name and address of the appropriate Departmental finance office that will pay the award. An applicant seeking payment of an award shall submit to that finance officer a copy of the final decision granting the award, accompanied by a statement that the applicant will not seek review of the decision in the United States courts. The Department will pay the amount awarded to the applicant within 60 days, unless judicial review of the award or of the underlying decision of the adversary adjudication has been sought by the applicant or any other party to the proceedings.
            
            
              § 13.30
              Designation of adjudicative officer.
              Upon the filing of an application pursuant to § 13.11(a), the officer who presided over the taking of evidence in the proceeding which gave rise to the application will, if available, be automatically designated as the adjudicative officer for the handling of the application.
            
          
          
             
            
              
              Pt. 13, App. A
              Appendix A to Part 13
              
                
                  Proceedings covered
                  Statutory authority
                  Applicable regulations
                
                
                  
                    Office of Inspector General
                    
                  
                
                
                  1. Proceedings to impose civil monetary penalties, assessments, or exclusions from Medicare and State health care programs

                  42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(c)(2); 1320b-10(c); 1395i-3(b)(3)(B)(ii), (g)(2)(A)(i); 1395l(h)(5)(D), (i)(6); 1395m(a)(11)(A), (a)(18), (b)(5)(C), (j)(2)(A)(iii); 1395u(j)(2), (k), (l)(3), (m)(3), (n)(3), (p)(3)(A); 1395y(b)(3)(C), (b)(6)(B); 1395cc(g); 1395dd(d)(1)(A), (B); 1395mm(i)(6)(B); 1395nn(g)(3), (4); 1395ss(d); 1395bbb(c)(1); 1396b(m)(5)(B); 1396r(b)(3)(B)(ii), (g)(2)(A)(i); 1396t(i)(3); 11131(c); 11137(b)(2)
                  42 CFR part 1003; 42 CFR part 1005.
                
                
                  2. Appeals of exclusions from Medicare and State health care programs and/or other programs under the Social Security Act
                  42 U.S.C. 1320a-7(f); 1395l(h)(5)(D); 1395m(a)(11)(A), (b)(5)(C); 1395u(j)(2), (k), (l)(3), (m)(3), (n)(3), (p)(3)(B)
                  42 CFR part 1001; 42 CFR part 1005.
                
                
                  3. Appeal of exclusions from programs under the Social Security Act, for which services may be provided on the recommendation of a Peer Review Organization
                  42 U.S.C. 1320c-5(b)(4), (5)
                  42 CFR part 1004; 42 CFR part 1005.
                
                
                  4. Proceedings to impose civil penalties and assessments for false claims and statements
                  31 U.S.C. 3803
                  45 CFR part 79.
                
                
                  
                    Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
                  
                
                
                  1. Proceedings to suspend or revoke licenses of clinical laboratories
                  42 U.S.C. 263a(i); 1395w-2
                  42 CFR part 493, Subpart R.
                
                
                  2. Proceedings provided to a fiscal intermediary before assigning or reassigning Medicare providers to a different fiscal intermediary
                  42 U.S.C. 1395h(e)(1)-(3)
                  42 CFR 421.114, 421.128.
                
                
                  3. Appeals of determinations that an institution or agency is not a Medicare provider of services, and appeals of terminations or nonrenewals of Medicare provider agreements
                  42 U.S.C. 1395cc(h); 1395dd(d)(1)(A)
                  42 CFR 489.53(d); 42 CFR part 498.
                
                
                  4. Proceedings before the Provider Reimbursement Review Board when Department employees appear as counsel for the intermediary
                  42 U.S.C. 1395oo
                  42 CFR part 405, Subpart R.
                
                
                  5. Appeals of CMS determinations that an intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded (ICFMR) no longer qualifies as an ICFMR for Medicaid purposes
                  42 U.S.C. 1396i
                  42 CFR part 498.
                
                
                  6. Proceedings to impose civil monetary penalties, assessments, or exclusions from Medicare and State health care programs
                  42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(h)(2)(B)(ii); 1395l(q)(2)(B)(i); 1395m(a)(11)(A), (c)(4)(C); 1395w-2(b)(2)(A); 1395w-4(g)(1), (g)(3)(B), (g)(4)(B)(ii); 1395nn(g)(5); 1395ss(a)(2), (p)(8), (p)(9)(C), (q)(5)(C), (r)(6)(A), (s)(3), (t)(2); 1395bbb(f)(2)(A); 1396r(h)(3)(C)(ii); 1396r-8(b)(3)(B), (C)(ii); 1396t(j)(2)(C); 1396u(h)(2)
                  42 CFR part 1003.
                
                
                  7. Appeals of exclusions from Medicare and State health care programs and/or other programs under the Social Security Act
                  42 U.S.C. 1395l(q)(2)(B)(ii); 1395m(a)(11)(A), (c)(5)(C); 1395w-4(g)(1), (g)(3)(B), (g)(4)(B)(ii)
                  42 CFR part 498; 42 CFR 1001.107.
                
                
                  
                    Food and Drug Administration
                  
                
                
                  1. Proceedings to withdraw approval of new drug applications
                  21 U.S.C. 355(e)
                  21 CFR part 12; 21 CFR 314.200.
                
                
                  2. Proceedings to withdraw approval of new animal drug applications and medicated feed applications
                  21 U.S.C. 360b(e), (m)
                  21 CFR part 12; 21 CFR part 514, Subpart B.
                
                
                  3. Proceedings to withdraw approval of medical device premarket approval applications
                  21 U.S.C. 306e(e), (g)
                  21 CFR part 12.
                  
                
                
                  
                  
                    Office for Civil Rights
                  
                
                
                  1. Proceedings to enforce Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin by recipients of Federal financial assistance
                  42 U.S.C. 2000d-1
                  45 CFR 80.9.
                
                
                  2. Proceedings to enforce section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of handicap by recipients of Federal financial assistance
                  29 U.S.C. 794a; 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1
                  45 CFR 84.61.
                
                
                  3. Proceedings to enforce the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of age by recipients of Federal financial assistance
                  42 U.S.C. 6104(a)
                  45 CFR 91.47.
                
                
                  4. Proceedings to enforce Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in certain education programs by recipients of Federal financial assistance
                  20 U.S.C. 1682
                  45 CFR 86.71.
                
              
              [69 FR 2847, Jan. 21, 2004]
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 15
          PART 15—UNIFORM RELOCATION ASSISTANCE AND REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION FOR FEDERAL AND FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 213, Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, Pub. L. 91-646, 84 Stat. 1894 (42 U.S.C. 4633) as amended by the Surface Transportation and Uniform Relocation Assistance Act of 1987, Title IV of Pub. L. 100-17, 101 Stat. 246-256 (42 U.S.C. 4601 note).
          
          
            § 15.1
            Uniform relocation assistance and real property acquisition.

            Regulations and procedures for complying with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-646, 84 Stat. 1894, 42 U.S.C. 4601 et seq.), as amended by the Surface Transportation and Uniform Relocation Assistance Act of 1987 (Title IV of Pub. L. 100-17, 101 Stat. 246-256, 42 U.S.C. 4601 note) are set forth in 49 CFR part 24.
            [52 FR 48026, Dec. 17, 1987 and 54 FR 8912, Mar. 2, 1989]
          
        
        
          Pt. 16
          PART 16—PROCEDURES OF THE DEPARTMENTAL GRANT APPEALS BOARD
          
            Sec.
            16.1
            What this part does.
            16.2
            Definitions.
            16.3
            When these procedures become available.
            16.4
            Summary of procedures below.
            16.5
            How the Board operates.
            16.6
            Who represents the parties.
            16.7
            The first steps in the appeal process: The notice of appeal and the Board's response.
            16.8
            The next step in the appeal process: Preparation of an appeal file and written argument.
            16.9
            How the Board will promote development of the record.
            16.10
            Using a conference.
            16.11
            Hearing.
            16.12
            The expedited process.
            16.13
            Powers and responsibilities.
            16.14
            How Board review is limited.
            16.15
            Failure to meet deadlines and other requirements.
            16.16
            Parties to the appeal.
            16.17
            Ex parte communications (communications outside the record).
            16.18
            Mediation.
            16.19
            How to calculate deadlines.
            16.20
            How to submit material to the Board.
            16.21
            Record and decisions.
            16.22
            The effect of an appeal.
            16.23
            How long an appeal takes.
            Appendix A to Part 16—What Disputes the Board Reviews
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301 and secs. 1, 5, 6, and 7 of Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953, 18 FR 2053, 67 Stat. 631 and authorities cited in the Appendix.
          
          
            Source:
            46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 16.1
            What this part does.

            This part contains requirements and procedures applicable to certain disputes arising under the HHS programs described in appendix A. This part is designed to provide a fair, impartial, quick and flexible process for appeal from written final decisions. This part supplements the provisions in part 75 of this title.
            [46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 16.2
            Definitions.
            (a) Board means the Departmental Grant Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services. Reference below to an action of the Board means an action of the Chair, another Board member, or Board staff acting at the direction of a Board member. In certain instances, the provisions restrict action to particular Board personnel, such as the Chair or a Board member assigned to a case.
            (b) Other terms shall have the meaning set forth in part 75 of this title, unless the context below otherwise requires.
            [46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 16.3
            When these procedures become available.
            Before the Board will take an appeal, three circumstances must be present:
            (a) The dispute must arise under a program which uses the Board for dispute resolution, and must meet any special conditions established for that program. An explanation is contained in appendix A.
            (b) The appellant must have received a final written decision, and must appeal that decision within 30 days after receiving it. Details of how final decisions are developed and issued, and what must be in them, are contained in 45 CFR 75.374.

            (c) The appellant must have exhausted any preliminary appeal process required by regulation. For example, see 42 CFR part 50 (subpart D) for Public Health Service programs. In such cases, the final written decision required for the Board's review is the decision resulting from the preliminary review or appeal process. appendix A contains further details.
            [46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, as amended at 62 FR 38218, July 17, 1997; 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 16.4
            Summary of procedures below.
            The Board's basic process is review of a written record (which both parties are given ample opportunity to develop), consisting of relevant documents and statements submitted by both parties (see § 16.8). In addition, the Board may hold an informal conference (see § 16.10). The informal conference primarily involves questioning of the participants by a presiding Board member. Conferences may be conducted by telephone conference call. The written record review also may be supplemented by a hearing involving an opportunity for examining evidence and witnesses, cross-examination, and oral argument (see § 16.11). A hearing is more expensive and time-consuming than a determination on the written record alone or with an informal conference. Generally, therefore, the Board will schedule a hearing only if the Board determines that there are complex issues or material facts in dispute, or that the Board's review would otherwise be significantly enhanced by a hearing. Where the amount in dispute is $25,000 or less, there are special expedited procedures (see § 16.12 of this part). In all cases, the Board has the flexibility to modify procedures to ensure fairness, to avoid delay, and to accommodate the peculiar needs of a given case. The Board makes maximum feasible use of preliminary informal steps to refine issues and to encourage resolution by the parties. The Board also has the capability to provide mediation services (see § 16.18).
          
          
            § 16.5
            How the Board operates.
            (a) The Board's professional staff consists of a Chair (who is also a Board member) and full- and part-time Board members, all appointed by the Secretary; and a staff of employees and consultants who are attorneys or persons from other relevant disciplines, such as accounting.

            (b) The Chair will assign a Board member to have lead responsibility for each case (the “presiding Board member”). The presiding Board member will conduct the conference or hearing, if one is held. Each decision of the Board is issued by the presiding Board member and two other Board members.
            
            (c) The Board staff assists the presiding Board member, and may request information from the parties; conduct telephone conference calls to request information, to clarify issues, or to schedule events; and assist in developing decisions and other documents in a case.
            (d) The Chair will assure that no Board or staff member will participate in a case where his or her impartiality could reasonably be questioned.
            (e) The Board's powers and responsibilities are set forth in § 16.13.
          
          
            § 16.6
            Who represents the parties.
            The appellant's notice of appeal, or the first subsequent submission to the Board, should specify the name, address and telephone number of the appellant's representative. In its first submission to the Board and the appellant, the respondent (i.e., the federal party to the appeal) should specify the name, address and telephone number of the respondent's representative.
          
          
            § 16.7
            The first steps in the appeal process: The notice of appeal and the Board's response.
            (a) As explained in 45 CFR 75.374, a prospective appellant must submit a notice of appeal to the Board within 30 days after receiving the final decision. The notice of appeal must include a copy of the final decision, a statement of the amount in dispute in the appeal, and a brief statement of why the decision is wrong.
            (b) Within ten days after receiving the notice of appeal, the Board will send an acknowledgment, enclose a copy of these procedures, and advise the appellant of the next steps. The Board will also send a copy of the notice of appeal, its attachments, and the Board's acknowledgment to the respondent. If the Board Chair has determined that the appeal does not meet the conditions of § 16.3 or if further information is needed to make this determination, the Board will notify the parties at this point.
            [46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 16.8
            The next step in the appeal process: Preparation of an appeal file and written argument.
            Except in expedited cases (generally those of $25,000 or less; see § 16.12 for details), the appellant and the respondent each participate in developing an appeal file for the Board to review. Each also submits written argument in support of its position. The responsibilities of each are as follows:
            (a) The appellant's responsibility. Within 30 days after receiving the acknowledgment of the appeal, the appellant shall submit the following to the Board (with a copy to the respondent):
            (1) An appeal file containing the documents supporting the claim, tabbed and organized chronologically and accompanied by an indexed list identifying each document. The appellant should include only those documents which are important to the Board's decision on the issues in the case.
            (2) A written statement of the appellant's argument concerning why the respondent's final decision is wrong (appellant's brief).
            (b) The respondent's responsibility. Within 30 days after receiving the appellant's submission under paragraph (a) of this section, the respondent shall submit the following to the Board (with a copy to the appellant):
            (1) A supplement to the appeal file containing any additional documents supporting the respondent's position, organized and indexed as indicated under paragraph (a) of this section. The respondent should avoid submitting duplicates of documents submitted by the appellant.
            (2) A written statement (respondent's brief) responding to the appellant's brief.
            (c) The appellant's reply. Within 15 days after receiving the respondent's submission, the appellant may submit a short reply. The appellant should avoid repeating arguments already made.
            (d) Cooperative efforts. Whenever possible, the parties should try to develop a joint appeal file, agree to preparation of the file by one of them, agree to facts to eliminate the need for some documents, or agree that one party will submit documents identified by the other.
            
            (e) Voluminous documentation. Where submission of all relevant documents would lead to a voluminous appeal file (for example where review of a disputed audit finding of inadequate documentation might involve thousands of receipts), the Board will consult with the parties about how to reduce the size of the file.
          
          
            § 16.9
            How the Board will promote development of the record.
            The Board may, at the time it acknowledges an appeal or at any appropriate later point, request additional documents or information; request briefing on issues in the case; issue orders to show cause why a proposed finding or decision of the Board should not become final; hold preliminary conferences (generally by telephone) to establish schedules and refine issues; and take such other steps as the Board determines appropriate to develop a prompt, sound decision.
          
          
            § 16.10
            Using a conference.
            (a) Once the Board has reviewed the appeal file, the Board may, on its own or in response to a party's request, schedule an informal conference. The conference will be conducted by the presiding Board member. The purposes of the conference are to give the parties an opportunity to make an oral presentation and the Board an opportunity to clarify issues and question both parties about matters which the Board may not yet fully understand from the record.
            (b) If the Board has decided to hold a conference, the Board will consult or correspond with the parties to schedule the conference, identify issues, and discuss procedures. The Board will identify the persons who will be allowed to participate, along with the parties' representatives, in the conference. The parties can submit with their briefs under § 16.8 a list of persons who might participate with them, indicating how each person is involved in the matter. If the parties wish, they may also suggest questions or areas of inquiry which the Board may wish to pursue with each participant.
            (c) Unless the parties and the Board otherwise agree, the following procedures apply:
            (1) Conferences will be recorded at Department expense. On request, a party will be sent one copy of the transcript. The presiding Board member will insure an orderly transcript by controlling the sequence and identification of speakers.
            (2) Only in exceptional circumstances will documents be received at a conference. Inquiry will focus on material in the appeal file. If a party finds that further documents should be in the record for the conference, the party should supplement the appeal file, submitting a supplementary index and copies of the documents to the Board and the other party not less than ten days prior to the conference.
            (3) Each party's representative may make an oral presentation. Generally, the only oral communications of other participants will consist of statements requested by the Board or responses to the Board's questions. The Board will allow reply comment, and may allow short closing statements. On request, the Board may allow the participants to question each other.
            (4) There will be no post-conference submissions, unless the Board determines they would be helpful to resolve the case. The Board may require or allow the parties to submit proposed findings and conclusions.
          
          
            § 16.11
            Hearing.
            (a) Electing a hearing. If the appellant believes a hearing is appropriate, the appellant should specifically request one at the earliest possible time (in the notice of appeal or with the appeal file). The Board will approve a request (and may schedule a hearing on its own or in response to a later request) if it finds there are complex issues or material facts in dispute the resolution of which would be significantly aided by a hearing, or if the Board determines that its decisionmaking otherwise would be enhanced by oral presentations and arguments in an adversary, evidentiary hearing. The Board will also provide a hearing if otherwise required by law or regulation.
            (b) Preliminary conference before the hearing. The Board generally will hold a prehearing conference (which may be conducted by telephone conference call) to consider any of the following: the possibility of settlement; simplifying and clarifying issues; stipulations and admissions; limitations on evidence and witnesses that will be presented at the hearing; scheduling the hearing; and any other matter that may aid in resolving the appeal. Normally, this conference will be conducted informally and off the record; however, the Board, after consulting with the parties, may reduce results of the conference to writing in a document which will be made part of the record, or may transcribe proceedings and make the transcript part of the record.
            (c) Where hearings are held. Hearings generally are held in Washington, DC. In exceptional circumstances, the Board may hold the hearing at an HHS Regional Office or other convenient facility near the appellant.
            (d) Conduct of the hearing. (1) The presiding Board member will conduct the hearing. Hearings will be as informal as reasonably possible, keeping in mind the need to establish an orderly record. The presiding Board member generally will admit evidence unless it is determined to be clearly irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious, so the parties should avoid frequent objections to questions and documents. Both sides may make opening and closing statements, may present witnesses as agreed upon in the prehearing conference, and may cross-examine. Since the parties have ample opportunity to develop a complete appeal file, a party may introduce an exhibit at the hearing only after explaining to the satisfaction of the presiding Board member why the exhibit was not submitted earlier (for example, because the information was not available).
            (2) The Board may request the parties to submit written statements of witnesses to the Board and each other prior to the hearing so that the hearing will primarily be concerned with cross-examination and rebuttal.
            (3) False statements of a witness may be the basis for criminal prosecution under sections 287 and 1001 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
            (4) The hearing will be recorded at Department expense.
            (e) Procedures after the hearing. The Board will send one copy of the transcript to each party as soon as it is received by the Board. At the discretion of the Board, the parties may be required or allowed to submit post-hearing briefs or proposed findings and conclusions (the parties will be informed at the hearing). A party should note any major prejudicial transcript errors in an addendum to its post-hearing brief (or if no brief will be submitted, in a letter submitted within a time limit set by the Board).
          
          
            § 16.12
            The expedited process.
            (a) Applicability. Where the amount in dispute is $25,000 or less, the Board will use these expedited procedures, unless the Board Chair determines otherwise under paragraph (b) of this section. If the Board and the parties agree, the Board may use these procedures in cases of more than $25,000.
            (b) Exceptions. If there are unique or unusually complex issues involved, or other exceptional circumstances, the Board may use additional procedures.
            (c) Regular expedited procedures. (1) Within 30 days after receiving the Board's acknowledgment of the appeal (see § 16.7), each party shall submit to the Board and the other party any relevant background documents (organized as required under § 16.8), with a cover letter (generally not to exceed ten pages) containing any arguments the party wishes to make.
            (2) Promptly after receiving the parties' submissions, the presiding Board member will arrange a telephone conference call to receive the parties' oral comments in response to each other's submissions. After notice to the parties, the Board will record the call. The Board member will advise the parties whether any opportunities for further briefing, submissions or oral presentations will be established. Cooperative efforts will be encouraged (see § 16.8(d)).
            (3) The Board may require the parties to submit proposed findings and conclusions.
            (d) Special expedited procedures where there has already been review. Some HHS components (for example, the Public Health Service) use a board or other relatively independent reviewing authority to conduct a formal preliminary review process which results in a written decision based on a record including documents or statements presented after reasonable notice and opportunity to present such material. In such cases, the following rules apply to appeals of $25,000 or less instead of those under paragraph (c) of this section:
            (1) Generally, the Board's review will be restricted to whether the decision of the preliminary review authority was clearly erroneous. But if the Board determines that the record is inadequate, or that the procedures under which the record was developed in a given instance were unfair, the Board will not be restricted this way.
            (2) Within 30 days after receiving the Board's acknowledgment of appeal (see § 16.7), the parties shall submit the following:
            (i) The appellant shall submit to the Board and the respondent a statement why the decision was clearly erroneous. Unless allowed by the Board after consultation with the respondent, the appellant shall not submit further documents.
            (ii) The respondent shall submit to the Board the record in the case. If the respondent has reason to believe that all materials in the record already are in the possession of the appellant, the respondent need only send the appellant a list of the materials submitted to the Board.
            (iii) The respondent may, if it wishes, submit a statement why the decision was not clearly erroneous.
            (3) The Board, in its discretion, may allow or require the parties to present further arguments or information.
          
          
            § 16.13
            Powers and responsibilities.
            In addition to powers specified elsewhere in these procedures, Board members have the power to issue orders (including “show cause” orders); to examine witnesses; to take all steps necessary for the conduct of an orderly hearing; to rule on requests and motions, including motions to dismiss; to grant extensions of time for good reasons; to dismiss for failure to meet deadlines and other requirements; to close or suspend cases which are not ready for review; to order or assist the parties to submit relevant information; to remand a case for further action by the respondent; to waive or modify these procedures in a specific case with notice to the parties; to reconsider a Board decision where a party promptly alleges a clear error of fact or law; and to take any other action necessary to resolve disputes in accordance with the objectives of these procedures.
          
          
            § 16.14
            How Board review is limited.
            The Board shall be bound by all applicable laws and regulations.
          
          
            § 16.15
            Failure to meet deadlines and other requirements.
            (a) Since one of the objectives of administrative dispute resolution is to provide a decision as fast as possible consistent with fairness, the Board will not allow parties to delay the process unduly. The Board may grant extensions of time, but only if the party gives a good reason for the delay.
            (b) If the appellant fails to meet any filing or procedural deadlines, appeal file or brief submission requirements, or other requirements established by the Board, the Board may dismiss the appeal, may issue an order requiring the party to show cause why the appeal should not be dismissed, or may take other action the Board considers appropriate.
            (c) If the respondent fails to meet any such requirements, the Board may issue a decision based on the record submitted to that point or take such other measures as the Board considers appropriate.
          
          
            § 16.16
            Parties to the appeal.
            (a) The only parties to the appeal are the appellant and the respondent. If the Board determines that a third person is a real party in interest (for example, where the major impact of an audit disallowance would be on the grantee's contractor, not on the grantee), the Board may allow the third person to present the case on appeal for the appellant or to appear with a party in the case, after consultation with the parties and if the appellant does not object.

            (b) The Board may also allow other participation, in the manner and by the deadlines established by the Board, where the Board decides that the intervenor has a clearly identifiable and substantial interest in the outcome of the dispute, that participation would sharpen issues or otherwise be helpful in resolution of the dispute, and that participation would not result in substantial delay.
          
          
            § 16.17
            Ex parte communications (communications outside the record).
            (a) A party shall not communicate with a Board or staff member about matters involved in an appeal without notice to the other party. If such communication occurs, the Board will disclose it to the other party and make it part of the record after the other party has an opportunity to comment. Board members and staff shall not consider any information outside the record (see § 16.21 for what the record consists of) about matters involved in an appeal.
            (b) The above does not apply to the following: Communications among Board members and staff; communications concerning the Board's administrative functions or procedures; requests from the Board to a party for a document (although the material submitted in response also must be given to the other party); and material which the Board includes in the record after notice and an opportunity to comment.
          
          
            § 16.18
            Mediation.
            (a) In cases pending before the Board. If the Board decides that mediation would be useful to resolve a dispute, the Board, in consultation with the parties, may suggest use of mediation techniques and will provide or assist in selecting a mediator. The mediator may take any steps agreed upon by the parties to resolve the dispute or clarify issues. The results of mediation are not binding on the parties unless the parties so agree in writing. The Board will internally insulate the mediator from any Board or staff members assigned to handle the appeal.
            (b) In other cases. In any other grants dispute, the Board may, within the limitations of its resources, offer persons trained in mediation skills to aid in resolving the dispute. Mediation services will only be offered at the request, or with the concurrence, of a responsible federal program official in the program under which the dispute arises. The Board will insulate the mediator if any appeal subsequently arises from the dispute.
          
          
            § 16.19
            How to calculate deadlines.
            In counting days, include Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays; but if a due date would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or Federal holiday, then the due date is the next Federal working day.
          
          
            § 16.20
            How to submit material to the Board.

            (a) Submissions should be addressed to the Board's current mailing address: Department of Health and Human Services, Departmental Appeals Board, Appellate Division—MS 6127, 330 Independence Ave. SW., Cohen Building—Rm. G-644, Washington, DC 20201; however, submissions to the Board in certain types of cases may be made by electronic filing using DAB E-File at https://dab.efile.hhs.gov. Changes to the mailing address will be made available on the Board's Web site at www.hhs.gov/dab/divisions/appellate.
            
            (b) All submissions after the notice of appeal should identify the Board's docket number (the Board's acknowledgement under § 16.7 will specify the docket number).
            (c) Unless the Board otherwise specifies, parties shall submit to the Board an original and two copies of all materials. Each submission other than the notice of appeal, must include a statement that one copy of the materials has been sent to the other party, identifying when and to whom the copy was sent.
            (d) Unless hand delivered, all materials should be sent to the Board and the other party by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.
            (e) The Board considers material to be submitted on the date when it is postmarked or hand delivered to the Board.
            [46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 16.21
            Record and decisions.

            (a) Each decision is issued by three Board members (see § 16.5(b)), who base their decision on a record consisting of the appeal file; other submissions of the parties; transcripts or other records of any meetings, conferences or hearings conducted by the Board; written statements resulting from conferences; evidence submitted at hearings; and orders and other documents issued by the Board. In addition, the Board may include other materials (such as evidence submitted in another appeal) after the parties are given notice and an opportunity to comment.
            (b) The Board will promptly notify the parties in writing of any disposition of a case and the basis for the disposition.
          
          
            § 16.22
            The effect of an appeal.
            (a) General. Until the Board disposes of an appeal, the respondent shall take no action to implement the final decision appealed.
            (b) Exceptions. The respondent may—
            (1) Suspend funding (see § 75.371 of this title);
            (2) Defer or disallow other claims questioned for reasons also disputed in the pending appeal;
            (3) In programs listed in appendix A, B.(a)(1), implement a decision to disallow Federal financial participation claimed in expenditures reported on a statement of expenditures, by recovering, withholding or offsetting payments, if the decision is issued before the reported expenditures are included in the calculation of a subsequent grant; or
            (4) Take other action to recover, withhold, or offset funds if specifically authorized by statute or regulation.
            [46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 16.23
            How long an appeal takes.

            The Board has established general goals for its consideration of cases, as follows (measured from the point when the Board receives the first submission after the notice of appeal):
            
            
              —For regular review based on a written record under § 16.8, 6 months. When a conference under § 16.10 is held, the goal remains at 6 months, unless a requirement for post-conference briefing in a particular case renders the goal unrealistic.
              —For cases involving a hearing under § 16.11, 9 months.
              —For the expedited process under § 16.12, 3 months.
            
            
            These are goals, not rigid requirements. The paramount concern of the Board is to take the time needed to review a record fairly and adequately in order to produce a sound decision. Furthermore, many factors are beyond the Board's direct control, such as unforeseen delays due to the parties' negotiations or requests for extensions, how many cases are filed, and Board resources. On the other hand, the parties may agree to steps which may shorten review by the Board; for example, by waiving the right to submit a brief, by agreeing to shorten submission schedules, or by electing the expedited process.
          
          
            Pt. 16, App. A
            Appendix A to Part 16—What Disputes the Board Reviews
            
              A. What this appendix covers.
            

            This appendix describes programs which use the Board for dispute resolution, the types of disputes covered, and any conditions for Board review of final written decisions resulting from those disputes. Disputes under programs not specified in this appendix may be covered in a program regulation or in a memorandum of understanding between the Board and the head of the appropriate HHS operating component or other agency responsible for administering the program. If in doubt, call the Board. Even though a dispute may be covered here, the Board still may not be able to review it if the limits in paragraph F apply.
            
            
              B. Mandatory grant programs.
            
            (a) The Board reviews the following types of final written decisions in disputes arising in HHS programs authorizing the award of mandatory grants:
            (1) Disallowances under Titles I, IV, VI, X, XIV, XVI(AABD), XIX, and XX of the Social Security Act, including penalty disallowances such as those under sections 403(g) and 1903(g) of the Act and fiscal disallowances based on quality control samples.
            (2) Disallowances in mandatory grant programs administered by the Public Health Service, including Title V of the Social Security Act.
            (3) Disallowances in the programs under sections 113 and 132 of the Developmental Disabilities Act.
            (4) Disallowances under Title III of the Older American Act.
            (5) Decisions relating to repayment and withholding under block grant programs as provided in 45 CFR 96.52.
            (6) Decisions relating to repayment and withholding under State Legalization Impact Assistance Grants as provided in 45 CFR 402.24 and 402.25.

            (b) In some of these disputes, there is an option for review by the head of the granting agency prior to appeal to the Board. Where an appellant has requested review by the agency head first, the “final written decision” required by § 16.3 for purposes of Board review will generally be the agency head's decision affirming the disallowance. If the agency head declines to review the disallowance or if the appellant withdraws its request for review by the agency head, the original disallowance decision is the “final written decision.” In the latter cases, the 30-day period for submitting a notice of appeal begins with the date of receipt of the notice declining review or with the date of the withdrawal letter.
            
            
              C. Direct, discretionary project programs.
            
            (a) The Board reviews the following types of final written decisions in disputes arising in any HHS program authorizing the award of direct, discretionary project grants or cooperative agreements:
            (1) A disallowance or other determination denying payment of an amount claimed under an award, or requiring return or set-off of funds already received. This does not apply to determinations of award amount or disposition of unobligated balances, or selection in the award document of an option for disposition of program-related income.
            (2) A termination for failure to comply with the terms of an award.
            (3) A denial of a noncompeting continuation award under the project period system of funding where the denial is for failure to comply with the terms of a previous award.
            (4) A voiding (a decision that an award is invalid because it was not authorized by statute or regulation or because it was fraudulently obtained).

            (b) Where an HHS component uses a preliminary appeal process (for example, the Public Health Service), the “final written decision” for purposes of Board review is the decision issued as a result of that process.
            
            
              D. Cost allocation and rate disputes.
            

            The Board reviews final written decisions in disputes which may affect a number of HHS programs because they involve cost allocation plans or rate determinations. These include decisions related to cost allocation plans negotiated with State or local governments and negotiated rates such as indirect cost rates, fringe benefit rates, computer rates, research patient care rates, and other special rates.
            
            
              E. SSI agreement disputes.
            

            The Board reviews disputes in the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program arising under agreements for Federal administration of State supplementary payments under section 1616 of the Social Security Act or mandatory minimum supplements under section 212 of Pub. L. 93-66. In these cases, the Board provides an opportunity to be heard and offer evidence at the Secretarial level of review as set out in the applicable agreements. Thus, the “final written decision” for purposes of Board review is that determination appealable to the Secretary under the agreement.
            
            
              F. Where Board review is not available.
            

            The Board will not review a decision if a hearing under 5 U.S.C. 554 is required by statute, if the basis of the decision is a violation of applicable civil rights or nondiscrimination laws or regulations (for example, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act), or if some other hearing process is established pursuant to statute.
            
            
              G. How the Board determines whether it will review a case.
            
            Under § 16.7, the Board Chair determines whether an appeal meets the requirements of this appendix. If the Chair finds that there is some question about this, the Board will request the written opinion of the HHS component which issued the decision. Unless the Chair determines that the opinion is clearly erroneous, the Board will be bound by the opinion. If the HHS component does not respond within a time set by the Chair, or cannot determine whether the Board clearly does or does not have jurisdiction, the Board will take the appeal.
            [46 FR 43817, Aug. 31, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 29492, July 6, 1982; 53 FR 7864, Mar. 10, 1988; 62 FR 38218, July 17, 1997]
          
        
        
          Pt. 17
          PART 17—RELEASE OF ADVERSE INFORMATION TO NEWS MEDIA
          
            Sec.
            17.1
            Definition.
            17.2
            Basic policy.
            17.3
            Precautions to be taken.
            17.4
            Regulatory investigations and trial-type proceedings.
            17.5
            Context to be reflected.
            17.6
            Advance notice.
            17.7
            Retractions or corrections.
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301.
          
          
            Source:
            41 FR 3, Jan. 2, 1976, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 17.1
            Definition.

            Adverse information released by an agency means any statement or release by the Department or any principal operating component made to the news media inviting public attention to an action or a finding by the Department or principal operating component of the Department which may adversely affect persons or organizations identified therein. This part does not apply to nor is it affected by any disclosure of records to the public in response to requests made under the Freedom of Information Act (Pub. L. 90-23). The criteria for such disclosures are set forth in the Department's Public Information Regulation (45 CFR part 5).
          
          
            § 17.2
            Basic policy.
            All adverse information release to news media shall be factual in content and accurate in description. Disparaging terminology not essential to the content and purpose of the publicity shall be avoided.
          
          
            § 17.3
            Precautions to be taken.
            The issuing organization shall take reasonable precautions to assure that information released is accurate and that its release fulfills an authorized purpose.
          
          
            § 17.4
            Regulatory investigations and trial-type proceedings.
            Adverse information relating to regulatory investigations of specifically identified persons or organizations or to pending agency trial-type proceedings shall be released only in limited circumstances in accordance with the criteria outlined below:
            (a) Where the Department or a principal operating component determines that there is a significant risk that the public health or safety may be impaired or substantial economic harm may occur unless the public is notified immediately, it may release information to news media as one of the means of notifying the affected public speedily and accurately. However, where the Department or principal operating component determines that public harm can be avoided by immediate discontinuance of an offending practice, a respondent shall be allowed an opportunity, where feasible, to cease the practice (pending a legal test) in lieu of release of adverse information by the agency.
            (b) Where it is required in order to bring notice of pending agency adjudication to persons likely to desire to participate therein or likely to be affected by that or a related adjudication, the Department or principal operating component shall rely on the news media to the extent necessary to provide such notice even though it may be adverse to a respondent.
          
          
            § 17.5
            Context to be reflected.
            The authority for and the character of the information shall be made clear, where appropriate, the release shall explain the nature of any studies performed, the sources of relevant data, the areas in which administrative findings of fact were made, and whether the information is based on allegations subject to subsequent adjudication.
          
          
            § 17.6
            Advance notice.
            Any respondent or prospective respondent in an agency proceeding shall, if practicable and consistent with the nature of the proceeding, be given advance notice of information to be released about the proceeding and a reasonable opportunity to prepare in advance a response to the information released.
          
          
            § 17.7
            Retractions or corrections.
            Where the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs finds that information released by the Department was misleading or a misstatement of fact and any person named therein requests a retraction or correction, the Department shall issue a retraction or correction in the same manner to all of the media outlets that received the original information (or as many of them as is feasible). Where information shown to be misleading or misstatement of fact has been released by a principal operating component of the Department and any person named therein requests a retraction or correction, the agency head shall issue a retraction or correction in the same manner to all of the media outlets that received the original information (or as many of them as is feasible).
          
        
        
          Pt. 18
          PART 18—OFFICIAL SYMBOL, LOGO, AND SEAL
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 3505 and 5 U.S.C. 301.
          
          
            § 18.1
            Description of the Symbol, Logo, and Seal.

            (a) The Departmental Symbol (Symbol) of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is the key element in Department identification. It represents the American People sheltered in the wing of the American Eagle, suggesting the Department's concern and responsibility for the welfare of the people. This Symbol is the visual link which connects the graphic communications of all components and programs of the Department. It is the major design component for the Department Identifiers — the Department Logo, Seal, and Signatures.
            (b) The Symbol is described as follows: The outline of an American Eagle, facing left, with one of its wings stretched upward and the other wing pointed downward, is flanked on its right side by two outlines of the profile of a human head, both of which are located in between the eagle's wings. One of the profile outlines is smaller than the other and is nestled in the larger outline.
            
              ER13MR15.002
            
            (c) The HHS Departmental Logo (Logo) incorporates the Symbol and is described as follows: From the tip of the outstretched wing of the American Eagle in symbol to the tip of the other, downward-facing wing, the words, “DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES • USA” form a circular arc. The official colors of the Logo are either Black or Reflex Blue. Reflex Blue RGB Numbers: 0/0/153 (R0, G0, B153)
            
              ER13MR15.003
            
            (d) The HHS Departmental Seal (Seal) incorporates the Symbol and is described as follows: Starting from the tip of the downward-facing wing of the American Eagle in the HHS symbol and forming a complete circle clockwise around the HHS symbol, the words, “DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES • USA •” are printed, surrounded by a border composed of a solid inner ring at the base of the text and a triangular, scalloped edge at the top of the text. The official colors of the Seal are Reflex Blue and Gold [Reflex Blue RGB Numbers: 0/0/153 (R0, G0, B153); Reflex Gold RGB Numbers: 254/252/1 (R254, G252, B1)]. The Seal may also appear in Reflex Blue or Black.
            
              
              ER13MR15.004
            
            (e) The HHS Departmental symbol, logo, and seal shall each be referred to as an HHS emblem and shall collectively be referred to as HHS emblems.
            [80 FR 13252, Mar. 13, 2015]
          
        
        
          Pt. 30
          PART 30—CLAIMS COLLECTION
          
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              Sec.
              30.1
              Purpose, authority, and scope.
              30.2
              Definitions.
              30.3
              Antitrust, fraud, exception in the account of an accountable official, and interagency claims excluded.
              30.4
              Compromise, waiver, or disposition under other statutes not precluded.
              30.5
              Other administrative remedies.
              30.6
              Form of payment.
              30.7
              Subdivision of claims.
              30.8
              Required administrative proceedings.
              30.9
              No private rights created.
            
            
              Subpart B—Standards for the Administrative Collection of Debts
              30.10
              Collection activities.
              30.11
              Demand for payment.
              30.12
              Administrative offset.
              30.13
              Debt reporting and the use of credit reporting agencies.
              30.14
              Contracting with private collection contractors and with entities that locate and recover unclaimed assets.
              30.15
              Suspension or revocation of eligibility for loans and loan guarantees, licenses, permits or privileges.
              30.16
              Liquidation of collateral.
              30.17
              Collection in installments.
              30.18
              Interest, penalties, and administrative costs.
              30.19
              Review of cost effectiveness of collection.
              30.20
              Taxpayer information.
            
            
              Subpart C—Debt Compromise
              30.21
              Scope and application.
              30.22
              Basis for compromise.
              30.23
              Enforcement policy.
              30.24
              Joint and several liability.
              30.25
              Further review of compromise offers.
              30.26
              Consideration of tax consequences to the Government.
              30.27
              Mutual release of the debtor and the Government.
            
            
              Subpart D—Suspending and Terminating Collection Activities
              30.28
              Scope and application.
              30.29
              Suspension of collection activity.
              30.30
              Termination of collection activity.
              30.31
              Exception to termination.
              30.32
              Discharge of indebtedness; reporting requirements.
            
            
              Subpart E—Referrals to the Department of Justice
              30.33
              Prompt referral.
              30.34
              Claims Collection Litigation Report.
              30.35
              Preservation of evidence.
              30.36
              Minimum amount of referrals.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            31 U.S.C. 3711(d).
          
          
            Source:
            72 FR 10409, Mar. 8, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            
              § 30.1
              Purpose, authority, and scope.
              (a) Purpose. This part prescribes the standards and procedures for the Department's use in the administrative collection, offset, compromise, and suspension or termination of collection activity for claims for funds or property, as defined by 31 U.S.C. 3701(b) and this part. Covered activities include the collection of debts in any amount; the compromise and suspension or termination of collection activity of debts that do not exceed $100,000, or such higher amount as the Attorney General may prescribe, exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs; and the referral of debts to the Department of the Treasury (Treasury), the Treasury-designated debt collection centers, or the Department of Justice (Justice) for collection by further administrative action or litigation, as applicable.
              (b) Authority. The Secretary is issuing the regulations in this part under the authority contained in 31 U.S.C. 3711(d). The standards and procedures prescribed in this part are authorized under the Federal Claims Collection Act, as amended, Public Law No. 89-508, 80 Stat. 308 (July 19, 1966), the Debt Collection Act of 1982, Public Law No. 97-365, 96 Stat. 1749 (October 25, 1982), the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, Public Law No. 104-134, 110 Stat. 1321, 1358 (April 26, 1996) and the Federal Claims Collection Standards at 31 CFR parts 900 through 904.
              (c) Scope. (1) The standards and procedures prescribed in this part apply to all officers and employees of the Department, including officers and employees of the various Operating Divisions and Regional Offices of the Department, charged with the collection and disposition of debts owed to the United States.
              (2) The standards and procedures set forth in this part will be applied except where specifically excluded herein or where a statute, regulation or contract prescribes different standards or procedures.
              (3) Regulations governing the use of certain debt collection procedures created under the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, including tax refund offset, administrative wage garnishment, and Federal salary offset, are contained in parts 31 through 33 of this chapter.
            
            
              § 30.2
              Definitions.
              In this part—
              
                Administrative offset means withholding funds payable by the United States to, or held by the United States for, a person to satisfy a debt.
              
                Agency means a department, agency, court, court administrative office, or instrumentality in the executive, judicial, or legislative branch of the Government, including Government corporations.
              
                Appropriate official means the Department official who, by statute or delegation of authority, determines the existence and amount of debt.
              
                Business day means Monday through Friday. For purposes of computation, the last day of the period will be included unless it is a Federal holiday, in which case the next business day following the holiday will be considered the last day of the period.
              
                Claim see the definition for the term “debt.” The terms “claim” and “debt” are synonymous and interchangeable.
              
                Creditor agency means an agency to which a debt is owed, including a debt collection center acting on behalf of a creditor agency.
              
                Day means calendar day. For purposes of computation, the last day of the period will be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday, in which case the next business day will be considered the last day of the period.
              
                Debt or claim means an amount of funds or other property determined by an appropriate official of the Federal Government to be owed to the United States from any person, organization, or entity, except another Federal agency. For the purpose of administrative offset, the term includes an amount owed by an individual to a State, the District of Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Debts include, but are not limited to, amounts owed pursuant to: Loans insured or guaranteed by the United States; fees; leases; rents; royalties; services; sales of real or personal property; Federal salary overpayments; overpayments to program beneficiaries, contractors, providers, suppliers, and grantees; audit disallowance determinations; civil penalties and assessments; theft or loss; interest; fines and forfeitures (except those arising under the Uniform Code of Military Justice); and all other similar sources.
              
              
                Debt collection center means the Department of the Treasury, or other Federal agency, subagency, unit, or division designated by the Secretary of the Treasury to collect debts owed to the United States.
              
                Debtor means an individual, organization, association, partnership, corporation, or State or local government or subdivision indebted to the Government, or the person or entity with legal responsibility for assuming the debtor's obligation.
              
                Debts arising under the Social Security Act are overpayments to, or contributions, reimbursements, penalties or assessments owed by, any entity, individual, or State under the Social Security Act. Such amounts include amounts owed to the Medicare program under section 1862(b) of the Social Security Act. Salary overpayments and other debts that result from the administration of the provisions of the Social Security Act are not deemed to “arise under” the Social Security Act for purposes of this part.
              
                Delinquent debt means a debt which the debtor does not pay or otherwise resolve by the date specified in the initial demand for payment, or in an applicable written repayment agreement or other instrument, including a post-delinquency repayment agreement.
              
                Department means the Department of Health and Human Services, and its Operating Divisions and Regional Offices.
              
                Disbursing official means an officer or employee who has authority to disburse public money pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3321 or another law.
              
                Disposable pay means that part of the debtor's current basic, special, incentive, retired, and retainer pay, or other authorized pay, remaining after deduction of amounts required by law to be withheld. For purposes of calculating disposable pay, legally required deductions that must be applied first include: Tax levies pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code (title 26, United States Code); properly withheld taxes, FICA, Medicare; health and life insurance premiums; and retirement contributions. Amounts deducted under garnishment orders, including child support garnishment orders, are not legally required deductions for calculating disposable pay.
              
                Evidence of service means information retained by the Department indicating the nature of the document to which it pertains, the date of mailing of the document, and the address and name of the debtor to whom it is being sent. A copy of the dated and signed written notice provided to the debtor pursuant to this part may be considered evidence of service for purposes of this part. Evidence of service may be retained electronically so long as the manner of retention is sufficient for evidentiary purposes.
              
                FMS means the Financial Management Service, a bureau of the Department of the Treasury.
              
                Hearing means a review of the documentary evidence to confirm the existence or amount of a debt or the terms of a repayment schedule. If the Secretary determines that the issues in dispute cannot be resolved by such a review, such as when the validity of the claim turns on the issue of credibility or veracity, the Secretary may provide an oral hearing. (See 45 CFR 33.6(c)(2) for oral hearing procedures that may be provided by the Secretary).
              
                IRS means the Internal Revenue Service, a bureau of the Department of the Treasury.
              
                Late charges means interest, penalties, and administrative costs required or permitted to be assessed on delinquent debts.
              
                Legally enforceable means that there has been a final agency determination that the debt, in the amount stated, is due and there are no legal bars to collection action.
              
                Local government means a political subdivision, instrumentality, or authority of any State, the District of Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or an Indian tribe, band or nation.
              
                Operating Division means each separate component, agency, subagency, and unit within the Department of Health and Human Services, including, but not limited to, the Administration for Children and Families, the Administration on Aging, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Food and Drug Administration, the National Institutes of Health, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Indian Health Service, Health Resources and Services Administration, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and the Office of the Secretary.
              
                OPM means the Office of Personnel Management.
              
                Payment authorizing agency means an agency that transmits a voucher to a disbursing official for the disbursement of public money.
              
                Payments made under the Social Security Act means payments by this Department or other agencies to beneficiaries, providers, intermediaries, physicians, suppliers, carriers, States, or other contractors or grantees under a Social Security Act program, including: Title I (Grants to States for Old-Age Assistance for the Aged); Title II (Federal Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Benefits); Title III (Grants to States for Unemployment Compensation Administration); Title IV (Grants to States for Aid and Services to Needy Families with Children and for Child-Welfare Services); Title V (Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant); Title IX (Miscellaneous Provisions Relating to Employment Security); Title X (Grants to States for Aid to the Blind); Title XI, part B (Peer Review of the Utilization and Quality of Health Care Services); Title XII (Advances to State Unemployment Funds); Title XIV (Grants to States for Aid to Permanently and Totally Disabled); Title XVI (Grants to States for Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled); Title XVII (Grants for Planning Comprehensive Action to Combat Mental Retardation); Title XVIII (Health Insurance for the Aged and Disabled); Title XIX (Grants to States for Medical Assistance Programs); Title XX (Block Grants to States for Social Services); and Title XXI (State Children's Health Insurance Program). Federal employee salaries and other payments made by the Department or other agencies in the course of administering the provisions of the Social Security Act are not deemed to be “payable under” the Social Security Act for purposes of this part.
              
                Private collection contractors means private debt collection under contract with the Department to collect a nontax debt or claim owed to the Department. The term includes private debt collectors, collection agencies, and commercial attorneys.
              
                Salary offset means an administrative offset to collect a debt owed by a Federal employee through deductions at one or more officially established pay intervals from the current pay account of the employee without his or her consent.
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or the Secretary's designee.
              
                Taxpayer identification number means the identifying number described under section 6109 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 6109). For an individual, the taxpayer identifying number is the individual's Social Security Number.
              
                Tax refund offset means withholding or reducing a tax refund payment by an amount necessary to satisfy a debt.
            
            
              § 30.3
              Antitrust, fraud, exception in the account of an accountable official, and interagency claims excluded.
              (a) Claims involving antitrust violations or fraud. (1) The standards in this part relating to compromise, suspension, and termination of collection activity do not apply to any debt based in whole or in part on conduct in violation of antitrust laws, or to any debt involving fraud, presentation of a false claim, or misrepresentation on the part of the debtor or any party having an interest in the claim, unless the Department of Justice returns a referred claim to the Department for further handling in accordance with parts 31 CFR 900 through 904 and this part.

              (2) Upon identification of a debt suspected of involving an antitrust violation or fraud, a false claim, misrepresentation, or other criminal activity or misconduct, the Secretary shall refer the debt to the Office of the Inspector General for review.
              
              (3) Upon the determination of the Office of the Inspector General that a claim is based in whole or in part on conduct in violation of the antitrust laws, or involves fraud, the presentation of a false claim, or misrepresentation on the part of the debtor or any party having an interest in the claim, the Secretary shall promptly refer the case to the Department of Justice for action.
              (b) Exception in the account of an accountable official. The standards in this part do not apply to compromise of an exception in the account of an accountable official.
              (c) Interagency claims. This part does not apply to claims between Federal agencies. The Department will attempt to resolve interagency claims by negotiation in accordance with EO 12146.
            
            
              § 30.4
              Compromise, waiver, or disposition under other statutes not precluded.
              Nothing in this part precludes the Department from disposing of any claim under statutes and implementing regulations other than subchapter II of chapter 37 of Title 31 of the United States Code and the Federal Claims Collection Standards, 31 CFR parts 900 through 904. Any statute and implementing regulation specifically applicable to the claims collection activities of the Department will take precedence over this part.
            
            
              § 30.5
              Other administrative remedies.
              The remedies and sanctions available under this part for collecting debts are not intended to be exclusive. Nothing contained in this part precludes using any other administrative remedy which may be available for collecting debts owed to the Department, such as converting the method of payment under a grant from an advancement to a reimbursement method or revoking a grantee's letter-of-credit.
            
            
              § 30.6
              Form of payment.
              Claims may be paid in the form of money or, when a contractual basis exists, the Department may demand the return of specific property or the performance of specific services.
            
            
              § 30.7
              Subdivision of claims.
              Debts may not be subdivided to avoid the monetary ceiling established by 31 U.S.C. 3711(a)(2). A debtor's liability arising from a particular transaction or contract shall be considered a single debt in determining whether the debt, exclusive of interest, penalties and administrative costs, does not exceed $100,000, or such higher amount as prescribed by the Attorney General for purposes of compromise, or suspension or termination of collection activity.
            
            
              § 30.8
              Required administrative proceedings.
              This part does not supersede, or require omission or duplication of administrative proceedings required by contract, or other laws or regulations. See for example, 42 CFR part 50 (Public Health Service), 45 CFR part 16 (Departmental Grant Appeals Board), and 48 CFR part 33 (Federal Acquisition Regulation) and part 333 (HHS Acquisition Regulation).
            
            
              § 30.9
              No private rights created.
              The standards in this part do not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, the Department, its officers, or any other person, nor shall the failure of the Department to comply with any of the provisions of this part be available to any debtor as a defense.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Standards for the Administrative Collection of Debts
            
              § 30.10
              Collection activities.
              (a) General rule. The Secretary shall aggressively and timely collect all debts arising out of activities of, or referred or transferred for collection actions to, the Department. Normally, an initial written demand for payment shall be made no later than 30 days after a determination by an appropriate official that a debt exists.
              (b) Cooperation with other agencies. The Department shall cooperate with other agencies in their debt collection activities.
              (c) Transfer of delinquent debts—(1) Mandatory transfer. The Department shall transfer legally enforceable debts 180 days or more delinquent to Treasury in accordance with the requirements of 31 CFR 285.12. This requirement does not apply to any debt that:
              (i) Is in litigation or foreclosure;
              (ii) Will be disposed of under an approved asset sale program within one year of becoming eligible for sale;
              (iii) Has been referred to a private collection contractor for a period of time acceptable to the Secretary of the Treasury;
              (iv) Is at a debt collection center for a period of time acceptable to the Secretary of the Treasury (see paragraph (c)(2) of this section);
              (v) Will be collected under internal offset procedures within three years after the debt first became delinquent; or
              (vi) Is exempt from this requirement based on a determination by the Secretary of the Treasury that exemption for a certain class of debt is in the best interest of the United States.
              (2) Permissive transfer. The Secretary may refer debts less than 180 days delinquent, including debts referred to the Department by another agency, to the Treasury in accordance with the requirements of 31 CFR 285.12, or with the consent of the Treasury, to a Treasury-designated debt collection center to accomplish efficient, cost effective debt collection. Referrals to debt collection centers shall be at the discretion of, and for a time period acceptable to, the Secretary of the Treasury. Referrals may be for servicing, collection, compromise, suspension, or termination of collection action.
            
            
              § 30.11
              Demand for payment.
              (a) Written demand for payment. (1) Written demand, as described in paragraph (b) of this section, shall be made promptly upon a debtor in terms that inform the debtor of the consequences of failing to cooperate with the Department to resolve the debt.
              (2) Normally, the demand letter will be sent no later than 30 days after the appropriate official determines that the debt exists. The demand letter shall be sent by first class mail to the debtor's last known address.
              (3) When necessary to protect the Government's interest, for example to prevent the running of a statute of limitations, the written demand for payment may be preceded by other appropriate action under this part, including immediate referral to Justice for litigation.
              (b) Demand letters. The specific content, timing, and number of demand letters shall depend upon the type and amount of the debt and the debtor's response, if any, to the Department's letters or telephone calls. Generally, one demand letter should suffice; however, more may be used.
              (1) The written demand for payment shall include the following information:
              (i) The nature and amount of the debt, including the basis for the indebtedness;
              (ii) The date by which payment should be made to avoid late charges and enforced collection, which generally shall be no later than 30 days from the date the demand letter is mailed;
              (iii) The applicable standards for imposing any interest, penalties, or administrative costs (see § 30.18);
              (iv) The rights, if any, the debtor may have to:
              (A) Seek review of the Department's determination of the debt, and for purposes of administrative wage garnishment or salary offset, to request a hearing (see 45 CFR parts 32 and 33); and
              (B) Enter into a reasonable repayment agreement.
              (v) An explanation of how the debtor may exercise any of the rights described in paragraph (b)(1)(iv) of this section;
              (vi) The name, address, and phone number of a contact person or office within the Department to address any debt-related matters; and
              (vii) The Department's remedies to enforce payment of the debt, which may include:
              (A) Garnishing the debtor's wages through administrative wage garnishment;

              (B) Offsetting any Federal payments due the debtor, including income tax refunds, salary, certain benefit payments such as Social Security, retirement, and travel reimbursements and advances;
              
              (C) Referring the debt to a private collection contractor;
              (D) Reporting the debt to a credit bureau or other automated database;
              (E) Referring the debt to Justice for litigation; and
              (F) Referring the debt to Treasury for any of the collection actions described in paragraphs (b)(1)(vii)(A) through (E) of this section, advising the debtor that such referral is mandatory if the debt is 180 or more days delinquent.
              (2) The written demand for payment should also include the following information:
              (i) The debtor's right to inspect and copy all records of the Department pertaining to the debt, or if the debtor or the debtor's representative cannot personally inspect the records, to request and receive copies of such records;
              (ii) The Department's willingness to discuss with the debtor alternative methods of payment;
              (iii) A debtor delinquent on a debt is ineligible for Government loans, loan guarantees, or loan insurance until the debtor resolves the debt;
              (iv) When seeking to collect statutory penalties, forfeiture or other similar types of claim, the debtor's licenses, permits, or other privileges may be suspended or revoked if failure to pay the debt is inexcusable or willful. Such suspension or revocation shall extend to programs or activities administered by the States on behalf of the Federal Government, to the extent that they affect the Federal Government's ability to collect money or funds owed by debtors;
              (v) Knowingly making false statements or bringing frivolous actions may subject the debtor to civil or criminal penalties under 31 U.S.C. 3729-3731, 18 U.S.C. 286, 287, 1001, and 1002, or any other applicable statutory authority, and, if the debtor is a Federal employee, to disciplinary action under 5 CFR part 752 or other applicable authority;
              (vi) Any amounts collected and ultimately found not to have been owed by the debtor will be refunded;
              (vii) For salary offset, up to 15% of the debtor's current disposable pay may be deducted every pay period until the debt is paid in full; and
              (viii) Dependent upon applicable statutory authority, the debtor may be entitled to consideration for a waiver.
              (c) The Secretary will retain evidence of service indicating the date of mailing of the demand letter. The evidence of service, which may include a certificate of service, may be retained electronically so long as the manner of retention is sufficient for evidentiary purposes.
              (d) Prior to, during, or after the completion of the demand process, if the Secretary determines to pursue, or is required to pursue offset, the procedures applicable to offset should be followed (see § 30.12). The availability of funds for debt satisfaction by offset and the Secretary's determination to pursue collection by offset shall release the Secretary from the necessity of further compliance with paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section.
              (e) Finding debtors. The Secretary will use every reasonable effort to locate debtors, using such sources as telephone directories, city directories, postmasters, drivers license records, automobile title and license records in State and local government agencies, the IRS, credit reporting agencies and skip locator services. Referral of a confess-judgment note to the appropriate United States Attorney's Office for entry of judgment will not be delayed because the debtor cannot be located.
              (f) Communications from debtors. The Secretary should respond promptly to communications from debtor, within 30 days where feasible, and should advise debtors who dispute debts to furnish available evidence to support their contentions.
              (g) Exception. This section does not require duplication of any notice already contained in a written agreement, letter or other document signed by, or provided to, the debtor.
            
            
              § 30.12
              Administrative offset.
              (a) Scope. (1) Administrative offset is the withholding of funds payable by the United States to, or held by the United States for, a person to satisfy a debt.
              (2) This section does not apply to:

              (i) Debts arising under the Social Security Act, except as provided in 42 U.S.C. 404;
              
              (ii) Payments made under the Social Security Act, except as provided for in 31 U.S.C. 3716(c), and implementing regulation at 31 CFR 285.4;
              (iii) Debts arising under, or payments made under, the Internal Revenue Code or the tariff laws of the United States;
              (iv) Offsets against Federal salaries to the extent these standards are inconsistent with regulations published to implement such offsets under 5 U.S.C. 5514 and 31 U.S.C. 3716 (see 5 CFR part 550, subpart K; 31 CFR 285.7; and part 33 of this chapter);
              (v) Offsets under 31 U.S.C. 3728 against a judgment obtained by a debtor against the United States;
              (vi) Offsets or recoupments under common law, State law, or Federal statutes specifically prohibiting offsets or recoupments for particular types of debts; or
              (vii) Offsets in the course of judicial proceedings, including bankruptcy.
              (3) Unless otherwise provided for by contract or law, debts or payments that are not subject to administrative offset under 31 U.S.C. 3716 may be collected by administrative offset under the common law or other applicable statutory authority.
              (4) Unless otherwise provided by law, collection by administrative offset under the authority of 31 U.S.C. 3716 may not be conducted more than 10 years after the Department's right to collect the debt first accrued, unless facts material to the Department's right to collect the debt were not known and could not reasonably have been known by the Secretary. This limitation does not apply to debts reduced to judgment.
              (5) Where there is reason to believe that a bankruptcy petition has been filed with respect to a debtor, the Office of the General Counsel should be contacted for legal advice concerning the impact of the Bankruptcy Code, particularly 11 U.S.C. 106, 362 and 553, on pending or contemplated collections by offset.
              (b) Centralized administrative offset. (1) Except as provided in the exceptions listed in § 30.10(c)(1), legally enforceable debts which are 180 days delinquent shall be referred to the Secretary of the Treasury for collection by centralized administrative offset pursuant to and in accordance with 31 CFR 901.3(b). Debts which are less than 180 days delinquent, including debts referred to the Department by another agency, also may be referred to the Secretary of the Treasury for collection by centralized administrative offset.
              (2) When referring delinquent debts to the Secretary of the Treasury for centralized administrative offset, the Department must certify, in a form acceptable to the Secretary of the Treasury, that:
              (i) The debt is past due and legally enforceable; and
              (ii) The Department has complied with all due process requirements under 31 U.S.C. 3716(a) and paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
              (3) Payments that are prohibited by law from being offset are exempt from centralized administrative offset. The Secretary of the Treasury shall exempt payments under means-tested programs from centralized administrative offset when requested in writing by the head of the payment certifying or authorizing agency. Also, the Secretary of the Treasury may exempt other classes of payments from centralized offset upon the written request of the head of the payment certifying or authorizing agency.
              (c) Non-centralized administrative offset. (1) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, when centralized administrative offset under paragraph (b) of this section is not available or appropriate, the Secretary may collect a delinquent debt by conducting non-centralized administrative offset internally or in cooperation with the agency certifying or authorizing payments to the debtor.
              (2) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, administrative offset may be initiated only after:
              (i) The debtor has been sent written notice of the type and amount of the debt, the intention of the Department to initiate administrative offset to collect the debt, and an explanation of the debtor's rights under 31 U.S.C. 3716; and
              (ii) The debtor has been given:
              (A) The opportunity to inspect and copy Department records related to the debt;

              (B) The opportunity for a review within the Department of the determination of indebtedness; and
              
              (C) The opportunity to make a written agreement to repay the debt.
              (3) The due process requirements under paragraph (c)(2) of this section may be omitted when:
              (i) Offset is in the nature of a recoupment, i.e., the debt and the payment to be offset arise out of the same transaction or occurrence;
              (ii) The debt arises under a contract as set forth in Cecile Industries, Inc. v. Cheney, 995 F.2d 1052 (Fed. Cir. 1993) (notice and other procedural protections set forth in 31 U.S.C. 3716(a) do not supplant or restrict established procedures for contractual offsets covered by the Contracts Disputes Act); or
              (iii) In the case of non-centralized administrative offset conducted under paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the Department first learns of the existence of the amount owed by the debtor when there is insufficient time before payment would be made to the debtor/payee to allow for prior notice and an opportunity for review. When prior notice and an opportunity for review are omitted, the Secretary shall give the debtor such notice and an opportunity for review as soon as practical and shall promptly refund any money ultimately found not to have been owed to the Government.
              (4) When the debtor previously has been given any of the required notice and review opportunities with respect to a particular debt, such as under § 30.11 of this part, the Department need not duplicate such notice and review opportunities before administrative offset may be initiated.
              (5) Before requesting that a payment authorizing agency to conduct non-centralized administrative offset, the Department shall:
              (i) Provide the debtor with due process as set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this section; and
              (ii) Provide the payment authorizing agency written certification that the debtor owes the past due, legally enforceable delinquent debt in the amount stated, and that the Department has fully complied with this section.
              (6) When a creditor agency requests that the Department, as the payment authorizing agency, conduct non-centralized administrative offset, the Secretary shall comply with the request, unless the offset would not be in the best interest of the United States with respect to the program of the Department, or would otherwise be contrary to law. Appropriate use should be made of the cooperative efforts of other agencies in effecting collection by administrative offset, including salary offset.
              (7) When collecting multiple debts by non-centralized administrative offset, the Department will apply the recovered amounts to those debts in accordance with the best interests of the United States, as determined by the facts and circumstances of the particular case, particularly the applicable statute of limitations.
              (d) Requests to OPM to offset a debtor's anticipated or future benefit payments under the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund and the Federal Employee Retirement System. Upon providing OPM written certification that a debtor has been afforded the procedures provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the Department may request OPM to offset a debtor's anticipated or future benefit payments under the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund (Fund) in accordance with 5 CFR part 831, subpart R, or under the Federal Employee Retirement System (FERS) in accordance with 5 CFR part 845, subpart D. Upon receipt of such a request, OPM will identify and “flag” a debtor's account in anticipation of the time when the debtor requests, or becomes eligible to receive, payments from the Fund or under FERS. This will satisfy any requirement that offset be initiated prior to the expiration of the time limitations referenced in 31 CFR 901.3(b)(4).
              (e) Review requirements. (1) For purposes of this section, whenever the Secretary is required to afford a debtor a review within the Department, the debtor shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity for an oral hearing when the debtor requests reconsideration of the debt and the Secretary determines that the question of the indebtedness cannot be resolved by review of the documentary evidence, for example, when the validity of the debt turns on an issue of credibility or veracity.
              
              (2) Unless otherwise required by law, an oral hearing under this section is not required to be a formal evidentiary hearing, although the Department will carefully document all significant matters discussed at the hearing.
              (3) An oral hearing is not required with respect to debt collection systems where determinations of indebtedness rarely involve issues of credibility or veracity, and the Secretary has determined that a review of the written record is adequate to correct prior mistakes.
              (4) In those cases when an oral hearing is not required by this section, the Secretary shall accord the debtor a “paper hearing,” that is, a determination of the request for reconsideration based upon a review of the written record.
            
            
              § 30.13
              Debt reporting and use of credit reporting agencies.
              (a) Reporting delinquent debts. (1) The Secretary will report delinquent debts over $100 to credit bureaus or other automated databases. Debts arising under the Social Security Act are excluded from paragraph (a).
              (2) Debts owed by individuals will be reported to consumer reporting agencies pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(12).
              (3) Once a debt has been referred to Treasury for collection, any subsequent reporting to or updating of a credit bureau or other automated database may be handled by the Treasury.
              (4) Where there is reason to believe that a bankruptcy petition has been filed with respect to a debtor, the Office of the General Counsel should be contacted for legal advice concerning the impact of the Bankruptcy Code, particularly with respect to the applicability of the automatic stay, 11 U.S.C. 362, and the procedures for obtaining relief from such stay prior to proceeding under paragraph (a) of this section.
              (5) If the debtor has not received prior written notice under § 30.11(b), before reporting a delinquent debt under this section, the Secretary shall provide the debtor at least 60 days written notice of the amount and nature of the debt; that the debt is delinquent and the Department intends to report the debt to a credit bureau (including the specific information that will be disclosed); that the debtor has the right to dispute the accuracy and validity of the information being disclosed; and, if a previous opportunity was not provided, that the debtor may request review within the Department of the debt or rescheduling of payment. The Secretary may disclose only the individual's name, address, and social security number and the nature, amount, status and history of the debt.
              (b) Use of credit reporting agencies. The Secretary may also use credit reporting agencies to obtain credit reports to evaluate the financial status of loan applicants, potential contractors and grantees; to determine a debtor's ability to repay a debt; and to locate debtors. In the case of an individual, the Secretary may disclose, as a routine use under 5 U.S.C 552a(b)(3), only the individual's name, address, and Social Security number and the purpose for which the information will be used.
            
            
              § 30.14
              Contracting with private collection contractors and with entities that locate and recover unclaimed assets.
              (a) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, the Secretary may contract with private collection contractors to recover delinquent debts, provided that:
              (1) The Secretary retains the authority to resolve disputes, compromise debts, suspend or terminate collection action, and refer debts to Justice for litigation;
              (2) The private collection contractor is not allowed to offer the debtor, as an incentive for payment, the opportunity to pay the debt less the private collection contractor's fee unless the Secretary has granted such authority prior to the offer;
              (3) The contract provides that the private collection contractor is subject to the Privacy Act of 1974 to the extent specified in 5 U.S.C. 552a(m), and to applicable Federal and State laws and regulations pertaining to debt collection practices, including but not limited to the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. 1692; and

              (4) The private collection contractor is required to account for all amounts collected.
              
              (b) The Secretary shall use government-wide debt collection contracts to obtain debt collection services provided by private collection contractors. However, the Secretary may refer debts to private collection contractors pursuant to a contract between the Department and the private collection contractor only if such debts are not subject to the requirement to transfer debts to the Department of the Treasury for debt collection under 31 U.S.C. 3711(g) and 31 CFR 285.12(e).
              (c) Debts arising under the Social Security Act (which can be collected by private collection contractors only by Treasury after the debt has been referred to Treasury for collection) are excluded from this section.
              (d) The Secretary may fund private collection contractor contracts in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3718(d), or as otherwise permitted by law. A contract under paragraph (a) of this section may provide that the fee a private collection contractor charges the Department for collecting the debt is payable from the amounts collected.
              (e) The Department may enter into contracts for locating and recovering assets of the United States including unclaimed assets. However, before entering into a contract to recover assets of the United States that may be held by a State government or financial institution, the Department must establish procedures that are acceptable to the Secretary of Treasury.
              (f) The Secretary may enter into contracts for debtor asset and income search reports. In accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3718(d), such contracts may provide that the fee a contractor charges the Department for such services may be payable from the amounts recovered, unless otherwise prohibited by statute.
            
            
              § 30.15
              Suspension or revocation of eligibility for loans and loan guarantees, licenses, permits, or privileges.
              (a)(1) Unless waived by the Secretary, financial assistance in the form of loans, loan guarantees, or loan insurance shall not be extended to any person delinquent on a non-tax debt owed to the United States. This prohibition does not apply to disaster loans. Grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts are not considered to be loans.
              (2) The authority to waive the application of this section may be delegated to the Chief Financial Officer and re-delegated only to the Deputy Chief Financial Officer.
              (3) States that manage Federal activities, pursuant to approval from the Secretary, should ensure that appropriate steps are taken to safeguard against issuing licenses, permits, or other privileges to debtors who fail to pay their debts to the Federal Government.
              (b) The Secretary will report to Treasury any surety that fails to honor its obligations under 31 U.S.C. 9305.
              (c) In non-bankruptcy cases, when seeking to collect statutory penalties, forfeitures, or other types of claims, the Secretary may suspend or revoke licenses, permits, or other privileges of a delinquent debtor if the failure to pay the debt is found to be inexcusable or willful. Such suspension or revocation will extend to programs or activities administered by the States on behalf of the Federal Government, to the extent that they affect the Federal Government's ability to collect money or funds owed by debtors.
              (d) Where there is reason to believe that a bankruptcy petition has been filed with respect to a debtor, before taking any action to suspend or revoke under paragraph (c) of this section, the Office of the General Counsel should be contacted for legal advice concerning the impact of the Bankruptcy Code, particularly 11 U.S.C. 362 and 525, which may restrict such action.
            
            
              § 30.16
              Liquidation of collateral.
              (a)(1) The Secretary will liquidate security or collateral through the exercise of a power of sale in the security instrument or a non-judicial foreclosure, and apply the proceeds to the applicable debt(s), if the debtor fails to pay the debt(s) within a reasonable time after demand and if such action is in the best interests of the United States.

              (2) Collection from other sources, including liquidation of security or collateral, is not a prerequisite to requiring payment by a surety, insurer, or guarantor unless such action is expressly required by statute or contract.
              (3) The Secretary will give the debtor reasonable notice of the sale and an accounting of any surplus proceeds and will comply with other requirements under law or contract.
              (b) Where there is reason to believe that a bankruptcy petition has been filed with respect to a debtor, the Office of the General Counsel should be contacted for legal advice concerning the impact of the Bankruptcy Code, particularly with respect to the applicability of the automatic stay, 11 U.S.C. 362, and the procedures for obtaining relief from such stay prior to proceeding under paragraph (a) of this section.
            
            
              § 30.17
              Collection in installments.
              (a) Whenever feasible, the total amount of a debt shall be collected in one lump sum payment. If a debtor is financially unable to pay a debt in one lump sum, either by funds or administrative offset, the Secretary may accept payment in regular installments. The Secretary will obtain financial statements from debtors who represent that they are unable to pay in one lump sum and independently verify such representations as described in § 30.22(a)(1).
              (b)(1) When the Secretary agrees to accept payments in regular installments, a legally enforceable written agreement should be obtained from the debtor that specifies all the terms and conditions of the agreement, and that includes a provision accelerating the debt in the event of a default.
              (2) The size and frequency of the payments should reasonably relate to the size of the debt and the debtor's ability to pay. Whenever feasible, the installment agreement will provide for full payment of the debt, including interest and charges, in three years or less.
              (3) In appropriate cases, the agreement should include a provision identifying security obtained from the debtor for the deferred payments.
            
            
              § 30.18
              Interest, penalties, and administrative costs.
              (a) Generally. Except as provided in paragraphs (g), (h), and (i) of this section, the Department shall charge interest, penalties, and administrative costs on delinquent debts owed to the United States. These charges shall continue to accrue until the debt is paid in full or otherwise resolved through compromise, termination, or waiver of the charges.
              (b) Interest. The Department shall charge interest on delinquent debts owed the United States as follows:
              (1) Interest shall accrue from the date of delinquency, or as otherwise provided by law. For debts not paid by the date specified in the written demand for payment made under § 30.11, the date of delinquency is the date of mailing of the notice. The date of delinquency for an installment payment is the due date specified in the payment agreement.

              (2) Unless a different rate is prescribed by statute, contract, or a repayment agreement, the rate of interest charged shall be the rate established annually by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3717. The Department may charge a higher rate if necessary to protect the rights of the United States and the Secretary has determined and documented a higher rate for delinquent debt is required to protect the Government's interests. Any such higher rate of interest charged will be based on Treasury's quarterly rate certification to the U.S. Public Health Service for delinquencies in the National Research Services Awards and the National Health Services Corps Scholarship Program. The Department publishes this rate in the Federal Register quarterly.

              (3) Unless prescribed by statute or contract, the rate of interest, as initially charged, shall remain fixed for the duration of the indebtedness. When a debtor defaults on a repayment agreement and seeks to enter into a new agreement, the Department may require payment of interest at a new rate that reflects the Treasury rate in effect at the time the new agreement is executed. Interest shall not be compounded, that is, interest shall not be charged on interest, penalties, or administrative costs required by this section, unless prescribed by statute or contract. If, however, the debtor defaults on a previous repayment agreement, charges that accrued but were not collected under the defaulted agreement shall be added to the principal under the new repayment agreement.
              (c) Administrative costs. The Department shall assess administrative costs incurred for processing and handling delinquent debts. The calculation of administrative costs should be based on actual costs incurred or a valid estimate of the actual costs. Calculation of administrative costs shall include all direct (personnel, supplies, etc.) and indirect collection costs, including the cost of providing a hearing or any other form of administrative review requested by a debtor, and any costs charged by a collection agency under § 30.14. These charges will be assessed monthly, or per payment period, throughout the period that the debt is overdue. Such costs may also be in addition to other administrative costs if collection is being made for another Federal agency or unit.
              (d) Penalty. Unless otherwise established by contract, repayment agreement, or statute, the Secretary will charge a penalty of six percent a year on the amount due on a debt that is delinquent for more than 90 days. This charge shall accrue from the date of delinquency.
              (e) Cost of living adjustment. When there is a legitimate reason to do so, such as when calculating interest and penalties on a debt would be extremely difficult because of the age of the debt, an administrative debt may be increased by the cost of living adjustment in lieu of charging interest and penalties under this section. Administrative debt includes, but is not limited to, a debt based on fines, penalties, and overpayments, but does not include a debt based on the extension of Government credit, such as those arising from loans and loan guaranties. The cost of living adjustment is the percentage by which the Consumer Price Index for the month of June of the calendar year preceding the adjustment exceeds the Consumer Price Index for the month of June of the calendar year in which the debt was determined or last adjusted. Such increases to administrative debts shall be computed annually.
              (f) Priority. When a debt is paid in partial or installment payments, amounts received shall be applied first to outstanding penalties, second to administrative charges, third to interest, and last to principal.
              (g) Waiver. (1) The Secretary shall waive the collection of interest and administrative charges imposed pursuant to this section on the portion of the debt that is paid within 30 days after the date on which interest began to accrue. The Secretary may extend this 30-day period on a case-by-case basis if the Secretary determines that such action is in the best interest of the Government, or otherwise warranted by equity and good conscience.
              (2) The Secretary also may waive interest, penalties, and administrative charges charged under this section, in whole or in part, without regard to the amount of the debt, based on:
              (i) The criteria set forth at § 30.22(a)(1) through (4) for the compromise of debts; or
              (ii) A determination by the Secretary that collection of these charges is:
              (A) Against equity and good conscience; or
              (B) Not in the best interest of the United States.
              (h) Review. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (h)(2) of this section, administrative review of a debt will not suspend the assessment of interest, penalties, and administrative costs. While agency review of a debt is pending, the debtor either may pay the debt or be liable for interest and related charges on the uncollected debt. When agency review results in a final determination that any amount was properly a debt and the debtor chose to retain the amount in dispute, the Secretary shall collect from the debtor the amount determined to be due, plus interest, penalties and administrative costs on such debt amount, as calculated under this section, starting from the date the debtor was first made aware of the debt and ending when the debt is repaid.
              (2) Exception. Interest, penalties, and administrative cost charges will not be imposed on a debt for periods during which collection activity has been suspended under § 30.29(c)(1) pending agency review or consideration of waiver if statute prohibits collection of the debt during this period.
              
              (i) Common law or other statutory authority. The Department may impose and waive interest and related charges on debts not subject to 31 U.S.C. 3717 in accordance with the common law or other statutory authority.
            
            
              § 30.19
              Review of cost effectiveness of collection.
              Periodically, the Secretary will compare costs incurred and amounts collected. Data on costs and corresponding recovery rates for debts of different types and in various dollar ranges will be used to compare the cost effectiveness of alternative collection techniques, establish guidelines with respect to points at which costs of further collection efforts are likely to exceed recoveries, assist in evaluating offers in compromise, and establish minimum debt amounts below which collection efforts need not be taken.
            
            
              § 30.20
              Taxpayer information.
              (a) When attempting to locate a debtor in order to collect or compromise a debt under this part or any other authority, the Secretary may send a request to Treasury in accordance with 31 CFR 901.11 to obtain a debtor's mailing address from the records of the IRS.
              (b) Mailing addresses obtained under paragraph (a) of this section may be used to enforce collection of a delinquent debt and may be disclosed to other agencies and to collection agencies for collection purposes.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Debt Compromise
            
              § 30.21
              Scope and application.
              (a) Scope. The standards set forth in this subpart apply to the compromise of debts pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3711. The Secretary may exercise such compromise authority for debts arising out of activities of, or referred or transferred for collection services to, the Department when the amount of the debt then due, exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs, does not exceed $100,000, or any higher amount authorized by the Attorney General.
              (b) Application. Unless otherwise provided by law, when the principal balance of a debt, exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs, exceeds $100,000 or any higher amount authorized by the Attorney General, the authority to accept a compromise rests with Justice. The Secretary shall evaluate the compromise offer, using the factors set forth in this subpart. If an offer to compromise any debt in excess of $100,000 is acceptable to the Department, the Secretary shall refer the debt to the Civil Division or other appropriate litigating division in Justice using a Claims Collection Litigation Report (CCLR), which may be obtained from Justice's National Central Intake Facility. The referral shall include appropriate financial information and a recommendation for the acceptance of the compromise offer. Justice approval is not required if the Secretary rejects a compromise offer.
            
            
              § 30.22
              Bases for compromise.
              (a) Compromise. The Secretary may compromise a debt if the full amount cannot be collected based upon inability to pay, inability to collect the full debt, cost of collection, or doubt debt can be proven in court.
              (1) Inability to pay. The debtor is unable to pay the full amount in a reasonable time, as verified through credit reports or other financial information. In determining a debtor's inability to pay the full amount of the debt within a reasonable time, the Secretary will obtain and verify the debtor's claim of inability to pay by using credit reports or a current financial Statement from the debtor, executed under penalty of perjury, showing the debtor's assets, liabilities, income, and expenses. The Secretary may use a Departmental financial information form or may request suitable forms from Justice or the local United States Attorney's Office. The Secretary also may consider other relevant factors such as:
              (i) Age and health of the debtor;
              (ii) Present and potential income;
              (iii) Inheritance prospects;
              (iv) The possibility that assets have been concealed or improperly transferred by the debtor; and
              (v) The availability of assets or income that may be realized by enforced collection proceedings.
              (2) Inability to collect full debt. The Government is unable to collect the debt in full within a reasonable time by enforced collection proceedings.
              (i) In determining the Government's ability to enforce collection, the Secretary will consider the applicable exemptions available to the debtor under State and Federal law, and may also consider uncertainty as to the price the collateral or other property will bring at a forced sale.
              (ii) A compromise effected under this section should be for an amount that bears a reasonable relation to the amount that can be recovered by enforced collection procedures, with regard to the exemptions available to the debtor and the time that collection will take.
              (3) Cost of collection. The cost of collecting the debt does not justify the enforced collection of the full amount.
              (i) The Secretary may compromise a debt if the cost of collecting the debt does not justify the enforced collection of the full amount. The amount accepted in compromise of such cases may reflect an appropriate discount for the administrative and litigation costs of collection, with consideration given to the time it will take to effect collection. Collection costs may be a substantial factor in the settlement of small debts.
              (ii) In determining whether the costs of collection justify enforced collection of the full amount, the Secretary will consider whether continued collection of the debt, regardless of cost, is necessary to further an enforcement principal, such as the Government's willingness to pursue aggressively defaulting and uncooperative debtors.
              (4) Doubt debt can be proven in court. There is significant doubt concerning the Government's ability to prove its case in court.
              (i) If there is significant doubt concerning the Government's ability to prove its case in court for the full amount claimed, either because of the legal issues involved or because of a bona fide dispute as to the facts, then the amount accepted in compromise of such cases should fairly reflect the probabilities of successful prosecution to judgment, with due regard to the availability of witnesses and other evidentiary support for the Government's claim.
              (ii) In determining the litigation risks involved, the Secretary will consider the probable amount of court costs and attorney fees pursuant to the Equal Access to Justice Act, 28 U.S.C. 2412, that may be imposed against the Government if it is unsuccessful in litigation.
              (b) Installments. The Secretary generally will not accept compromises payable in installments. This is not an advantageous form of compromise in terms of time and administrative expense. If, however, payment of a compromise in installments is necessary, the Secretary shall, except in the case of compromises based on paragraph (a)(4) of this section, obtain a legally enforceable written agreement providing that, in the event of default, the full original principal balance of the debt prior to compromise, less sums paid thereon, is reinstated. The Office of the General Counsel should be consulted concerning the appropriateness of including such a requirement in the case of compromises based on paragraph (a)(4) of this section. Whenever possible, the Secretary will obtain security for repayment in the manner set forth in subpart B of this part.
            
            
              § 30.23
              Enforcement policy.
              The Secretary may compromise statutory penalties, forfeitures, or claims established as an aid to enforcement and to compel compliance if the Department's enforcement policy, in terms of deterrence and securing compliance, present and future, will be adequately served by the Secretary's acceptance of the sum to be agreed upon.
            
            
              § 30.24
              Joint and several liability.
              (a) When two or more debtors are jointly and severally liable, the Secretary will pursue collection against all debtors, as appropriate. The Secretary will not attempt to allocate the burden of payment between the debtors but will proceed to liquidate the indebtedness as quickly as possible.

              (b) The Secretary will ensure that a compromise agreement with one debtor does not automatically release the Department's claim against the remaining debtor(s). The amount of a compromise with one debtor shall not be considered a precedent or binding in determining the amount that will be required from other debtors jointly and severally liable on the claim.
            
            
              § 30.25
              Further review of compromise offers.
              If the Secretary is uncertain whether to accept a firm, written, substantive compromise offer on a debt that is within the Secretary's delegated compromise authority, the Secretary may refer the offer to the Civil Division or other appropriate litigating division in Justice, using a CCLR accompanied by supporting data and particulars concerning the debt. Justice may act upon such an offer or return it to the Secretary with instructions or advice.
            
            
              § 30.26
              Consideration of tax consequences to the Government.
              In negotiating a compromise, the Secretary will consider the tax consequences to the Government. In particular, the Secretary will consider requiring a waiver of tax-loss-carry-forward and tax-loss-carry-back rights of the debtor. For information on discharge of indebtedness reporting requirements see § 30.32.
            
            
              § 30.27
              Mutual release of the debtor and the Government.
              In all appropriate instances, a compromise that is accepted by the Secretary will be implemented by means of a mutual release. The terms of such mutual release shall provide that the debtor is released from further non-tax liability on the compromised debt in consideration of payment in full of the compromise amount and the Government and its officials, past and present, are released and discharged from any and all claims and causes of action arising from the same transaction that the debtor may have. In the event a mutual release is not executed when a debt is compromised, unless prohibited by law, the debtor is still deemed to have waived any and all claims and causes of action against the Government and its officials related to the transaction giving rise to the compromised debt.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Suspending and Terminating Collection Activities
            
              § 30.28
              Scope and application.
              (a) Scope. The standards set forth in this subpart apply to the suspension or termination of collection activity pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3711 on debts that do not exceed $100,000, or such other amount as the Attorney General may direct, exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs, after deducting the amount of partial payments or collections, if any. Prior to referring a debt to Justice for litigation, the Secretary may suspend or terminate collection under this subpart with respect to debts arising out of activities of, or referred or transferred for collection services to, the Department.
              (b) Application. (1) If, after deducting the amount of partial payments or collections, the principal amount of the debt exceeds $100,000, or such other amount as the Attorney General may direct, exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs, the authority to suspend or terminate rests solely with Justice.
              (2) If the Secretary believes that suspension or termination of any debt in excess of $100,000 may be appropriate, the Secretary shall refer the debt to the Civil Division or other appropriate litigating division in Justice, using the CCLR. The referral will specify the reasons for the Secretary's recommendation. If, prior to referral to Justice, the Secretary determines that a debt is plainly erroneous or clearly without merit, the Secretary may terminate collection activity regardless of the amount involved without obtaining Justice concurrence.
            
            
              § 30.29
              Suspension of collection activity.
              (a) Generally. The Secretary may suspend collection activity on a debt when:
              (1) The Department cannot locate the debtor;
              (2) The debtor's financial condition is expected to improve; or
              (3) The debtor has requested a waiver or review of the debt.
              (b) Financial condition. Based on the current financial condition of a debtor, the Secretary may suspend collection activity on a debt when the debtor's future prospects justify retention of the debt for periodic review and collection activity, and:
              (1) The applicable statute of limitations has not expired;
              (2) Future collection can be effected by administrative offset, notwithstanding the expiration of the applicable statute of limitations for litigation of claims, with due regard to the 10-year limitation for administrative offset prescribed by 31 U.S.C. 3716(e)(1); or
              (3) The debtor agrees to pay interest on the amount of the debt on which collection will be suspended, and such suspension is likely to enhance the debtor's ability to pay the full amount of the principal of the debt with interest at a later date.
              (c) Waiver or review. (1) The Secretary shall suspend collection activity during the time required for consideration of the debtor's request for waiver or administrative review of the debt if the statute under which the request is sought prohibits the Secretary from collecting the debt during that time.
              (2) If the statute under which the waiver or administrative review request is sought does not prohibit collection activity pending consideration of the request, the Secretary may use discretion, on a case-by-case basis, to suspend collection. Collection action ordinarily will be suspended upon a request for waiver or review if the Secretary is prohibited by statute or regulation from issuing a refund of amounts collected prior to agency consideration of the debtor's request. However, collection will not be suspended when the Secretary determines that the request for waiver or review is frivolous or was made primarily to delay collection.
              (d) Bankruptcy. Upon learning that a bankruptcy petition has been filed with respect to a debtor, in most cases the Secretary must suspend collection activity on the debt, pursuant to the provisions of 11 U.S.C. 362, 1201, and 1301, unless the Secretary can clearly establish that the automatic stay has been lifted or is no longer in effect. The Office of the General Counsel should be contacted immediately for legal advice, and the Secretary will take the necessary legal steps to ensure that no funds or money are paid by the Department to the debtor until relief from the automatic stay is obtained.
            
            
              § 30.30
              Termination of collection activity.
              (a) The Secretary may terminate collection activity when:
              (1) The Department is unable to collect any substantial amount through its own efforts or through the efforts of others;
              (2) The Department is unable to locate the debtor;
              (3) Costs of collection are anticipated to exceed the amount recoverable;
              (4) The debt is legally without merit or enforcement of the debt is barred by any applicable statute of limitations;
              (5) The debt cannot be substantiated; or
              (6) The debt against the debtor has been discharged in bankruptcy.
              (b)(1) Collection activity will not be terminated before the Secretary has pursued all appropriate means of collection and determined, based upon the results of the collection activity, that the debt is uncollectible.
              (2) Termination of collection activity ceases active collection of the debt. The termination of collection activity does not preclude the Secretary from retaining a record of the account for purposes of:
              (i) Selling the debt, if the Secretary of the Treasury determines that such sale is in the best interest of the United States;
              (ii) Pursuing collection at a subsequent date in the event there is a change in the debtor's status or a new collection tool becomes available;
              (iii) Offsetting against future income or assets not available at the time of termination of collection activity; or
              (iv) Screening future applicants for prior indebtedness.

              (c) Generally, the Secretary shall terminate collection activity on a debt that has been discharged in bankruptcy, regardless of the amount. The Secretary may continue collection activity, however, subject to the provisions of the Bankruptcy Code, for any payments provided under a plan of reorganization. Offset and recoupment rights may survive the discharge of the debtor in bankruptcy and, under some circumstances, claims also may survive the discharge. For example, when the Department is a known creditor of a debtor the claims of the Department may survive a discharge if the Department did not receive formal notice of the bankruptcy proceedings. When the Department believes that it has claims or offsets that may have survived the discharge of the debtor, the Office of the General Counsel should be contacted for legal advice.
            
            
              § 30.31
              Exception to termination.
              When a significant enforcement policy is involved, or recovery of a judgment is a prerequisite to the imposition of administrative sanctions, the Secretary may refer debts to Justice for litigation even though termination of collection activity may otherwise be appropriate.
            
            
              § 30.32
              Discharge of indebtedness; reporting requirements.
              (a)(1) Before discharging a delinquent debt, also referred to as close out of the debt, the Secretary shall take all appropriate steps to collect the debt in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3711(g)(9), and parts 30 through 33 of this chapter, including, as applicable, administrative offset; tax refund offset; Federal salary offset; credit bureau reporting; administrative wage garnishment; litigation; foreclosure; and referral to Treasury, Treasury-designated debt collection centers, or private collection contractors.
              (2) Discharge of indebtedness is distinct from termination or suspension of collection activity under this subpart, and is governed by the Internal Revenue Code. When collection action on a debt is suspended or terminated, the debt remains delinquent and further collection action may be pursued at a later date in accordance with the standards set forth in this part and 31 CFR parts 900 through 904.
              (3) When the Department discharges a debt in full or in part, further collection action is prohibited. Therefore, before discharging a debt, the Secretary must:
              (i) Make the determination that collection action is no longer warranted; and
              (ii) Terminate debt collection action.
              (b) In accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3711(i), the Secretary shall use competitive procedures to sell a delinquent debt upon termination of collection action if the Secretary of the Treasury determines such a sale is in the best interests of the United States. Since the discharge of a debt precludes any further collection action, including the sale of a delinquent debt, the Secretary may not discharge a debt until the requirements of 31 U.S.C. 3711(i) have been meet.
              (c) Upon discharge of an indebtedness, the Secretary must report the discharge to the IRS in accordance with the requirements of 26 U.S.C. 6050P and 26 CFR 1.6050P-1. The Secretary may request that Treasury or Treasury-designated debt collection centers file such a discharge report to the IRS on the Department's behalf.
              (d) When discharging a debt, the Secretary must request that litigation counsel release any liens of record securing the debt.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Referrals to the Department of Justice
            
              § 30.33
              Prompt referral.
              (a)(1) The Secretary promptly shall refer to Justice for litigation debts on which aggressive collection activity has been taken in accordance with subpart B of this part, and that cannot be compromised, or on which collection activity cannot be suspended or terminated, in accordance with subpart D of this part.
              (2) The Secretary may refer to Justice for litigation those debts arising out of activities of, or referred or transferred for collection services to, the Department.
              (b)(1) Debts for which the principal amount is over $1,000,000, or such other amount as the Attorney General may direct, exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs shall be referred to the Civil Division or other division responsible for litigating such debts at the Department of Justice, Washington DC.

              (2) Debts for which the principal amount is $1,000,000 or less, or such other amount as the Attorney General may direct, exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs shall be referred to the Nationwide Central Intake Facility at Justice as required by the CCLR instructions.
              (c)(1) Consistent with aggressive agency collection activity and the standards contained in this part and 31 CFR parts 900 through 904, debts shall be referred to Justice as early as possible, and, in any event, well within the period for initiating timely lawsuits against the debtors.
              (2) The Secretary shall make every effort to refer delinquent debts to Justice for litigation within one year of the date such debts last became delinquent. In the case of guaranteed or insured loans, the Secretary will make every effort to refer these delinquent debts to Justice for litigation within one year from the date the loan was presented to the Department for payment or re-insurance.
              (d) Justice has exclusive jurisdiction over debts referred to it pursuant to this subpart. Upon referral of a debt to Justice, the Secretary shall:
              (1) Immediately terminate the use of any administrative collection activities to collect the debt;
              (2) Advise Justice of the collection activities utilized to date, and their result; and
              (3) Refrain from having any contact with the debtor and direct all debtor inquiries concerning the debt to Justice.
              (e) After referral of a debt under this subpart, the Secretary shall immediately notify the Department of Justice of any payments credited by the Department to the debtor's account. Pursuant to 31 CFR 904.1(b), after referral of the debt under this subpart, Justice shall notify the Secretary of any payment received from the debtor.
            
            
              § 30.34
              Claims Collection Litigation Report.
              (a)(1) Unless excepted by Justice, the Secretary will complete the CCLR, accompanied by a signed Certificate of Indebtedness, to refer all administratively uncollectible claims to the Department of Justice for litigation.
              (2) The Secretary shall complete all of the sections of the CCLR appropriate to each debt as required by the CCLR instructions, and furnish such other information as may be required in specific cases.
              (b) The Secretary shall indicate clearly on the CCLR the actions that the Department wishes Justice to take with respect to the referred debt. The Secretary may indicate specifically any of a number of litigation activities which Justice may pursue, including enforced collection, judgement lien only, renew judgement lien only, renew judgement lien and enforced collection, program enforcement, foreclosure only, and foreclosure and deficiency judgment.
              (c) The Secretary also shall use the CCLR to refer a debt to Justice for the purpose of obtaining approval of a proposal to compromise the debt, or to suspend or terminate administrative collection activity of the debt.
            
            
              § 30.35
              Preservation of evidence.
              The Secretary will maintain and preserve all files and records that may be needed by Justice to prove the Department's claim in court. When referring debts to Justice for litigation, certified copies of the documents that form the basis for the claim should be provided along with the CCLR. Upon its request, the original documents will be provided to Justice.
            
            
              § 30.36
              Minimum amount of referrals.
              (a) Except as in paragraph (b) of this section, claims of less than $2,500 exclusive of interest, penalties, and administrative costs, or such other amount as the Attorney General may prescribe, shall not be referred for litigation.
              (b) The Secretary shall not refer claims of less than the minimum amount unless:
              (1) Litigation to collect such smaller amount is important to ensure compliance with the policies and programs of the Department;
              (2) The claim is being referred solely for the purpose of securing a judgment against the debtor, which will be filed as a lien against the debtor's property pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 3201 and returned to the Department for enforcement; or

              (3) The debtor has the clear ability to pay the claim and the Government effectively can enforce payment, with due regard for the exemptions available to the debtor under State and Federal law and the judicial remedies available to the Government.
              (c) The Secretary should consult with the Financial Litigation Staff of the Executive Office for United States Attorneys in Justice prior to referring claims valued at less than the minimum amount.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 31
          PART 31—TAX REFUND OFFSET
          
            Sec.
            31.1
            Purpose and scope.
            31.2
            Definitions.
            31.3
            General rule.
            31.4
            Certification and referral of debt.
            31.5
            Notice.
            31.6
            Review of Departmental records.
            31.7
            Review of a determination that a debt is past-due and legally enforceable.
          
          
            Authority:
            31 U.S.C. 3720A, 31 CFR 285.2, E.O. 12866, E.O. 13258.
          
          
            Source:
            68 FR 70445, Dec. 18, 2003, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 31.1
            Purpose and scope.
            (a) Purpose. This part prescribes the Department's standards and procedures for submitting past-due, legally enforceable debts to the Department of the Treasury for collection by tax refund offset.
            (b) Authority. These standards and procedures are authorized under the tax refund offset provision of the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, as amended by the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, codified at 31 U.S.C. 3720A, and the implementing regulations issued by the Department of the Treasury at 31 CFR 285.2.
            (c) Scope. (1) This part applies to all Departmental Operating Divisions and Regional Offices that administer a program that gives rise to a past-due non-tax debt owed to the United States, and to all officers or employees of the Department authorized to collect such debt. This part does not apply to any debt or claim owed to the Department of Health and Human Services by another Federal agency.
            (2) Nothing in this part precludes the Department from pursuing other debt collection procedures, including administrative wage garnishment under part 32 of this title, to collect a debt that has been submitted to the Department of the Treasury under this part. The Department may use such debt collection procedures separately or in conjunction with the offset collection procedures of this part.
          
          
            § 31.2
            Definitions.
            In this part, unless the context otherwise requires:
            
              Administrative offset means withholding funds payable by the United States (including funds payable by the United States on behalf of a State government) to, or held by the United States for, a person to satisfy a claim.
            
              Day means calendar day. For purposes of computation, the last day of the period will be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal legal holiday, in which case the next business day will be considered the last day of the period.
            
              Debt or claim means an amount of money, funds, or other property determined by an appropriate official to be owed to the United States from any individual, entity, organization, association, partnership, corporation, or State or local government or subdivision, except another Federal agency.
            
              Debtor means an individual, organization, association, partnership, corporation, or State or local government or subdivision indebted to the Government, or the person or entity with legal responsibility for assuming the debtor's obligation.
            
              Department means the Department of Health and Human Services, and each of its Operating Divisions and regional offices.
            
              Evidence of service means information retained by the Department indicating the nature of the document to which it pertains, the date of mailing of the document, and the address and name of the debtor to whom it is being sent. A copy of the dated and signed written notice of intent to offset provided to the debtor pursuant to this part may be considered evidence of service for purposes of this regulation. Evidence of service may be retained electronically so long as the manner of retention is sufficient for evidentiary purposes.
            
              FMS means the Financial Management Service, a bureau within the Department of the Treasury.
            
            
              IRS means the Internal Revenue Service, a bureau of the Department of the Treasury.
            
              Legally enforceable means that there has been a final agency determination that the debt, in the amount stated, is due and there are no legal bars to collection action.
            
              Operating division means each separate component, within the Department of Health and Human Services, including, but not limited to, the Administration for Children and Families, Administration on Aging, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Food and Drug Administration, the National Institutes of Health, and the Office of the Secretary.
            
              Past-due debt means a debt which the debtor does not pay or otherwise resolve by the date specified in the initial demand for payment, or in an applicable written repayment agreement or other instrument, including a post-delinquency repayment agreement.
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, or the Secretary's designee within any Operating Division or Regional Office.
            
              Taxpayer identifying number means the identifying number described under section 6109 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 6109). For an individual, the taxpayer identifying number is the individual's social security number.
            
              Tax refund offset means withholding or reducing a tax refund payment by an amount necessary to satisfy a debt owed to the United States by the payee(s) of a tax refund payment.
            
              Tax refund payment means any overpayment of Federal taxes to be refunded to the person making the overpayment after the IRS makes the appropriate credits as provided in 26 U.S.C. 6402 for any liabilities for any tax on the part of the person who made the overpayment.
          
          
            § 31.3
            General rule.
            (a) Any past-due, legally enforceable debt of at least $25, or such other minimum amount as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, shall be submitted to FMS for collection by tax refund offset.
            (b) FMS will compare tax refund payment records, as certified by the IRS, with records of debts submitted by the Department under this part. A match will occur when the taxpayer identification number and name of a payment certification record are the same as the taxpayer identifying number and name control of a debtor record. When a match occurs and all other requirements for tax refund offset have been met, FMS will reduce the amount of any tax refund payment payable to a debtor by the amount of any past-due legally enforceable debt. Any amounts not offset will be paid to the payee(s) listed in the payment certification record.
          
          
            § 31.4
            Certification and referral of debt.
            (a) Certification. The Secretary shall certify to FMS that:
            (1) The debt is past-due and legally enforceable in the amount submitted and that the Department will ensure that collections are properly credited to the debt;
            (2) Except in the case of a judgment debt or as otherwise allowed by law, the debt is referred within ten (10) years after the Department's right of action accrues;
            (3) The Department has made reasonable efforts to obtain payment of the debt, and has:
            (i) Submitted the debt to FMS for collection by offset and complied with the administrative offset provision of 31 U.S.C. 3716(a) and related regulations, to the extent that collection by administrative offset is not prohibited by statute;

            (ii) Notified, or made a reasonable attempt to notify, the debtor that the debt is past-due, and unless paid within 60 days of the date of the notice, the debt may be referred to Treasury for tax refund offset. For purposes of this regulation, the Department has made a reasonable attempt to notify the debtor if the agency uses the current address information contained in the Department's records related to the debt. If address validation is desired or necessary, the Department may obtain information from the IRS pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 6103(m)(2)(4) or (5).
            (iii) Given the debtor at least 60 days to present evidence that all or part of the debt is not past-due or not legally enforceable, considered any evidence presented by the debtor, and determined that the debt is past-due and legally enforceable; and
            (iv) Provided the debtor with an opportunity to make a written agreement to repay the debt; and
            (4) The debt is at least $25.
            (b) Referral. (1) The Secretary shall submit past-due, legally enforceable debt information for tax refund offset in the time and manner prescribed by the Department of the Treasury.
            (2) For each debt referred under this part, the Secretary will include the following information:
            (i) The name and taxpayer identifying number, as defined in 26 U.S.C. 6109, of the debtor responsible for the debt;
            (ii) The amount of such past-due and legally enforceable debt;
            (iii) The date on which the debt became past-due; and
            (iv) The designation of the Department referring the debt.
            (c) Correcting and updating referral. (1) After referring a debt under this part, the Secretary shall promptly notify the Department of the Treasury if:
            (i) An error was made with respect to information transmitted to the Department of the Treasury;
            (ii) The Department receives a payment or credits a payment to the account of a debtor referred for tax refund offset; or
            (iii) The debt amount is otherwise incorrect.
            (2) The Department shall provide the certification required under paragraph (a) of this section for any increases to amounts owed.
            (d) Rejection of certification. If the Department of Treasury rejects a certification because it does not comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, upon notification of the rejection and the reason(s) for rejection, the Secretary will resubmit the debt with a corrected certification.
          
          
            § 31.5
            Notice.
            (a) Requirements. If not previously included in the initial demand letter provided under section 30.11, at least 60 days before referring a debt for tax refund offset, the Secretary shall mail, by first class mail to the debtor's last known address, written notice informing the debtor of:
            (1) The nature and amount of the debt;
            (2) The determination that the debt is past-due and legally enforceable, and unless paid within 60 days after the date of the notice, the Secretary intends to enforce collection by referring the debt the Department of the Treasury for tax refund offset; and
            (3) The debtor's rights to:
            (i) Inspect and copy Department records relating to the debt;
            (ii) Enter into written agreement to repay the amount of the debt;
            (iii) Request review and present evidence that all or part of the debt is not past-due or not legally enforceable.
            (b) The Secretary will retain evidence of service indicating the date of mailing of the notice. The notice may be retained electronically so long as the manner of retention is sufficient for evidentiary purposes
          
          
            § 31.6
            Review of Departmental records.
            (a) To inspect or copy Departmental records relating to the debt, the debtor must send a written request to the address designated in the notice described in section 31.5. The request must be received by the Department within 60 days from the date of the notice.
            (b) In response to a timely request as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the designated Department official shall notify the debtor of the location and time when the debtor may inspect and copy such records. If the debtor is unable to personally inspect such records as the result of geographical or other constraints, the Department will arrange to send copies of the records to the debtor.
          
          
            § 31.7
            Review of a determination that a debt is past-due and legally enforceable.
            (a) Requesting a review. (1) If the debtor believes that all or part of the debt is not past-due or not legally enforceable, the debtor may request a review by the Department by sending a written request to the address provided in the notice. The written request must be received by the Department within 60 days from the date of the notice or, if the debtor has requested to inspect the records, within 30 days from the debtor's inspection of the records or the Department's mailing of the records under section 31.6(b), whichever is later.
            (2) The request for review must be signed by the debtor, state the amount disputed, and fully identify and explain the evidence that the debtor believes supports the debtor's position. The debtor must submit with the request any documents that the debtor wishes to be considered, or the debtor must state in the request that additional information will be submitted within the above specified time period.
            (3) Failure to timely request a review will be deemed an admission by the debtor that the debt is past-due and legally enforceable, and will result in a referral of the debt to the Department of the Treasury without further action.
            (b) Review. Upon the timely submission of evidence by the debtor, the Department shall review the dispute and shall consider its records and any documentation and evidence submitted by the debtor. The Department shall make a determination based on the review of the written record, and shall send a written notice of its decision to the debtor. There is no administrative appeal of this decision.
            (c) A debt that previously has been reviewed pursuant to this part, or that has been reduced to a judgment, will not be reconsidered under this part unless the evidence presented by the debtor disputes payments made or events occurring subsequent to the previous review or judgment.
          
        
        
          Pt. 32
          PART 32—ADMINISTRATIVE WAGE GARNISHMENT
          
            Sec.
            32.1
            Purpose and scope.
            32.2
            Definitions.
            32.3
            General rule.
            32.4
            Notice.
            32.5
            Hearing.
            32.6
            Withholding order.
            32.7
            Certification by employer.
            32.8
            Amounts withheld.
            32.9
            Financial hardship.
            32.10
            Refunds.
            32.11
            Ending garnishment.
            32.12
            Right of action.
          
          
            Authority:
            31 U.S.C. 3720D, 5 U.S.C. 552, 553, E.O. 12866, 12988, 13808.
          
          
            Source:
            68 FR 15093, Mar. 28, 2003, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 32.1
            Purpose and scope.
            (a) Purpose. This part prescribes the standards and procedures for the Department to collect money from a debtor's disposable pay by means of administrative wage garnishment to satisfy delinquent non-tax debts owed to the United States.
            (b) Authority. These standards and procedures are authorized under the wage garnishment provisions of the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, codified at 31 U.S.C. 3720D, and the Department of the Treasury Administrative Wage Garnishment Regulations at 31 CFR 285.11.
            (c) Scope. (1) This part applies to all Departmental Operating Divisions and Regional Offices that administer a program that gives rise to a delinquent non-tax debt owed to the United States and to all officers or employees of the Department authorized to collect such debt.
            (2) This part shall apply notwithstanding any provision of State law.
            (3) Nothing in this part precludes the compromise of a debt or the suspension or termination of collection action in accordance with part 30 of this title, or other applicable law or regulation.
            (4) The receipt of payments pursuant to this part does not preclude the Department from pursuing other debt collection remedies, including the offset of Federal payments to satisfy delinquent non-tax debt owed to the United States. The Department may pursue such debt collection remedies separately or in conjunction with administrative wage garnishment.

            (5) This part does not apply to the collection of delinquent non-tax debts owed to the United States from the wages of Federal employees from their Federal employment. Federal pay is subject to the Federal salary offset procedures set forth in 5 U.S.C. 5514 and other applicable laws.
            (6) Nothing in this part requires the Department to duplicate notices or administrative proceedings required by contract or other laws or regulations.
          
          
            § 32.2
            Definitions.
            In this part, unless the context otherwise requires:
            
              Business day means Monday through Friday. For purposes of computation, the last day of the period will be included unless it is a Federal legal holiday, in which case the next business day following the holiday will be considered the last day of the period.
            
              Certificate of service means a certificate signed by an employee of the Department indicating the nature of the document to which it pertains, the date of mailing of the document, and to whom it is being sent.
            
              Day means calendar day. For purposes of computation, the last day of the period will be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal legal holiday, in which case the next business day will be considered the last day of the period.
            
              Debt or claim means an amount of money, funds, or property that has been determined by the Secretary to be owed to the United States by an individual, including debt administered by a third party as an agent of the Federal Government. A debt or claim includes, but is not limited to: amounts owed on account of loans made, insured or guaranteed by the Federal Government, including any deficiency or difference between the price obtained by the Federal Government upon selling the property and the amount owed to the Federal Government; overpayments to program beneficiaries; any amount the Federal Government is authorized by statute to collect for the benefit of any person; the unpaid share of any non-Federal partner in a program involving a Federal payment, including a matching or cost-sharing payment of the non-Federal partner; any fine, civil penalty or assessment; and other amounts or money or property owed to the Federal Government.
            
              Debtor means an individual who owes a delinquent non-tax debt to the United States.
            
              Delinquent debt means any non-tax debt that has not been paid by the date specified in the Department's initial written demand for payment, or applicable payment agreement or instrument, unless other satisfactory payment arrangements have been made. For purposes of this part, “delinquent” and “overdue” have the same meaning.
            
              Department means the United States Department of I-Iealth and 1—luman Services, including each of its Operating Divisions and Regional Offices.
            
              Disposable pay means that part of the debtor's compensation (including, but not limited to, salary, bonuses, commissions, and vacation pay) from an employer remaining after the deduction of health insurance premiums and any amounts required by law to be withheld. For purposes of this part, “amounts required by law to be withheld” include amounts for deductions such as social security taxes and withholding taxes, but do not include any amount withheld pursuant to a court order.
            
              Employer means a person or entity that employs the services of others and that pays their wages or salaries. The term employer includes, but is not limited to, State and local Governments, but does not include an agency of the Federal Government as defined by 31 CFR 285.11(c).
            
              Garnishment means the process of withholding amounts from an employee's disposable pay and paying those amounts to a creditor in satisfaction of a withholding order.
            
              Hearing means a review of the documentary evidence concerning the existence or amount of a debt, or the terms of a repayment schedule, provided such repayment schedule is established other than by a written agreement entered into pursuant to this part. If the hearing official determines that the issues in dispute cannot be resolved solely by review of the written record, such as when the validity of the debt turns on the issue of credibility or veracity, an oral hearing may be provided.
            
              Hearing official means any qualified individual, as determined by the Secretary, including a Departmental Appeals Board administrative law judge.
            
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or the Secretary's designee within the Department.
            
              Withholding order for purposes of this part means “Wage Garnishment Order (SF329B).” Also for purposes of this part, the terms “wage garnishment order” and “garnishment order” have the same meaning as “withholding order.”
          
          
            § 32.3
            General rule.

            (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, whenever a delinquent debt is owed by an individual, the Secretary, or another federal agency collecting a debt on the Department's behalf (See 45 CFR part 30), may initiate proceedings administratively to garnish the wages of the delinquent debtor.
            (b) The Secretary may not garnish the wages of a debtor who the Secretary knows has been involuntarily separated from employment until the debtor has been re-employed continuously for at least 12 months. The debtor has the burden of informing the Secretary of the circumstances surrounding an involuntary separation from employment.
          
          
            § 32.4
            Notice.
            (a) Notice requirements. At least 30 days before the initiation of garnishment proceedings, the Secretary shall mail, by first class mail, to the debtor's last known address a written notice informing the debtor of:
            (1) The nature and amount of the debt;
            (2) The intention of the Secretary to initiate proceedings to collect the debt through deductions from pay until the debt and all accumulated interest, penalties, and administrative costs are paid in full;
            (3) The debtor's right—
            (i) To inspect and copy Department records related to the debt;
            (ii) To enter into a written repayment agreement with the Department under terms agreeable to the Department;
            (iii) To a hearing, in accordance with § 32.5, concerning the existence or the amount of the debt or the terms of the proposed repayment schedule under the garnishment order, except that the debtor is not entitled to a hearing concerning the proposed repayment schedule if the terms were established by written agreement pursuant to paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section; and
            (4) The time frames within which the debtor may exercise his or her rights.
            (b) The Secretary will keep a copy of the dated notice. The notice may be retained electronically so long as the manner of retention is sufficient for evidentiary purposes.
          
          
            § 32.5
            Hearing.
            (a) In general. Upon timely written request of the debtor, the Secretary shall provide a hearing, which at the Department's option may be oral or written, concerning the existence or amount of the debt, or the terms of a repayment schedule established other than by written agreement under § 32.4(a)(3)(ii).
            (b) Request for hearing. (1) The request for a hearing must be signed by the debtor, state each issue being disputed, and identify and explain with reasonable specificity all facts and evidence that the debtor believes supports the debtor's position. Supporting documentation identified by the debtor should be attached to the request.
            (2) Effect of timely request. Subject to paragraph (j) of this section, if the debtor's written request is received on or before the 15th business day following the mailing of the written notice required under this part, a withholding order shall not be issued under § 32.6 until the debtor has been provided the requested hearing and a decision in accordance with paragraphs (g) and (h) of this section has been rendered.

            (3) Failure to timely request a hearing. If the debtor's written request is received after the 15th business day following the mailing of the written notice required under this part, the Secretary shall provide a hearing to the debtor. However, the Secretary shall not delay the issuance of a withholding order unless the Secretary determines that the delay in submitting such request was caused by factors beyond the control of the debtor, or the Secretary receives information that the Secretary determines justifies a delay or cancellation of the withholding order.
            
            (c) Oral hearing. (1) For purposes of this section, a debtor shall be provided a reasonable opportunity for an oral hearing when the hearing official determines that the issues in dispute cannot be resolved by review of the documentary evidence, such as when the validity of the claim turns on the issue of credibility or veracity.
            (2) If the hearing official determines an oral hearing is appropriate, the hearing official will establish the date, time and location of the hearing. At the debtor's option, the oral hearing may be conducted in person or by telephone conference. The hearing official will notify the debtor of the date, time, and in the case of an in-person hearing, the location of the hearing. All travel expenses incurred by the debtor in connection with an in-person hearing will be borne by the debtor.
            (d) Paper hearing. (1) If the hearing official determines an oral hearing is not required by this section, the hearing official shall afford the debtor a paper hearing, that is, the issues in dispute will be decided based upon a review of the written record.
            (2) The hearing official shall notify the debtor of the deadline for the submission of additional evidence if necessary for a review of the record.
            (e) Burden of proof. (1) The Secretary has the initial burden of proving the existence or amount of the debt.
            (2) Thereafter, if the debtor disputes the existence or amount of the debt, the debtor must present by a preponderance of the evidence that no debt exists or that the amount is incorrect. When challenging the terms of a repayment schedule, the debtor must establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the terms of the repayment schedule are unlawful, would cause financial hardship to the debtor, or that collection of the debt may not be pursued due to operation of law.
            (f) Record. The hearing official shall maintain a summary record of any hearing provided under this part. A hearing is not required to be a formal evidentiary-type hearing, but witnesses who testify in an oral hearing must do so under oath or affirmation.
            (g) Date of decision. (1) The hearing official shall issue a written decision, as soon as practicable, but no later than sixty (60) days after the date on which the request for the hearing was received by the Department.
            (2) If the hearing official is unable to provide the debtor with a hearing and render a decision within 60 days after the receipt of the request for such hearing:
            (i) A withholding order may not be issued until the hearing is held and a decision is rendered; or
            (ii) A withholding order previously issued to the debtor's employer must be suspended beginning on the 61st day after the receipt of the hearing request and continuing until a hearing is held and a decision is rendered.
            (h) Content of decision. The written decision shall include:
            (1) A summary of the facts presented;
            (2) The hearing official's findings, analysis, and conclusions; and
            (3) The terms of any repayment schedule, if applicable.
            (i) Final agency action. The hearing official's decision will be the final agency action for the purposes of judicial review under the Administrative Procedure Act. 5 U.S.C. 701 et seq.
            
            (j) Failure to appear. In the absence of good cause shown, a debtor who fails to appear at a hearing will be deemed as not having timely filed a request for a hearing.
          
          
            § 32.6
            Withholding order.

            (a) Unless the Secretary receives information that the Secretary determines justifies a delay or cancellation of a withholding order, the Secretary shall send, by first class mail, an SF-329A “Letter to Employer & Important Notice to Employer,” an SF-329B “Wage Garnishment Order,” an SF-329C “Wage Garnishment Worksheet,” and an SF-329D “Employer Certification,” to the debtor's employer within 30 days after the debtor fails to make a timely request for a hearing, i.e., within 15 business days after mailing the notice required under this part, or, if the timely request for a hearing is made by the debtor, within 30 days after a final decision is made by the Secretary to proceed with garnishment.

            (b) The Secretary shall keep a copy of the dated letter to the employer and a copy of the wage garnishment order. The certificate of service may be retained electronically so long as the manner of retention is sufficient for evidentiary purposes.
          
          
            § 32.7
            Certification by employer.
            The employer must complete and return the SF-329D, “Employer Certification” to the Department within 20 days of receipt.
          
          
            § 32.8
            Amounts withheld.
            (a) After receipt of a withholding order issued under this part, the employer shall deduct from all disposable pay paid to the debtor during each pay period the amount of garnishment described in paragraph (b) of this section. The employer may use the SF-329C “Wage Garnishment Worksheet” to calculate the amount to be deducted from the debtor's disposable pay.
            (b) Subject to paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section, the amount of garnishment shall be the lesser of:
            (1) The amount indicated on the garnishment order up to 15% of the debtor's disposable pay; or

            (2) The amount set forth in 15 U.S.C. 1673(a)(2) (Maximum allowable garnishment). The amount set forth at 15 U.S.C. 1673(a)(2) is the amount by which a debtor's disposable pay exceeds an amount equivalent to thirty times the minimum wage. See 29 CFR 870.10.
            (c)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, when a debtor's pay is subject to multiple withholding orders, unless otherwise provided by Federal law, withholding orders issued pursuant to this part shall have priority over other withholding orders that are served later in time.
            (2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, withholding orders for family support shall have priority over withholding orders issued under this part.
            (3) If amounts are being withheld from a debtor's pay pursuant to a withholding order served on an employer before a withholding order issued pursuant to this part, or if a withholding order for family support is served on an employer at any time, the amounts withheld pursuant to a withholding order issued under this part shall be the lesser of:
            (i) The amount calculated under paragraph (b) of this section, or
            (ii) An amount equal to 25% of the debtor's disposable pay less the amount(s) withheld under the withholding order(s) with priority.
            (d) If the debtor owes more than one debt to the Department, the Secretary may issue multiple withholding orders provided that the total amount garnished from the debtor's pay for such orders does not exceed the amount set forth in paragraph (b) of this section.
            (e) An amount greater than that set forth in paragraphs (b) or (c) of this section may be withheld upon the written consent of the debtor.
            (f) The employer shall promptly pay to the Department all amounts withheld in accordance with the withholding order issued pursuant to this part.
            (g) The employer is not required to vary its normal pay and disbursement cycles in order to comply with the withholding order.
            (h) Any assignment or allotment by an employee shall be void to the extent it interferes with or prohibits execution of the withholding order issued under this part, except for any assignment or allotment made pursuant to a family support judgment or order.
            (i) The employer shall withhold the appropriate amount from the debtor's wages for each pay period until the employer receives notification from the Secretary to discontinue wage withholding.
            (j) The withholding order, SF-329B “Wage Garnishment Order,” sent to the employer under § 32.6, requires the employer to commence wage withholding on the first pay day after the employer receives the order. However, if the first pay day is within 10 days after receipt of the order, the employer may begin deductions on the second pay day.
            (k) An employer may not discharge, refuse to employ, or take disciplinary action against any debtor as a result of the issuance of a withholding order under this part.
            [68 FR 15093, Mar. 28, 2003; 68 FR 24052, May 6, 2003]
          
          
            § 32.9
            Financial hardship.

            (a) A debtor whose wages are subject to a withholding order may, at any time, request a review by the Department of the amount garnished, based on materially changed circumstances such as disability, divorce, or catastrophic illness which result in financial hardship.
            (b) A debtor requesting such a review under paragraph (a) of this section shall submit the basis for claiming that the current amount of garnishment results in a financial hardship to the debtor, along with supporting documentation. The Secretary shall consider any information submitted in accordance with this part.
            (c) If a financial hardship is found, the Secretary shall downwardly adjust, by an amount and for a period of time established by the Secretary, the amount garnished to reflect the debtor's financial condition. The Secretary will notify the employer of any adjustments to the amount to be withheld.
          
          
            § 32.10
            Refunds.
            (a) If the hearing official, pursuant to a hearing under this part, determines that a debt is not legally due and owing to the United States, the Secretary shall promptly refund any amount collected by means of administrative wage garnishment.
            (b) Unless required by Federal law or contract, refunds under this part shall not bear interest.
          
          
            § 32.11
            Ending garnishment.
            (a) Once the Department has fully recovered the amounts owed by the debtor, including interest, penalties, and administrative costs assessed pursuant to and in accordance with part 30 of this title, the Secretary shall send the debtor's employer notification to discontinue wage withholding.
            (b) At least annually, the Secretary shall review its debtors' accounts to ensure that garnishment has been terminated for accounts that have been paid in full.
          
          
            § 32.12
            Right of action.
            (a) The employer of a debtor subject to wage withholding pursuant to this part shall pay to the Department as directed in a withholding order issued under this part.
            (b) The Secretary may bring suit against an employer for any amount that the employer fails to withhold from wages owed and payable to a debtor in accordance with §§ 32.6 and 32.8, plus attorney's fees, costs, and, if applicable, punitive damages.
            (c) A suit under this section may not be filed before the termination of the collection action involving a particular debtor, unless earlier filing is necessary to avoid expiration of any applicable statute of limitations period. For purposes of this section, “termination of collection action” occurs when the Secretary has terminated collection action in accordance with part 30 of this title, or other applicable law or regulation.
            (d) Notwithstanding deemed to occur if from a debtor whose paragraph (c) of this section, termination of the collection action will be a period of one (1) year the Department does not receive any payments wages were subject to a garnishment order issued under this part.
          
        
        
          Pt. 33
          PART 33—SALARY OFFSET
          
            Sec.
            33.1
            Purpose, authority, and scope.
            33.2
            Definitions.
            33.3
            General rule.
            33.4
            Notice requirements before offset.
            33.5
            Review of department records relating to the debt.
            33.6
            Hearings.
            33.7
            Obtaining the services of a hearing official.
            33.8
            Voluntary repayment agreement in lieu of salary offset.
            33.9
            Special review.
            33.10
            Procedures for salary offset.
            33.11
            Salary offset when the Department is the creditor agency but not the paying agency.
            33.12
            Salary offset when the Department is the paying agency but not the creditor agency.
            33.13
            Interest, penalties, and administrative costs.
            33.14
            Non-waiver of rights.
            33.15
            Refunds.
            33.16
            Additional administrative collection.
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 5514; 5 CFR Part 550, Subpart K.
          
          
            Source:
            72 FR 10421, Mar. 8, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 33.1
            Purpose, authority, and scope.
            (a) Purpose. This part prescribes the Department's standards and procedures for the collection of debts owed by Federal employees to the United States through involuntary salary offset.
            (b) Authority. 5 U.S.C. 5514; 5 CFR part 550, subpart K.
            (c) Scope. (1) This part applies to internal and Government-wide collections of debts owed by Federal employees by administrative offset from the current pay account of the debtor without his or her consent.
            (2) The procedures contained in this part do not apply to any case where an employee consents to collection through deduction(s) from the employee's pay account, or to debts arising under the Internal Revenue Code or the tariff laws of the United States, or where another statute explicitly provides for, or prohibits, collection of a debt by salary offset (e.g., travel advances in 5 U.S.C. 5705 and employee training expenses in 5 U.S.C. 4108).
            (3) This part does not preclude an employee from requesting waiver of an erroneous payment under 5 U.S.C. 5584, 10 U.S.C. 2774, or 32 U.S.C. 716, or in any way questioning the amount or validity of a debt, in the manner prescribed by the Secretary. Similarly, this part does not preclude an employee from requesting waiver of the collection of a debt under any other applicable statutory authority.
            (4) Nothing in this part precludes the compromise of the debt, or the suspension or termination of collection actions, in accordance with part 30 of this title.
          
          
            § 33.2
            Definitions.
            In this part—
            
              Administrative offset means withholding funds payable by the United States to, or held by the United States for, a person to satisfy a debt owed by the payee.
            
              Agency means an executive department or agency; a military department; the United States Postal Service; the Postal Rate Commission; the United States Senate; the United States House of Representatives; and court, court administrative office, or instrumentality in the judicial or legislative branches of the Government; or a Government Corporation.
            
              Creditor agency means the agency to which the debt is owed, including a debt collection center when acting on behalf of a creditor agency in matters pertaining to the collection of a debt.
            
              Day means calendar day. For purposes of computation, the last day of the period will be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday, in which case the next business day will be considered the last day of the period.
            
              Debt means an amount determined by an appropriate official to be owed to the United States from sources which include loans insured or guaranteed by the United States and all other amounts due the United States from fees, leases, rents, royalties, services, sales of real or personal property, overpayments, penalties, damages, interest, fines and forfeitures (except those arising under the Uniform Code of Military Justice), and all other similar sources.
            
              Debt collection center means the Department of the Treasury or other Government agency or division designated by the Secretary of the Treasury with authority to collect debts on behalf of creditor agencies in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3711(g).
            
              Debtor means a Federal employee who owes a debt to the United States.
            
              Delinquent debt means a debt which the debtor does not pay or otherwise resolve by the date specified in the initial demand for payment, or in an applicable written repayment agreement or other instrument, including a post-delinquency repayment agreement.
            
              Department means the Department of Health and Human Services, its Staff Divisions, Operating Divisions, and Regional Offices.
            
              Disposable pay means that part of the debtor's current basic, special, incentive, retired, and retainer pay, or other authorized pay, remaining after deduction of amounts required by law to be withheld. For purposes of calculating disposable pay, legally required deductions that must be applied first include: Tax levies pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code (title 26, United States Code); properly withheld taxes, FICA, Medicare; health and life insurance premiums; and retirement contributions. Amounts deducted under garnishment orders, including child support garnishment orders, are not legally required deductions for calculating disposable pay.
            
              Employee means any individual currently employed by an agency, as defined in this section, including seasonal and temporary employees and current members of the Armed Forces or a Reserve of the Armed Forces (Reserves).
            
              Evidence of service means information retained by the Department indicating the nature of the document to which it pertains, the date of mailing the document, and the address and name of the debtor to whom it is being sent. A copy of the dated and signed written notice of intent to offset provided to the debtor pursuant to this part may be considered evidence of service for purposes of this part. Evidence of service may be retained electronically so long as the manner of retention is sufficient for evidentiary purposes.
            
              Hearing means a review of the documentary evidence to confirm the existence or amount of a debt or the terms of a repayment schedule. If the Secretary determines that the issues in dispute cannot be resolved by such a review, such as when the validity of the claim turns on the issue of credibility or veracity, the Secretary may provide an oral hearing.
            
              Hearing official means a Departmental Appeals Board administrative law judge or appropriate alternate as outlined in § 33.7(a)(2).
            
              Paying agency means the agency employing the individual and authorizing the payment of his or her current pay.
            
              Salary offset means an administrative offset to collect a debt under 5 U.S.C. 5514 owed by a federal employee through deductions at one or more officially established pay intervals from the current pay account of the employee without his or her consent.
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or the Secretary's designee within any Staff Division, Operating Division or Regional Office.
            
              Waiver means the cancellation, remission, forgiveness, or non-recovery of a debt owed by an employee to this Department or another agency as required or permitted by 5 U.S.C. 5584, 8346(b), 10 U.S.C. 2774, 32 U.S.C. 716, or any other law.
          
          
            § 33.3
            General rule.
            (a) Whenever a delinquent debt is owed to the Department by an employee, the Secretary may, subject to paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section, involuntarily offset the amount of the debt from the employee's disposable pay.
            (b) Unless provided by another statute pertaining to a particular type of debt (e.g., 42 U.S.C. 292r, Health professionals education, 42 U.S.C. 297b, Nurse education), the Department may not initiate salary offset to collect a debt more than 10 years after the Government's right to collect the debt first accrued, unless facts material to the Government's right to collect the debt were not known and could not reasonably have been known by the official or officials of the Government who were charged with the responsibility to discover and collect such debts.
            (c) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, prior to initiating collection through salary offset under this part, the Secretary must first provide the employee with the following:
            (1) Written notice of intent to offset as described in § 33.4; and
            (2) An opportunity to petition for a hearing, and, if a hearing is provided, to receive a written decision from the hearing official within 60 days on the following issues:
            (i) The determination of the Department concerning the existence or amount of the debt; and
            (ii) The repayment schedule, unless it was established by written agreement between the employee and Department.
            (d) The provisions of paragraph (c) of this section do not apply to:
            (1) Any adjustment to pay arising out of an employee's election of coverage or a change in coverage under a federal benefits program requiring periodic deduction from pay, if the amount to be recovered was accumulated over four pay periods or less;

            (2) A routine intra-agency adjustment of pay that is made to correct an overpayment of pay attributable to clerical or administrative errors or delays in processing pay documents, if the overpayment occurred within the four pay periods preceding the adjustment and, at the time of such adjustment, or as soon thereafter as practical, the individual is provided written notice of the nature and the amount of the adjustment and point of contact for contesting such adjustment; or
            (3) Any adjustment to collect a debt amounting to $50 or less, if, at the time of such adjustment, or as soon thereafter as practical, the individual is provided written notice of the nature and the amount of the adjustment and a point of contact for contesting such adjustment.
          
          
            § 33.4
            Notice requirements before offset.
            (a) At least 30 days before the initiation of salary offset under this part, the Secretary shall mail, by first class mail, to the employee's last known address, a written notice informing the debtor of the following:
            (1) The Secretary has reviewed the records relating to the debt and has determined that a debt is owed, the amount of the debt, and the facts giving rise to the debt;
            (2) The Secretary's intention to collect the debt by means of deduction from the employee's current disposable pay account until the debt and all accumulated interest, penalties, and administrative costs are paid in full;
            (3) The amount, stated either as a fixed dollar amount or as a percentage of pay not to exceed 15 percent of disposable pay, the frequency, the commencement date, and the duration of the intended deductions;
            (4) An explanation of the Department's policies concerning the assessment of interest, penalties, and administrative costs, stating that such assessments must be made unless waived in accordance with 31 CFR 901.9 and § 30.18 of this title;
            (5) The employee's right to inspect and copy all records of the Department pertaining to the debt or, if the employee or the employee's representative cannot personally inspect the records, to request and receive copies of such records;
            (6) If not previously provided, the opportunity to establish a schedule for the voluntary repayment of the debt through offset, or to enter into an agreement to establish a schedule for repayment of the debt in lieu of offset, provided the agreement is in writing, signed by both the employee and the Department, and documented in the Department's files;
            (7) The right to a hearing conducted by an impartial hearing official with respect to the existence and amount of the debt, or the repayment schedule, so long as a petition is filed by the employee as prescribed in § 33.6;
            (8) Time limitations and other procedures or conditions for inspecting Department records pertaining to the debt, establishing an alternative repayment agreement, and requesting a hearing;
            (9) The name, address, and telephone number of the person or office within the Department who may be contacted concerning the procedures for inspecting Department records, establishing an alternative repayment agreement, and requesting a hearing;
            (10) The name and address of the office within the Department to which the petition for a hearing should be sent, which generally will be the Operating Division or Staff Division responsible for collecting the debt;
            (11) A timely and properly filed petition for a hearing will stay the commencement of the collection proceeding;
            (12) The Department will initiate action to effect salary offset not less than 30 days from the date of mailing the notice of intent, unless the employee properly files a timely petition for a hearing,
            (13) A final decision on a hearing, if one is requested, will be issued at the earliest practical date, but not later than 60 days after the filing of the petition requesting the hearing unless the employee requests and the hearing official grants a delay in the proceeding;
            (14) Knowingly false or frivolous statements, representations or evidence may subject the employee to:
            (i) Disciplinary procedures appropriate under chapter 75 of title 5, United States Code; part 752 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations; or any other applicable statutes or regulations;

            (ii) Penalties under the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. 3729-3731, or under any other applicable statutory authority; and
            (iii) Criminal penalties under 18 U.S.C. 286, 287, 1001, and 1002, or under any other applicable statutory authority;
            (15) Any other rights and remedies available to the employee under statutes or regulations governing the program for which the collection is being made;
            (16) Unless there are applicable contractual or statutory provisions to the contrary, amounts paid on or deducted for the debt, which are later waived or found not owed to the United States, will be promptly refunded to the employee; and
            (17) Proceedings with respect to such debt are governed by 5 U.S.C. 5514.
            (b) The Secretary will retain evidence of service indicating the date of mailing of the notice.
          
          
            § 33.5
            Review of department records relating to the debt.
            (a) To inspect or copy Department records relating to the debt, the employee must send a written request to the Department official or office designated in the notice of intent to offset stating his or her intention. The written request must be received by the Department within 15 days from the employee's receipt of the notice.
            (b) In response to a timely request as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the designated Department official shall notify the employee of the location and time when the employee may inspect and copy such records. If the employee or employee's representative is unable to personally inspect such records as the result of geographical or other constraints, the Department shall arrange to send copies of such records to the employee.
          
          
            § 33.6
            Hearings.
            (a) Petitions for hearing. (1) To request a hearing concerning the existence or amount of the debt or the offset schedule established by the Department, the employee must send a written petition to the office designated in the notice of intent to offset, see § 33.4(a)(10), within 15 days of receipt of the notice.
            (2) The petition must:
            (i) Be signed by the employee;
            (ii) Fully identify and explain with reasonable specificity all the facts, evidence, and witnesses, if any, that the employee believes support his or her position; and
            (iii) Specify whether an oral or paper hearing is requested. If an oral hearing is requested, the request should explain why the matter cannot be resolved by review of the documentary evidence alone.
            (3) The timely filing of a petition for hearing shall stay any further collection proceedings.
            (b) Failure to timely request. (1) If the petition for hearing is filed after the 15-day period provided for in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the Secretary may grant the request if the employee can establish that the delay was the result of circumstances beyond the employee's control, or that the employee failed to receive actual notice of the filing deadline.
            (2) An employee waives the right to a hearing, and will have his or her disposable pay offset in accordance with the offset schedule established by the Department, if the employee:
            (i) Fails to file a timely request for a hearing, unless such failure is excused; or
            (ii) Fails to appear at an oral hearing, of which the employee was notified, unless the hearing official determines that the failure to appear was due to circumstances beyond the employee's control.
            (c) Form of hearings—(1) General. After the employee requests a hearing, the hearing official shall notify the employee of the form of the hearing to be provided. If the hearing will be oral, the notice shall set forth the date, time, and location of the hearing. If the hearing will be a review of the written record, the employee shall be notified that he or she should submit evidence and arguments in writing to the hearing official by a specified date, after which the record shall be closed. The date specified shall give the employee reasonable time to submit documentation.
            
            (2) Oral hearing. An employee who requests an oral hearing shall be provided an oral hearing if the hearing official determines that the matter cannot be resolved by review of documentary evidence alone because an issue of credibility or veracity is involved. Where an oral hearing is appropriate, the hearing is not an adversarial adjudication and need not take the form of an evidentiary hearing, i.e., the rules of evidence need not apply. Oral hearings may take the form of, but are not limited to:
            
            (i) Informal conferences with the hearing official in which the employee and agency representative will be given full opportunity to present evidence, witnesses, and arguments;
            (ii) Informal meetings in which the hearing official interviews the employee; or
            (iii) Formal written submissions with an opportunity for oral presentations.
            (3) Paper hearing. If the hearing official determines that an oral hearing is not necessary, the hearing official will make the determination based upon a review of the available written record.
            (4) Record. The hearing official shall maintain a summary record of any hearing conducted under this part. Witnesses who testify in oral hearings will do so under oath or affirmation.
            (d) Written decision. (1) Date of decision. The hearing officer shall issue a written opinion stating his or her decision, based upon documentary evidence and information developed at the hearing, as soon as practicable after the hearing, but not later than sixty (60) days after the date on which the hearing petition was received by the creditor agency, unless the employee requested a delay in the proceedings, in which case the 60-day decision period shall be extended by the number of days by which the hearing was postponed. The recipient of an employee's request for a hearing must forward the request expeditiously to the Departmental Appeals Board so as to not jeopardize the Boards's ability to issue a decision within this 60-day period.
            (2) Content of decision. The written decision shall include:
            (i) A statement of the facts presented to support the origin, nature, and amount of the debt;
            (ii) The hearing official's findings, analysis, and conclusions, including a determination whether the employee's petition for hearing was baseless and resulted from an intent to delay creditor agency collection activity; and
            (iii) The terms of any repayment schedule, if applicable.
            (e) Failure to appear. In the absence of good cause shown, an employee who fails to appear at a hearing shall be deemed, for the purpose of this part, to admit the existence and amount of the debt as described in the notice of intent. If the representative of the creditor agency fails to appear, the hearing official shall proceed with the hearing as scheduled and make a determination based upon oral testimony presented and the documentary evidence submitted by both parties. With the agreement of both parties, the hearing official shall schedule a new hearing date, and both parties shall be given reasonable notice of the time and place of the new hearing.
          
          
            § 33.7
            Obtaining the services of a hearing official.
            (a)(1) When the Department is the creditor agency, the office designated in § 33.4(a)(10) shall schedule a hearing, if one is requested by an employee, before a hearing official.
            (2) When the Department cannot provide a prompt and appropriate hearing before an administrative law judge or a hearing official furnished pursuant to another lawful arrangement, the office designated in § 33.4(a)(10) may:
            (i) When the debtor is not an employee of the Department, contact an agent of the employee's paying agency designated in 5 CFR part 581, appendix A, to arrange for a hearing official; or
            (ii) When the debtor is an employee of the Department, contact an agent of any agency designated in 5 CFR part 581, appendix A, to arrange for a hearing official.

            (b)(1) When another agency is the creditor agency, it is the responsibility of that agency to arrange for a hearing if one is requested. The Department will provide a hearing official upon the request of a creditor agency when the debtor is employed by the Department and the creditor agency cannot provide a prompt and appropriate hearing before a hearing official furnished pursuant to another lawful arrangement.
            (2) Services rendered to a creditor agency under paragraph (b)(1) of this section will be provided on a fully reimbursable basis pursuant to the Economy Act of 1932, as amended, 31 U.S.C. 1535.
            (c) The determination of a hearing official designated under this section is considered to be an official certification regarding the existence and amount of the debt for purposes of executing salary offset under 5 U.S.C. 5514 and this part. A creditor agency may make a certification to the Secretary of the Treasury under 5 CFR 550.1108 or a paying agency under 5 CFR 550.1109 regarding the existence and amount of the debt based on the certification of a hearing official. If a hearing official determines that a debt may not be collected via salary offset, but the creditor agency finds that the debt is still valid, the creditor agency may still seek collection of the debt through other means, such as offset of other Federal payments or litigation.
          
          
            § 33.8
            Voluntary repayment agreement in lieu of salary offset.
            (a)(1) In response to the notice of intent to offset, the employee may propose to establish an alternative schedule for the voluntary repayment of the debt by submitting a written request to the Department official designated in the notice of intent to offset. An employee who wishes to repay the debt without salary offset shall also submit a proposed written repayment agreement. The proposal shall admit the existence of the debt, and the agreement must be in such form that it is legally enforceable. The agreement must:
            (i) Be in writing;
            (ii) Be signed by both the employee and the Department;
            (iii) Specify all the terms of the arrangement for payment; and
            (iv) Contain a provision accelerating the debt in the event of default by the employee, but such an increase may not result in a deduction that exceeds 15 percent of the employee's disposable pay unless the employee has agreed in writing to deduction of a greater amount.
            (2) Any proposal under paragraph (a)(1) of this section must be received by the Department within 30 days of the date of the notice of intent to offset.
            (b) In response to a timely request as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the designated Department official shall notify the employee whether the proposed repayment schedule is acceptable. It is within the Secretary's discretion to accept a proposed alternative repayment schedule, and to set the necessary terms of a voluntary repayment agreement.
            (c) No voluntary repayment agreement will be binding on the Secretary unless it is in writing and signed by both the Secretary and the employee.
          
          
            § 33.9
            Special review.
            (a) A Department employee subject to salary offset or a voluntary repayment agreement may, at any time, request a special review by the Secretary of the amount of the salary offset or voluntary repayment installments, based on materially changed circumstances, such as, but not limited to, catastrophic illness, divorce, death, or disability.
            (b)(1) In determining whether an offset would prevent the employee from meeting essential subsistence expenses, e.g., food, housing, clothing, transportation, and medical care, the employee shall submit a detailed statement and supporting documents for the employee, his or her spouse, and dependents indicating:
            (i) Income from all sources;
            (ii) Assets and liabilities;
            (iii) Number of dependents;
            (iv) Food, housing, clothing, transportation, and medical expenses; and
            (v) Exceptional and unusual expenses, if any.
            (2) When requesting a special review under this section, the employee shall file an alternative proposed offset or payment schedule and a statement, with supporting documents as described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, stating why the current salary offset or payments result in an extreme financial hardship to the employee.

            (c)(1) The Secretary shall evaluate the statement and supporting documents, and determine whether the original offset or repayment schedule imposes extreme financial hardship on the employee.
            (2) Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the request and supporting documents, the Secretary shall notify the employee in writing of such determination, including, if appropriate, a revised offset or repayment schedule.
            (d) If the special review results in a revised offset or repayment schedule, the Secretary shall provide a new certification to the paying agency.
          
          
            § 33.10
            Procedures for salary offset.
            (a) Method and source of deductions. Unless the employee and the Secretary have agreed to an alternative repayment arrangement under § 33.8, a debt shall be collected in lump sum or by installment deductions at officially established pay intervals from an employee's current pay account.
            (b) Limitation on amount of deduction. Ordinarily, the size of installment deductions must bear a reasonable relationship to the size of the debt and the employee's ability to pay. However, the amount deducted for any pay period must not exceed 15 percent of the disposable pay from which the deduction is made, unless the employee has agreed in writing to the deduction of a greater amount, as outlined in § 33.8.
            (c) Duration of deductions. (1) Lump sum. If the amount of the debt is equal to or less than 15 percent of the employee's disposable pay for an officially established pay interval, the debt generally will be collected in one lump-sum deduction.
            (2) If the employee is deemed financially unable to pay in one lump-sum or the amount of the debt exceeds 15 percent of the employee's disposable pay for an officially established pay interval, the debt shall be collected in installments. Except as provided in paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section, installment deductions must be made over a period not greater than the anticipated period of active duty or employment.
            (d) When deductions may begin. (1) Deductions will begin on the date stated in the notice of intent, unless an alternative repayment agreement under § 33.8 has been accepted or the employee has filed a timely request for a hearing.
            (2) If the employee files a timely petition for hearing as provided in § 33.6, deductions will begin after the hearing official has provided the employee with a hearing and a final written decision has been rendered in favor of the Department.
            (e) Liquidation from final check. If an employee retires, resigns, or the period of employment ends before collection of the debt is completed, the remainder of the debt will be offset under 31 U.S.C. 3716 from subsequent payments of any nature (e.g., final salary payment or lump-sum leave) due the employee from the paying agency as of the date of separation.
            (f) Recovery from other payments due a separated employee. If the debt cannot be satisfied by offset from any final payment due the employee on the date of separation, the Secretary will liquidate the debt, where appropriate, by administrative offset under 31 U.S.C. 3716 from later payments of any kind due the former employee (e.g., lump sum leave payment).
          
          
            § 33.11
            Salary offset when the Department is the creditor agency but not the paying agency.
            (a) Centralized administrative offset. (1) Under 31 U.S.C. 3716, the Department shall notify the Secretary of the Treasury of all past-due, legally enforceable debts which are 180 days delinquent for purposes of collection by centralized administrative offset. This includes debts which the Department seeks to recover from the pay account of an employee of another agency via salary offset. The Secretary of the Treasury and other Federal disbursing officials will match payments, including Federal salary payments, against these debts. Where a match occurs, and all the requirements for offset have been met, the payments will be offset to collect the debt.

            (2) Prior to offset of the pay account of an employee, the Department must comply with the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 5514; 5 CFR part 550, subpart K, and this part. Specific procedures for notifying the Secretary of the Treasury of a debt for purposes of collection by administrative offset, including salary offset, are contained in 31 CFR parts 285 and 901 and part 30 of this title.
            (b) Non-centralized administrative offset. When salary offset through centralized administrative offset under paragraph (a) of this section is not possible, the Department may attempt to collect a debt through non-centralized administrative offset in accordance with part 30 of this title.
            (1) Format of the request. Upon completion of the procedures established in this part and pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5514, the Department shall:
            (i) Certify in writing to the paying agency that the employee owes the debt, the amount and basis of the debt, the date on which payment(s) is due, the date the Government's right to collect the debt first accrued, and that the Departmental regulations implementing 5 U.S.C. 5514 have been approved by the Office of Personnel Management.
            (ii) If the collection is to be made in installments, advise the paying agency of the number of installments to be collected, the amount or percentage of disposable pay to be collected in each installment, and the commencement date of the installments, if a date other than the next officially established pay period is required.
            (iii) Unless the employee has consented in writing to the salary deductions or signed a statement acknowledging receipt of the required procedures and this written consent or statement is forwarded to the paying agency, advise the paying agency of the action(s) taken under 5 U.S.C. 5514 and this part, and give the date(s) the action(s) was taken.
            (2) Requesting recovery from current paying agency. (i) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the Department shall submit a certified debt claim containing the information specified in paragraph (a) of this section, and an installment agreement, or other instruction on the payment schedule, if applicable, to the employee's paying agency.
            (ii) If the employee is in the process of separating from the Federal Government, the Department shall submit the certified debt claim to the employee's paying agency for collection as provided in § 33.10(e). The paying agency must certify the total amount of its collection on the debt and send a copy of the certification to the employee and another copy to the Department. If the paying agency's collection does not fully satisfy the debt, and the paying agency is aware that the employee is entitled to payments from the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund, or other similar payments that may be due the employee from other Federal Government sources, the paying agency will provide written notification of the outstanding debt to the agency responsible for making such payments to the employee, stating the employee owes a debt, the amount of the debt, and that the provisions of this section have been fully complied with. The Department must submit a properly certified claim to the agency responsible for making such payments before the collection can be made.
            (iii) If the employee is already separated and all payments due from the employee's former paying agency have been paid, the Department may request, unless otherwise prohibited, that money due and payable to the employee from the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund (5 CFR 831.1801 or 5 CFR 845.401) or other similar funds, be administratively offset to collect the debt. See 31 U.S.C. 3716 and 31 CFR 901.3.
            (iv) If the employee transfers to another paying agency, the Department must submit a properly certified debt claim to the new paying agency before collection can be resumed; however, the Department need not repeat the due process procedures described in 5 U.S.C. 5514 and this part. The Department shall review the debt to ensure that collection is resumed by the new paying agency.
          
          
            § 33.12
            Salary offset when the Department is the paying agency but not the creditor agency.
            (a) Format of the request. (1) When the Department is the paying agency and another agency is the creditor agency, the creditor agency must certify, in writing, to the Department that the employee owes the debt, the amount and basis of the debt, the date on which payment(s) is due, the date the Government's right to collect the debt first accrued, and that the creditor agency's regulations implementing 5 U.S.C. 5514 have been approved by the Office of Personnel Management.
            (2) If the collection is to be made in installments, the creditor agency must also advise the Department of the number of installments to be collected, the amount or percentage of disposable pay to be collected in each installment, and the commencement date of the installments, if a date other than the next officially established pay period is required.
            (3) Unless the employee has consented in writing to the salary deductions or signed a statement acknowledging receipt of the required procedures and the written consent or statement is forwarded to the Department, the creditor agency must advise the Department of the action(s) taken under 5 U.S.C. § 5514, and give the date(s) the action(s) was taken.
            (b) Requests for recovery. (1) Complete claim. When the Department receives a properly certified debt claim from a creditor agency, deductions should be scheduled to begin prospectively at the next officially established pay interval. The employee must receive written notice as described in § 33.10 that the Department has received a certified debt claim from the creditor agency, including the amount, and written notice of the date deductions from salary will commence and the amount of such deductions.
            (2) Incomplete claim. When the Department receives an incomplete debt claim from a creditor agency, the Secretary shall return the debt claim with a notice that procedures under 5 U.S.C. 5514 and 5 CFR part 550, subpart K, must be provided and a properly certified debt claim received before action will be taken to collect from the employee's current pay account.
            (c) Review. The Secretary is not required or authorized to review the merits of the determination with respect to the amount or validity of the debt certified by the creditor agency.
            (d) Employees separating. If an employee begins separation action before the Department collects the total debt due the creditor agency, the following actions will be taken:
            (1) To the extent possible, the balance owed the creditor agency will be liquidated from a final salary check, or other final payments of any nature due the employee from the Department;
            (2) The Secretary will certify the total amount of the Department's collection on the debt and send a copy of the certification to the employee and another copy to the creditor agency; and
            (3) If the Department's collection does not fully satisfy the debt, and the Secretary is aware that the employee is entitled to payments from the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund, or other similar payments that may be due the employee from other Federal Government sources, the Secretary will provide written notification of the outstanding debt to the agency responsible for making such payments to the employee. The written notification shall state that the employee owes a debt, the amount of the debt, and that the provisions of this section have been fully complied with. The Department shall furnish a copy of this written notification to the creditor agency so that it can file a properly certified debt claim with the agency responsible for making such payments.
            (e) Employees who transfer to another paying agency. If, after the creditor agency has submitted a debt claim to the Department, the employee transfers from the Department to a different paying agency before the debt is collected in full, the Secretary shall:
            (1) Certify the total amount of the collection made on the debt; and
            (2) Furnish a copy of the certification to the employee and another copy to the creditor agency along with notice of the employee's transfer.
          
          
            § 33.13
            Interest, penalties, and administrative costs.
            Debts owed to the Department shall be assessed interest, penalties and administrative costs in accordance with 45 CFR 30.18.
          
          
            § 33.14
            Non-waiver of rights.

            An employee's involuntary payment of all or any portion of a debt collected under this part shall not be construed as a waiver of any rights which the employee may have under 5 U.S.C. 5514 or any other provision of law or contract, unless there are statutory or contractual provisions to the contrary.
          
          
            § 33.15
            Refunds.
            (a) The Secretary shall promptly refund any amounts paid or deducted under this part when:
            (1) A debt is waived or otherwise found not owing to the United States; or
            (2) The employee's paying agency is directed by administrative or judicial order to refund amount deducted from the employee's current pay.
            (b) Unless required or permitted by law or contract, refunds shall not bear interest.
          
          
            § 33.16
            Additional administrative collection action.
            Nothing contained in this part is intended to preclude the use of any other appropriate administrative remedy.
          
        
        
          Pt. 34
          PART 34—CLAIMS FILED UNDER THE MILITARY PERSONNEL AND CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES ACT
          
            Sec.
            34.1
            Purpose and scope.
            34.2
            Definitions.
            34.3
            Filing procedures and time limits.
            34.4
            Allowable claims.
            34.5
            Unallowable claims.
            34.6
            Reconsideration or appeal.
            34.7
            Payment procedures.
            34.8
            Computation of award and settlement.
            34.9
            Claims involving carriers or insurers.
          
          
            Authority:
            31 U.S.C. 3721.
          
          
            Source:
            69 FR 13257, Mar. 22, 2004, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 34.1
            Purpose and scope.
            (a) Purpose. This part prescribes polices and procedures for handling claims not in excess of $40,000.00 filed by employees against the Department of Health and Human Services under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees Claims (MPCE) Act of 1964, 31 U.S.C. 3721, for damage to, or loss of, property against the Department. Under the MPCE Act, the Secretary may approve claims made against the Government by a federal government employee for damage to or loss of personal property that is incident to employment when the loss or damage is not due to any negligence on the part of employee.
            (b) Scope. This part applies to all Departmental Operating Divisions and Regional Offices that process and review claims under the MPCE Act. Nothing in this part shall be construed to bar other types of claims that are payable under other statutory authority such as, but not limited to, the Federal Tort Claims Act (28 U.S.C. 2671-2680).
          
          
            § 34.2
            Definitions.
            In this part, unless the context otherwise requires:
            
              Claim means any claim filed by or on behalf of an employee for damage to, or loss of, property that is incident to the claimant's employment. This definition includes claims where the claimant is not the legal owner of the property in question, but has obtained authorization from the legal owner to posses or control the property.
            
              Claimant means an employee who has filed a claim with the Department under the MPCE Act.
            
              Damage or loss means total or partial destruction or loss of the item claimed.
            
              Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              Employee means an officer or employee of the Department.
            
              Quarters means a house, apartment or other residence assigned by the government to an employee of the Department.
          
          
            § 34.3
            Filing procedures and time limits.
            (a) Who may file a claim. A claim may be filed by the following individuals:
            (1) An employee;
            (2) An authorized agent or representative of an employee or employee's estate, regardless of whether the claim arose before or concurrent with an employee's death; and
            (3) A former employee or his authorized agent or representative if damage or loss occurred prior to the separation from the Department.
            (b) Requirements. A claim submitted under this part must be presented in writing to the Claims Officer (See paragraph (c) of this section). Claims may be submitted on a HHS-481 form, Employee Claim for Loss or Damage to Personal Property. All claims must be signed by the claimant or his authorized agent or representative. The HHS-Form can be obtained from the Claims Officer or downloaded from the Program Support Center's webpage at www.psc.gov. All claims must include the following:
            (1) Name and address of the claimant;
            (2) The office in which the claimant was employed at the time of loss, current office, if different, and telephone number;
            (3) Date of loss or damage;
            (4) Amount of claim;
            (5) Description of the property, including but not limited to type, design, model number, date acquired, value when acquired, value when lost, and estimation of repair or replacement cost;
            (6) Description of incident; and
            (7) If property was insured when loss or damage occurred, a statement indicating whether a claim was filed with an insurance carrier.
            (c) Where to file your claim. (1) Claimants employed with the Regional Offices should submit claims to the Chief Regional Counsel, Office of the General Counsel, within the claimant's Region.
            (2) All other claimants must submit claims to the Office of the General Counsel, General Law Division, Claims and Employment Law Branch, 330 Independence Ave., SW., Room 4760, Cohen Building, Washington, DC 20201.
            (d) Evidence required. You must submit the following:
            (1) Not less than two itemized signed estimates for the cost of repairs, or an itemized bill of repair for the damaged property;
            (2) In the event the property is not economically repairable or is totally lost or destroyed, proof of this fact, its market value before or after loss, purchase price, and date of acquisition of the property;
            (3) Proof of ownership or right to recover for the damage such as a receipt;
            (4) Police/incident report;
            (5) If property is insured, insurance information, such as insurance carrier, type of coverage, deductible, and whether claim has been filed and/or paid;
            (6) Travel orders, if applicable;
            (7) Any citations or traffic tickets, if applicable; and
            (8) Any other evidence required by the claims officer not specified above.
            (e) Time limit. (1) A claim filed under this section must be filed in writing with the Department within two years from the date of the incident.
            (2) If the claim accrues in the time of war or in the time of armed conflict in which any armed forces of the United States are engaged or if such a war or armed conflict occurs within two years after the claim accrues, and if good cause is shown, the claim shall be presented no more than two years after that cause ceases to exist, or two years after the war or armed conflict is terminated, whichever is earlier.
            (3) All required evidence in support of a claim submitted under this section must be forwarded to the claims officer within sixty days after request. Failure to do so will be deemed as an abandonment of the claim and the claim will be disallowed.
          
          
            § 34.4
            Allowable claims.
            (a) What you can claim. (1) Claims for damage or loss may be allowed where possession of the property was lawful and reasonable under circumstances.
            (2) Claims for property damage or loss by fire, flood, hurricane, theft, or other serious occurrence may be allowed when the property is located inside:
            (i) Quarters that have been assigned or provided by the government; or
            (ii) Quarters outside the United States whether assigned by the government or not, except when a civilian employee outside the U.S. is a local inhabitant.
            (3) Claims for damage to, or loss of, property may be allowed when caused by:
            (i) Marine, air disaster, enemy action or threat thereof, or other extraordinary risks incurred incident to the performance of official duties by the claimant; and
            (ii) Efforts by the claimant to save human life or government property.

            (4) Property used for the benefit of the government. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, property used for the benefit of the government at the request, or with the knowledge and consent of, superior authority.
            (5) Claims for clothing and accessories may be allowed when loss or damage was caused by faulty or defective equipment or furnishings owned or managed by the Department.
            (6) Claims for stolen property, only if it is determined that the claimant exercised due care in protecting his property and there is clear evidence that a burglary or theft occurred.
            (7) Claims for automobiles, only when required to perform official business or parked on a government-owned or operated parking lot or garage incident to employment. This subsection does not include claims for damage or loss when traveling between place of residence and duty station, or when the loss or damage was caused by the negligence of a third party. If the automobile is a total loss, the maximum amount allowed is the value of the vehicle at the time of loss as determined by the National Automobile Dealer Association Appraisal Guide or similar publications.
            (8) Claims for any other meritorious claims in exceptional cases may be allowed by the Claims Officer.
            (9) Transportation or travel losses. Damage or loss of personal property, including baggage and household items, while being transported by a carrier, agent or agency of the government, or private conveyance, may be allowed only if the property is shipped under orders or in connection with travel orders.
            (b) [Reserved]
          
          
            § 34.5
            Unallowable claims.
            (a) What you cannot claim. (1) Claims for money or currency, such as intangible property (i.e. bankbooks, check, money orders, promissory notes, stock certificates, etc.).
            (2) Worn-out or unserviceable property.
            (3) Easily pilferable articles, such as jewelry, cameras, watches, and binoculars when they are shipped with household goods by a moving company or unaccompanied baggage. This does not apply to checked property or property in personal custody of the claimant or his agent provided proper security measures have been taken.
            (4) Government property.
            (5) Appraisal or estimate fees.
            (6) Automobiles, except when required to perform official business or parked on a government-owned or operated parking lot or garage incident to employment.
            (7) Loss or damage caused in whole or in part by the negligent or wrongful act of the claimant or his agent or employee.
            (8) Claims under $30.00.
            (9) Stolen property when it's determined that claimant failed to exercise due care in protecting his or her property.
            (10) Sales Tax. Reimbursements for the payment of sales tax incurred in connection with repairs or replacing an item will not be allowed.
            (b) [Reserved]
          
          
            § 34.6
            Reconsideration or appeal.
            (a) Requests for reconsideration or appeal shall be forwarded to the Associate General Counsel, General Law Division, Office of the General Counsel, within sixty days from the date of the Claims Officer's decision along with any new evidence supporting the claim.
            (b) A voucher or a supplemental voucher will be prepared by the Claims Officer if it is determined that the claimant's request for reconsideration should be allowed.
          
          
            § 34.7
            Payment procedures.
            (a) For all claims that are approved in whole or part, the claims officer shall prepare and mail a payment voucher to the claimant.
            (b) This voucher shall be mailed to the claimant with appropriate instructions.
            (c) Upon receipt of the signed payment voucher, the claims officer shall sign and forward the signed voucher to the office where the claimant is or was employed for processing.
            (d) Upon receipt of the signed payment voucher, the office in which the claimant is or was employed will submit the voucher for transmission to the Treasury Department for issuance of a check in the sum allowed.
            (e) Funds paid for settlement of allowed claims shall be made from appropriations of the office in which the claimant is or was employed.
          
          
            
            § 34.8
            Computation of award and settlement.
            (a) The amount awarded on any item of property shall not exceed the adjusted cost of the item based on the cost of replacing it with a similar one of the same quality minus the appropriate depreciation rate. The amount normally payable on property damaged beyond economical repair shall not exceed its depreciated value. If the cost of repairs is less than the depreciated value it shall be considered economically repairable and the costs of repairs shall be the amount payable.
            (b) Depreciation in value of an item shall be determined by considering the type of article involved, its replacement cost, condition when lost or damaged beyond economical repair, and the time elapsed between the date of acquisition and the date of accrual of the claim.
            (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, settlements of claims under the MPCE Act are final and conclusive. The acceptance of a settlement constitutes a complete release of any claim against the United States and any employee of the government whose act or omission gave rise to the claim by reason of the same claim.
          
          
            § 34.9
            Claims involving carriers or insurers.
            (a) Carriers. (1) If property is damaged, lost or destroyed while being shipped pursuant to authorized travel orders, the owner shall file a written claim for reimbursement against the carrier no later than nine months from the date of delivery or should have been made according to the terms of the contract. It shall be filed before or concurrent with submitting a claim against the government under this part.
            (2) The demand shall be made against the responsible carrier if more than one contract was issued, a separate demand shall be made against the last carrier on each such document, unless claimant knows which carrier was in possession of the property when the damage or loss occurred.
            (b) Insurers. (1) If property which is damaged, lost, or destroyed incident to the claimant's service is insured in whole or in part, the claimant shall inform the Claims Officer whether a claim was made with the insurance carrier.
            (2) The claimant shall inform the claims officer if he or she received a reimbursement from the insurance carrier for the item that was damaged or lost. The exact amount of the reimbursement must be reported.
            (3) If the claimant receives a reimbursement for the lost or damaged property from an insurance carrier, the maximum amount that can be recovered from the Department is the difference between an appropriate award under this regulation and the amount recovered from the insurance carrier. The claimant is responsible for submitting to the Department documentation that identifies the exact amount of the reimbursement.
          
        
        
          Pt. 35
          PART 35—TORT CLAIMS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT
          
            
              Subpart A—General
              Sec.
              35.1
              Scope of regulations.
            
            
              Subpart B—Procedures
              35.2
              Administrative claim; when presented; place of filing.
              35.3
              Administrative claim; who may file.
              35.4
              Administrative claims; evidence and information to be submitted.
              35.5
              Investigation, examination, and determination of claims.
              35.6
              Final denial of claim.
              35.7
              Payment of approved claims.
              35.8
              Release.
              35.9
              Penalties.
              35.10
              Limitation on Department's authority.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 1(a), 80 Stat. 306; 28 U.S.C. 2672; 28 CFR Part 14.
          
          
            Source:
            32 FR 14101, Oct. 11, 1967, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General
            
              § 35.1
              Scope of regulations.

              The regulations in this part shall apply only to claims asserted under the Federal Tort Claims Act, as amended, 28 U.S.C. sections 2671-2680, accruing on or after January 18, 1967, for money damages against the United States for damage to or loss of property or personal injury or death caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of any employee of the Department of Health and Human Services while acting within the scope of his office or employment.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Procedures
            
              § 35.2
              Administrative claim; when presented; place of filing.
              (a) For purposes of the regulations in this part, a claim shall be deemed to have been presented when the Department of Health and Human Services receives, at a place designated in paragraph (b) of this section, an executed Standard Form 95 or other written notification of an incident accompanied by a claim for money damages in a sum certain for damage to or loss of property, for personal injury, or for death, alleged to have occurred by reason of the incident. A claim which should have been presented to the Department but which was mistakenly addressed to or filed with another Federal agency, shall be deemed to be presented to the Department as of the date that the claim is received by the Department. A claim mistakenly addressed to or filed with the Department shall forthwith be transferred to the appropriate Federal agency, if ascertainable, or returned to the claimant.
              (b) A claim presented in compliance with paragraph (a) of this section may be amended by the claimant at any time prior to final action by the Department Claims Officer or prior to the exercise of the claimant's option to bring suit under 28 U.S.C. 2675(a). Amendments shall be submitted in writing and signed by the claimant or his duly authorized agent or legal representative. Upon the timely filing of an amendment to a pending claim, the Department shall have 6 months in which to make a final disposition of the claim as amended and the claimant's option under 28 U.S.C. 2675(a) shall not accrue until 6 months after the filing of an amendment.
              (c) Forms may be obtained and claims may be filed, with the office, local, regional, or headquarters, of the constituent organization having jurisdiction over the employee involved in the accident or incident, or with the Department of Health and Human Services Claims Officer, Washington, DC 20201.
              [32 FR 14101, Oct. 11, 1967, as amended at 35 FR 4517, Mar. 13, 1970]
            
            
              § 35.3
              Administrative claim; who may file.
              (a) A claim for injury to or loss of property may be presented by the owner of the property interest which is the subject of the claim, his duly authorized agent, or his legal representative.
              (b) A claim for personal injury may be presented by the injured person, his duly authorized agent, or his legal representative.
              (c) A claim based on death may be presented by the executor or administrator of the decedent's estate or by any other person legally entitled to assert such a claim under applicable state law.
              (d) A claim for loss wholly compensated by an insurer with the rights of a subrogee may be presented by the insurer. A claim for loss partially compensated by an insurer with the rights of a subrogee may be presented by the insurer or the insured individually, as their respective interests appear, or jointly. Whenever an insurer presents a claim asserting the rights of a subrogee, he shall present with his claim appropriate evidence that he has the rights of a subrogee.
              (e) A claim presented by an agent or legal representative shall be presented in the name of the claimant, be signed by the agent or legal representative, show the title or legal capacity of the person signing, and be accompanied by evidence of his authority to present a claim on behalf of the claimant as agent, executor, administrator, parent, guardian, or other representative.
            
            
              § 35.4
              Administrative claims; evidence and information to be submitted.
              (a) Death. In support of a claim based on death, the claimant may be required to submit the following evidence or information:
              (1) An authenticated death certificate or other competent evidence showing cause of death, date of death, and age of the decedent.

              (2) Decedent's employment or occupation at time of death, including his monthly or yearly salary or earnings (if any), and the duration of his last employment or occupation.
              (3) Full names, addresses, birth dates, kinship, and marital status of the decedent's survivors, including identification of those survivors who were dependent for support upon the decedent at the time of his death.
              (4) Degree of support afforded by the decedent to each survivor dependent upon him for support at the time of his death.
              (5) Decedent's general physical and mental condition before death.
              (6) Itemized bills for medical and burial expenses incurred by reason of the incident causing death, or itemized receipts of payments for such expenses.
              (7) If damages for pain and suffering prior to death are claimed, a physician's detailed statement specifying the injuries suffered, duration of pain and suffering, any drugs administered for pain and the decedent's physical condition in the interval between injury and death.
              (8) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on either the responsibility of the United States for the death or the damages claimed.
              (b) Personal injury. In support of a claim for personal injury, including pain and suffering, the claimant may be required to submit the following evidence or information:
              (1) A written report by his attending physician or dentist setting forth the nature and extent of the injury, nature and extent of treatment, any degree of temporary or permanent disability, the prognosis, period of hospitalization, and any diminished earning capacity. In addition, the claimant may be required to submit to a physical or mental examination by a physician employed or designated by the Department or the constituent organization. A copy of the report of the examining physician shall be made available to the claimant upon the claimant's written request provided that claimant has, upon request, furnished the report referred to in the first sentence of this subparagraph and has made or agrees to make available to the Department or the operating agency any other physician's reports previously or thereafter made of the physical or mental condition which is the subject matter of his claim.
              (2) Itemized bills for medical, dental, and hospital expenses incurred, or itemized receipts of payment for such expenses.
              (3) If the prognosis reveals the necessity for future treatment, a statement of expected duration of and expenses for such treatment.
              (4) If a claim is made for loss of time from employment, a written statement from his employer showing actual time lost from employment, whether he is a full or part-time employee, and wages or salary actually lost.
              (5) If a claim is made for loss of income and the claimant is self-employed, documentary evidence showing the amount of earnings actually lost.
              (6) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on either the responsibility of the United States for the personal injury or the damages claimed.
              (c) Property damage. In support of a claim for damage to or loss of property, real or personal, the claimant may be required to submit the following evidence or information:
              (1) Proof of ownership.
              (2) A detailed statement of the amount claimed with respect to each item of property.
              (3) An itemized receipt of payment for necessary repairs or itemized written estimates of the cost of such repairs.
              (4) A statement listing date of purchase, purchase price, market value of the property as of date of damage, and salvage value, where repair is not economical.
              (5) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing either on the responsibility of the United States for the injury to or loss of property or the damages claimed.
              (d) Time limit. All evidence required to be submitted by this section shall be furnished by the claimant within a reasonable time. Failure of a claimant to furnish evidence necessary to a determination of his claim within three months after a request therefor has been mailed to his last known address may be deemed an abandonment of the claim. The claim may be thereupon disallowed.
            
            
              
              § 35.5
              Investigation, examination, and determination of claims.
              When a claim is received, the constituent agency out of whose activities the claim arose shall make such investigation as may be necessary or appropriate for a determination of the validity of the claim and thereafter shall forward the claim, together with all pertinent material, and a recommendation based on the merits of the case, with regard to allowance or disallowance of the claim, to the Department Claims Officer to whom authority has been delegated to adjust, determine, compromise and settle all claims hereunder.
            
            
              § 35.6
              Final denial of claim.
              (a) Final denial of an administrative claim shall be in writing and sent to the claimant, his attorney, or legal representative by certified or registered mail. The notification of final denial may include a statement of the reasons for the denial and shall include a statement that, if the claimant is dissatisfied with the Department's action, he may file suit in an appropriate U.S. District Court not later than 6 months after the date of mailing of the notification.
              (b) Prior to the commencement of suit and prior to the expiration of the 6-month period after the date of mailing, by certified or registered mail of notice of final denial of the claim as provided in 28 U.S.C. 2401(b), a claimant, his duly authorized agent, or legal representative, may file a written request with the Department for reconsideration of a final denial of a claim under paragraph (a) of this section. Upon the timely filing of a request for reconsideration the Department shall have 6 months from the date of filing in which to make a final disposition of the claim and the claimant's option under 28 U.S.C. 2675(a) to bring suit shall not accrue until 6 months after the filing of a request for reconsideration. Final Department action on a request for reconsideration shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section.
              [32 FR 14101, Oct. 11, 1967, as amended at 35 FR 4517, Mar. 13, 1970]
            
            
              § 35.7
              Payment of approved claims.
              (a) Upon allowance of his claim, claimant or his duly authorized agent shall sign the voucher for payment, Standard Form 1145, before payment is made.
              (b) When the claimant is represented by an attorney, the voucher for payment (SF 1145) shall designate both the claimant and his attorney as “payees.” The check shall be delivered to the attorney whose address shall appear on the voucher.
            
            
              § 35.8
              Release.
              Acceptance by the claimant, his agent or legal representative, of any award, compromise or settlement made hereunder, shall be final and conclusive on the claimant, his agent or legal representative and any other person on whose behalf or for whose benefit the claim has been presented, and shall constitute a complete release of any claim against the United States and against any employee of the Government whose act or omission gave rise to the claim, by reason of the same subject matter.
            
            
              § 35.9
              Penalties.
              A person who files a false claim or makes a false or fraudulent statement in a claim against the United States may be liable to a fine of not more than $10,000 or to imprisonment of not more than 5 years, or both (18 U.S.C. 287.1001), and, in addition, to a forfeiture of $2,000 and a penalty of double the loss or damage sustained by the United States (31 U.S.C. 231).
            
            
              § 35.10
              Limitation on Department's authority.
              (a) An award, compromise or settlement of a claim hereunder in excess of $25,000 shall be effected only with the prior written approval of the Attorney General or his designee. For the purposes of this paragraph, a principal claim and any derivative or subrogated claim shall be treated as a single claim.

              (b) An administrative claim may be adjusted, determined, compromised or settled hereunder only after consultation with the Department of Justice when, in the opinion of the Department:
              
              (1) A new precedent or a new point of law is involved; or
              (2) A question of policy is or may be involved; or
              (3) The United States is or may be entitled to indemnity or contribution from a third party and the Department is unable to adjust the third party claim; or
              (4) The compromise of a particular claim, as a practical matter, will or may control the disposition of a related claim in which the amount to be paid may exceed $25,000.
              (c) An administrative claim may be adjusted, determined, compromised or settled only after consultation with the Department of Justice when it is learned that the United States or an employee, agent or cost plus contractor of the United States is involved in litigation based on a claim arising out of the same incident or transaction.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 36
          PART 36—INDEMNIFICATION OF HHS EMPLOYEES
          
            § 36.1
            Policy.
            (a) The Department of Health and Human Services may indemnify, in whole or in part, its employees (which for the purpose of this regulation includes former employees) for any verdict, judgment or other monetary award which is rendered against any such employee, provided that the conduct giving rise to the verdict, judgment or award was taken within the scope of his or her employment with the Department and that such indemnification is in the interest of the United States, as determined by the Secretary, or his or her designee, in his or her discretion.
            (b) The Department of Health and Human Services may settle or compromise a personal damage claim against its employee by the payment of available funds, at any time, provided the alleged conduct giving rise to the personal damage claim was taken within the scope of employment and that such settlement or compromise is in the interest of the United States, as determined by the Secretary, or his or her designee, in his or her discretion.
            (c) Absent exceptional circumstances, as determined by the Secretary or his or her designee, the Department will not entertain a request either to agree to indemnify or to settle a personal damage claim before entry of an adverse verdict, judgment or monetary award.
            (d) When an employee of the Department of Health and Human Services becomes aware that an action has been filed against the employee in his or her individual capacity as a result of conduct taken within the scope of his or her employment, the employee should immediately notify the Department that such an action is pending.
            (e) The employee may, thereafter, request either (1) indemnification to satisfy a verdict, judgment or award entered against the employee or (2) payment to satisfy the requirements of a settlement proposal. The employee shall submit a written request, with documentation including copies of the verdict, judgment, award or settlement proposal, as appropriate, to the head of his employing component, who shall thereupon submit to the General Counsel, in a timely manner, a recommended disposition of the request. The General Counsel shall also seek the views of the Department of Justice. The General Counsel shall forward the request, the employing component's recommendation and the General Counsel's recommendation to the Secretary for decision.
            (f) Any payment under this section either to indemnify a Department of Health and Human Services employee or to settle a personal damage claim shall be contingent upon the availability of appropriated funds of the employing component of the Department of Health and Human Services.
            (Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301)
            [53 FR 11280, Apr. 6, 1988]
          
        
        
          Pt. 46
          PART 46—PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS
          
            
              Subpart A—Basic HHS Policy for Protection of Human Research Subjects
              Sec.
              46.101
              To what does this policy apply?
              46.102
              Definitions for purposes of this policy.
              
              46.103
              Assuring compliance with this policy—research conducted or supported by any Federal department or agency.
              46.104
              Exempt research.
              46.105-46.106
              [Reserved]
              46.107
              IRB membership.
              46.108
              IRB functions and operations.
              46.109
              IRB review of research.
              46.110
              Expedited review procedures for certain kinds of research involving no more than minimal risk, and for minor changes in approved research.
              46.111
              Criteria for IRB approval of research.
              46.112
              Review by institution.
              46.113
              Suspension or termination of IRB approval of research.
              46.114
              Cooperative research.
              46.115
              IRB records.
              46.116
              General requirements for informed consent.
              46.117
              Documentation of informed consent.
              46.118
              Applications and proposals lacking definite plans for involvement of human subjects.
              46.119
              Research undertaken without the intention of involving human subjects.
              46.120
              Evaluation and disposition of applications and proposals for research to be conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency.
              46.121
              [Reserved]
              46.122
              Use of Federal funds.
              46.123
              Early termination of research support: Evaluation of applications and proposals.
              46.124
              Conditions.
            
            
              Subpart B—Additional Protections for Pregnant Women, Human Fetuses and Neonates Involved in Research
              46.201
              To what do these regulations apply?
              46.202
              Definitions.
              46.203
              Duties of IRBs in connection with research involving pregnant women, fetuses, and neonates.
              46.204
              Research involving pregnant women or fetuses.
              46.205
              Research involving neonates.
              46.206
              Research involving, after delivery, the placenta, the dead fetus or fetal material.
              46.207
              Research not otherwise approvable which presents an opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of pregnant women, fetuses, or neonates.
            
            
              Subpart C—Additional Protections Pertaining to Biomedical and Behavioral Research Involving Prisoners as Subjects
              46.301
              Applicability.
              46.302
              Purpose.
              46.303
              Definitions.
              46.304
              Composition of Institutional Review Boards where prisoners are involved.
              46.305
              Additional duties of the Institutional Review Boards where prisoners are involved.
              46.306
              Permitted research involving prisoners.
            
            
              Subpart D—Additional Protections for Children Involved as Subjects in Research
              46.401
              To what do these regulations apply?
              46.402
              Definitions.
              46.403
              IRB duties.
              46.404
              Research not involving greater than minimal risk.
              46.405
              Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the individual subjects.
              46.406
              Research involving greater than minimal risk and no prospect of direct benefit to individual subjects, but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subject's disorder or condition.
              46.407
              Research not otherwise approvable which presents an opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children.
              46.408
              Requirements for permission by parents or guardians and for assent by children.
              46.409
              Wards.
            
            
              Subpart E—Registration of Institutional Review Boards
              46.501
              What IRBs must be registered?
              46.502
              What information must be provided when registering an IRB?
              46.503
              When must an IRB be registered?
              46.504
              How must an IRB be registered?
              46.505
              When must IRB registration information be renewed or updated?
            
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301; 42 U.S.C. 289(a); 42 U.S.C. 300v-1(b).
          
          
            Editorial Note:
            The Department of Health and Human Services issued a notice of waiver regarding the requirements set forth in part 46, relating to protection of human subjects, as they pertain to demonstration projects, approved under section 1115 of the Social Security Act, which test the use of cost—sharing, such as deductibles, copayment and coinsurance, in the Medicaid program. For further information see 47 FR 9208, Mar. 4, 1982.
          
          
            Subpart A—Basic HHS Policy for Protection of Human Research Subjects
            
              Source:
              82 FR 7259, 7273, Jan. 19, 2017, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              
              § 46.101
              To what does this policy apply?
              (a) Except as detailed in § 46.104, this policy applies to all research involving human subjects conducted, supported, or otherwise subject to regulation by any Federal department or agency that takes appropriate administrative action to make the policy applicable to such research. This includes research conducted by Federal civilian employees or military personnel, except that each department or agency head may adopt such procedural modifications as may be appropriate from an administrative standpoint. It also includes research conducted, supported, or otherwise subject to regulation by the Federal Government outside the United States. Institutions that are engaged in research described in this paragraph and institutional review boards (IRBs) reviewing research that is subject to this policy must comply with this policy.
              (b) [Reserved]
              (c) Department or agency heads retain final judgment as to whether a particular activity is covered by this policy and this judgment shall be exercised consistent with the ethical principles of the Belmont Report.62
                
              
              
                
                  62 The National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.- Belmont Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1979.
              
              (d) Department or agency heads may require that specific research activities or classes of research activities conducted, supported, or otherwise subject to regulation by the Federal department or agency but not otherwise covered by this policy comply with some or all of the requirements of this policy.
              (e) Compliance with this policy requires compliance with pertinent federal laws or regulations that provide additional protections for human subjects.
              (f) This policy does not affect any state or local laws or regulations (including tribal law passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe) that may otherwise be applicable and that provide additional protections for human subjects.
              (g) This policy does not affect any foreign laws or regulations that may otherwise be applicable and that provide additional protections to human subjects of research.

              (h) When research covered by this policy takes place in foreign countries, procedures normally followed in the foreign countries to protect human subjects may differ from those set forth in this policy. In these circumstances, if a department or agency head determines that the procedures prescribed by the institution afford protections that are at least equivalent to those provided in this policy, the department or agency head may approve the substitution of the foreign procedures in lieu of the procedural requirements provided in this policy. Except when otherwise required by statute, Executive Order, or the department or agency head, notices of these actions as they occur will be published in the Federal Register or will be otherwise published as provided in department or agency procedures.
              (i) Unless otherwise required by law, department or agency heads may waive the applicability of some or all of the provisions of this policy to specific research activities or classes of research activities otherwise covered by this policy, provided the alternative procedures to be followed are consistent with the principles of the Belmont Report.63

                 Except when otherwise required by statute or Executive Order, the department or agency head shall forward advance notices of these actions to the Office for Human Research Protections, Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), or any successor office, or to the equivalent office within the appropriate Federal department or agency, and shall also publish them in the Federal Register or in such other manner as provided in department or agency procedures. The waiver notice must include a statement that identifies the conditions under which the waiver will be applied and a justification as to why the waiver is appropriate for the research, including how the decision is consistent with the principles of the Belmont Report.
              
                
                  63 Id.
                
              
              (j) Federal guidance on the requirements of this policy shall be issued only after consultation, for the purpose of harmonization (to the extent appropriate), with other Federal departments and agencies that have adopted this policy, unless such consultation is not feasible.
              (k) [Reserved]
              (l) Compliance dates and transition provisions:
              (1) Pre-2018 Requirements. For purposes of this section, the pre-2018 Requirements means this subpart as published in the 2016 edition of the Code of Federal Regulations.
              (2) 2018 Requirements. For purposes of this section, the 2018 Requirements means the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects requirements contained in this subpart. The general compliance date for the 2018 Requirements is January 21, 2019. The compliance date for § 46.114(b) (cooperative research) of the 2018 Requirements is January 20, 2020.
              (3) Research subject to pre-2018 requirements. The pre-2018 Requirements shall apply to the following research, unless the research is transitioning to comply with the 2018 Requirements in accordance with paragraph (l)(4) of this section:
              (i) Research initially approved by an IRB under the pre-2018 Requirements before January 21, 2019;
              (ii) Research for which IRB review was waived pursuant to § 46.101(i) of the pre-2018 Requirements before January 21, 2019; and
              (iii) Research for which a determination was made that the research was exempt under § 46.101(b) of the pre-2018 Requirements before January 21, 2019.
              (4) Transitioning research. If, on or after July 19, 2018, an institution planning or engaged in research otherwise covered by paragraph (l)(3) of this section determines that such research instead will transition to comply with the 2018 Requirements, the institution or an IRB must document and date such determination.
              (i) If the determination to transition is documented between July 19, 2018, and January 20, 2019, the research shall:
              (A) Beginning on the date of such documentation through January 20, 2019, comply with the pre-2018 Requirements, except that the research shall comply with the following:
              (1) Section 46.102(l) of the 2018 Requirements (definition of research) (instead of § 46.102(d) of the pre-2018 Requirements);
              (2) Section 46.103(d) of the 2018 Requirements (revised certification requirement that eliminates IRB review of application or proposal) (instead of § 46.103(f) of the pre-2018 Requirements); and
              (3) Section 46.109(f)(1)(i) and (iii) of the 2018 Requirements (exceptions to mandated continuing review) (instead of § 46.103(b), as related to the requirement for continuing review, and in addition to § 46.109, of the pre-2018 Requirements); and
              (B) Beginning on January 21, 2019, comply with the 2018 Requirements.
              (ii) If the determination to transition is documented on or after January 21, 2019, the research shall, beginning on the date of such documentation, comply with the 2018 Requirements.
              (5) Research subject to 2018 Requirements. The 2018 Requirements shall apply to the following research:
              (i) Research initially approved by an IRB on or after January 21, 2019;
              (ii) Research for which IRB review is waived pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section on or after January 21, 2019; and
              (iii) Research for which a determination is made that the research is exempt on or after January 21, 2019.
              (m) Severability: Any provision of this part held to be invalid or unenforceable by its terms, or as applied to any person or circumstance, shall be construed so as to continue to give maximum effect to the provision permitted by law, unless such holding shall be one of utter invalidity or unenforceability, in which event the provision shall be severable from this part and shall not affect the remainder thereof or the application of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other dissimilar circumstances.
              [82 FR 7259, 7273, Jan. 19, 2017, as amended at 83 FR 28518, June 19, 2018]
            
            
              
              § 46.102
              Definitions for purposes of this policy.
              (a) Certification means the official notification by the institution to the supporting Federal department or agency component, in accordance with the requirements of this policy, that a research project or activity involving human subjects has been reviewed and approved by an IRB in accordance with an approved assurance.
              (b) Clinical trial means a research study in which one or more human subjects are prospectively assigned to one or more interventions (which may include placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects of the interventions on biomedical or behavioral health-related outcomes.
              (c) Department or agency head means the head of any Federal department or agency, for example, the Secretary of HHS, and any other officer or employee of any Federal department or agency to whom the authority provided by these regulations to the department or agency head has been delegated.
              (d) Federal department or agency refers to a federal department or agency (the department or agency itself rather than its bureaus, offices or divisions) that takes appropriate administrative action to make this policy applicable to the research involving human subjects it conducts, supports, or otherwise regulates (e.g., the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the U.S. Department of Defense, or the Central Intelligence Agency).
              (e)(1) Human subject means a living individual about whom an investigator (whether professional or student) conducting research:
              (i) Obtains information or biospecimens through intervention or interaction with the individual, and uses, studies, or analyzes the information or biospecimens; or
              (ii) Obtains, uses, studies, analyzes, or generates identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens.
              (2) Intervention includes both physical procedures by which information or biospecimens are gathered (e.g., venipuncture) and manipulations of the subject or the subject's environment that are performed for research purposes.
              (3) Interaction includes communication or interpersonal contact between investigator and subject.
              (4) Private information includes information about behavior that occurs in a context in which an individual can reasonably expect that no observation or recording is taking place, and information that has been provided for specific purposes by an individual and that the individual can reasonably expect will not be made public (e.g., a medical record).
              (5) Identifiable private information is private information for which the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained by the investigator or associated with the information.
              (6) An identifiable biospecimen is a biospecimen for which the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained by the investigator or associated with the biospecimen.
              (7) Federal departments or agencies implementing this policy shall:
              (i) Upon consultation with appropriate experts (including experts in data matching and re-identification), reexamine the meaning of “identifiable private information,” as defined in paragraph (e)(5) of this section, and “identifiable biospecimen,” as defined in paragraph (e)(6) of this section. This reexamination shall take place within 1 year and regularly thereafter (at least every 4 years). This process will be conducted by collaboration among the Federal departments and agencies implementing this policy. If appropriate and permitted by law, such Federal departments and agencies may alter the interpretation of these terms, including through the use of guidance.

              (ii) Upon consultation with appropriate experts, assess whether there are analytic technologies or techniques that should be considered by investigators to generate “identifiable private information,” as defined in paragraph (e)(5) of this section, or an “identifiable biospecimen,” as defined in paragraph (e)(6) of this section. This assessment shall take place within 1 year and regularly thereafter (at least every 4 years). This process will be conducted by collaboration among the Federal departments and agencies implementing this policy. Any such technologies or techniques will be included on a list of technologies or techniques that produce identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens. This list will be published in the Federal Register after notice and an opportunity for public comment. The Secretary, HHS, shall maintain the list on a publicly accessible Web site.
              (f) Institution means any public or private entity, or department or agency (including federal, state, and other agencies).
              (g) IRB means an institutional review board established in accord with and for the purposes expressed in this policy.
              (h) IRB approval means the determination of the IRB that the research has been reviewed and may be conducted at an institution within the constraints set forth by the IRB and by other institutional and federal requirements.
              (i) Legally authorized representative means an individual or judicial or other body authorized under applicable law to consent on behalf of a prospective subject to the subject's participation in the procedure(s) involved in the research. If there is no applicable law addressing this issue, legally authorized representative means an individual recognized by institutional policy as acceptable for providing consent in the nonresearch context on behalf of the prospective subject to the subject's participation in the procedure(s) involved in the research.
              (j) Minimal risk means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.
              (k) Public health authority means an agency or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision of a state or territory, an Indian tribe, or a foreign government, or a person or entity acting under a grant of authority from or contract with such public agency, including the employees or agents of such public agency or its contractors or persons or entities to whom it has granted authority, that is responsible for public health matters as part of its official mandate.
              (l) Research means a systematic investigation, including research development, testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge. Activities that meet this definition constitute research for purposes of this policy, whether or not they are conducted or supported under a program that is considered research for other purposes. For example, some demonstration and service programs may include research activities. For purposes of this part, the following activities are deemed not to be research:
              (1) Scholarly and journalistic activities (e.g., oral history, journalism, biography, literary criticism, legal research, and historical scholarship), including the collection and use of information, that focus directly on the specific individuals about whom the information is collected.
              (2) Public health surveillance activities, including the collection and testing of information or biospecimens, conducted, supported, requested, ordered, required, or authorized by a public health authority. Such activities are limited to those necessary to allow a public health authority to identify, monitor, assess, or investigate potential public health signals, onsets of disease outbreaks, or conditions of public health importance (including trends, signals, risk factors, patterns in diseases, or increases in injuries from using consumer products). Such activities include those associated with providing timely situational awareness and priority setting during the course of an event or crisis that threatens public health (including natural or man-made disasters).
              (3) Collection and analysis of information, biospecimens, or records by or for a criminal justice agency for activities authorized by law or court order solely for criminal justice or criminal investigative purposes.

              (4) Authorized operational activities (as determined by each agency) in support of intelligence, homeland security, defense, or other national security missions.
              
              (m) Written, or in writing, for purposes of this part, refers to writing on a tangible medium (e.g., paper) or in an electronic format.
            
            
              § 46.103
              Assuring compliance with this policy—research conducted or supported by any Federal department or agency.
              (a) Each institution engaged in research that is covered by this policy, with the exception of research eligible for exemption under § 46.104, and that is conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency, shall provide written assurance satisfactory to the department or agency head that it will comply with the requirements of this policy. In lieu of requiring submission of an assurance, individual department or agency heads shall accept the existence of a current assurance, appropriate for the research in question, on file with the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office, and approved for Federal-wide use by that office. When the existence of an HHS-approved assurance is accepted in lieu of requiring submission of an assurance, reports (except certification) required by this policy to be made to department and agency heads shall also be made to the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office. Federal departments and agencies will conduct or support research covered by this policy only if the institution has provided an assurance that it will comply with the requirements of this policy, as provided in this section, and only if the institution has certified to the department or agency head that the research has been reviewed and approved by an IRB (if such certification is required by § 46.103(d)).
              (b) The assurance shall be executed by an individual authorized to act for the institution and to assume on behalf of the institution the obligations imposed by this policy and shall be filed in such form and manner as the department or agency head prescribes.
              (c) The department or agency head may limit the period during which any assurance shall remain effective or otherwise condition or restrict the assurance.
              (d) Certification is required when the research is supported by a Federal department or agency and not otherwise waived under § 46.101(i) or exempted under § 46.104. For such research, institutions shall certify that each proposed research study covered by the assurance and this section has been reviewed and approved by the IRB. Such certification must be submitted as prescribed by the Federal department or agency component supporting the research. Under no condition shall research covered by this section be initiated prior to receipt of the certification that the research has been reviewed and approved by the IRB.

              (e) For nonexempt research involving human subjects covered by this policy (or exempt research for which limited IRB review takes place pursuant to § 46.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), or (d)(7) or (8)) that takes place at an institution in which IRB oversight is conducted by an IRB that is not operated by the institution, the institution and the organization operating the IRB shall document the institution's reliance on the IRB for oversight of the research and the responsibilities that each entity will undertake to ensure compliance with the requirements of this policy (e.g., in a written agreement between the institution and the IRB, by implementation of an institution-wide policy directive providing the allocation of responsibilities between the institution and an IRB that is not affiliated with the institution, or as set forth in a research protocol).
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.104
              Exempt research.
              (a) Unless otherwise required by law or by department or agency heads, research activities in which the only involvement of human subjects will be in one or more of the categories in paragraph (d) of this section are exempt from the requirements of this policy, except that such activities must comply with the requirements of this section and as specified in each category.

              (b) Use of the exemption categories for research subject to the requirements of subparts B, C, and D: Application of the exemption categories to research subject to the requirements of 45 CFR part 46, subparts B, C, and D, is as follows:
              (1) Subpart B. Each of the exemptions at this section may be applied to research subject to subpart B if the conditions of the exemption are met.
              (2) Subpart C. The exemptions at this section do not apply to research subject to subpart C, except for research aimed at involving a broader subject population that only incidentally includes prisoners.
              (3) Subpart D. The exemptions at paragraphs (d)(1), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8) of this section may be applied to research subject to subpart D if the conditions of the exemption are met. Paragraphs (d)(2)(i) and (ii) of this section only may apply to research subject to subpart D involving educational tests or the observation of public behavior when the investigator(s) do not participate in the activities being observed. Paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section may not be applied to research subject to subpart D.
              (c) [Reserved]
              (d) Except as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the following categories of human subjects research are exempt from this policy:
              (1) Research, conducted in established or commonly accepted educational settings, that specifically involves normal educational practices that are not likely to adversely impact students' opportunity to learn required educational content or the assessment of educators who provide instruction. This includes most research on regular and special education instructional strategies, and research on the effectiveness of or the comparison among instructional techniques, curricula, or classroom management methods.
              (2) Research that only includes interactions involving educational tests (cognitive, diagnostic, aptitude, achievement), survey procedures, interview procedures, or observation of public behavior (including visual or auditory recording) if at least one of the following criteria is met:
              (i) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects cannot readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects;
              (ii) Any disclosure of the human subjects' responses outside the research would not reasonably place the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' financial standing, employability, educational advancement, or reputation; or
              (iii) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects can readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects, and an IRB conducts a limited IRB review to make the determination required by § 46.111(a)(7).
              (3)(i) Research involving benign behavioral interventions in conjunction with the collection of information from an adult subject through verbal or written responses (including data entry) or audiovisual recording if the subject prospectively agrees to the intervention and information collection and at least one of the following criteria is met:
              (A) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects cannot readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects;
              (B) Any disclosure of the human subjects' responses outside the research would not reasonably place the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' financial standing, employability, educational advancement, or reputation; or
              (C) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects can readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects, and an IRB conducts a limited IRB review to make the determination required by § 46.111(a)(7).

              (ii) For the purpose of this provision, benign behavioral interventions are brief in duration, harmless, painless, not physically invasive, not likely to have a significant adverse lasting impact on the subjects, and the investigator has no reason to think the subjects will find the interventions offensive or embarrassing. Provided all such criteria are met, examples of such benign behavioral interventions would include having the subjects play an online game, having them solve puzzles under various noise conditions, or having them decide how to allocate a nominal amount of received cash between themselves and someone else.
              (iii) If the research involves deceiving the subjects regarding the nature or purposes of the research, this exemption is not applicable unless the subject authorizes the deception through a prospective agreement to participate in research in circumstances in which the subject is informed that he or she will be unaware of or misled regarding the nature or purposes of the research.
              (4) Secondary research for which consent is not required: Secondary research uses of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, if at least one of the following criteria is met:
              (i) The identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens are publicly available;
              (ii) Information, which may include information about biospecimens, is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects cannot readily be ascertained directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects, the investigator does not contact the subjects, and the investigator will not re-identify subjects;
              (iii) The research involves only information collection and analysis involving the investigator's use of identifiable health information when that use is regulated under 45 CFR parts 160 and 164, subparts A and E, for the purposes of “health care operations” or “research” as those terms are defined at 45 CFR 164.501 or for “public health activities and purposes” as described under 45 CFR 164.512(b); or

              (iv) The research is conducted by, or on behalf of, a Federal department or agency using government-generated or government-collected information obtained for nonresearch activities, if the research generates identifiable private information that is or will be maintained on information technology that is subject to and in compliance with section 208(b) of the E-Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. 3501 note, if all of the identifiable private information collected, used, or generated as part of the activity will be maintained in systems of records subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, and, if applicable, the information used in the research was collected subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.
              
              (5) Research and demonstration projects that are conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency, or otherwise subject to the approval of department or agency heads (or the approval of the heads of bureaus or other subordinate agencies that have been delegated authority to conduct the research and demonstration projects), and that are designed to study, evaluate, improve, or otherwise examine public benefit or service programs, including procedures for obtaining benefits or services under those programs, possible changes in or alternatives to those programs or procedures, or possible changes in methods or levels of payment for benefits or services under those programs. Such projects include, but are not limited to, internal studies by Federal employees, and studies under contracts or consulting arrangements, cooperative agreements, or grants. Exempt projects also include waivers of otherwise mandatory requirements using authorities such as sections 1115 and 1115A of the Social Security Act, as amended.
              (i) Each Federal department or agency conducting or supporting the research and demonstration projects must establish, on a publicly accessible Federal Web site or in such other manner as the department or agency head may determine, a list of the research and demonstration projects that the Federal department or agency conducts or supports under this provision. The research or demonstration project must be published on this list prior to commencing the research involving human subjects.
              (ii) [Reserved]
              (6) Taste and food quality evaluation and consumer acceptance studies:
              (i) If wholesome foods without additives are consumed, or

              (ii) If a food is consumed that contains a food ingredient at or below the level and for a use found to be safe, or agricultural chemical or environmental contaminant at or below the level found to be safe, by the Food and Drug Administration or approved by the Environmental Protection Agency or the Food Safety and Inspection Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
              (7) Storage or maintenance for secondary research for which broad consent is required: Storage or maintenance of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens for potential secondary research use if an IRB conducts a limited IRB review and makes the determinations required by § 46.111(a)(8).
              (8) Secondary research for which broad consent is required: Research involving the use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens for secondary research use, if the following criteria are met:
              (i) Broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens was obtained in accordance with § 46.116(a)(1) through (4), (a)(6), and (d);
              (ii) Documentation of informed consent or waiver of documentation of consent was obtained in accordance with § 46.117;
              (iii) An IRB conducts a limited IRB review and makes the determination required by § 46.111(a)(7) and makes the determination that the research to be conducted is within the scope of the broad consent referenced in paragraph (d)(8)(i) of this section; and (iv) The investigator does not include returning individual research results to subjects as part of the study plan. This provision does not prevent an investigator from abiding by any legal requirements to return individual research results.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.105-46.106
              [Reserved]
            
            
              § 46.107
              IRB membership.
              (a) Each IRB shall have at least five members, with varying backgrounds to promote complete and adequate review of research activities commonly conducted by the institution. The IRB shall be sufficiently qualified through the experience and expertise of its members (professional competence), and the diversity of its members, including race, gender, and cultural backgrounds and sensitivity to such issues as community attitudes, to promote respect for its advice and counsel in safeguarding the rights and welfare of human subjects. The IRB shall be able to ascertain the acceptability of proposed research in terms of institutional commitments (including policies and resources) and regulations, applicable law, and standards of professional conduct and practice. The IRB shall therefore include persons knowledgeable in these areas. If an IRB regularly reviews research that involves a category of subjects that is vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, such as children, prisoners, individuals with impaired decision-making capacity, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons, consideration shall be given to the inclusion of one or more individuals who are knowledgeable about and experienced in working with these categories of subjects.
              (b) Each IRB shall include at least one member whose primary concerns are in scientific areas and at least one member whose primary concerns are in nonscientific areas.
              (c) Each IRB shall include at least one member who is not otherwise affiliated with the institution and who is not part of the immediate family of a person who is affiliated with the institution.
              (d) No IRB may have a member participate in the IRB's initial or continuing review of any project in which the member has a conflicting interest, except to provide information requested by the IRB.
              (e) An IRB may, in its discretion, invite individuals with competence in special areas to assist in the review of issues that require expertise beyond or in addition to that available on the IRB. These individuals may not vote with the IRB.
            
            
              § 46.108
              IRB functions and operations.
              (a) In order to fulfill the requirements of this policy each IRB shall:

              (1) Have access to meeting space and sufficient staff to support the IRB's review and recordkeeping duties;
              
              (2) Prepare and maintain a current list of the IRB members identified by name; earned degrees; representative capacity; indications of experience such as board certifications or licenses sufficient to describe each member's chief anticipated contributions to IRB deliberations; and any employment or other relationship between each member and the institution, for example, full-time employee, part-time employee, member of governing panel or board, stockholder, paid or unpaid consultant;
              (3) Establish and follow written procedures for:
              (i) Conducting its initial and continuing review of research and for reporting its findings and actions to the investigator and the institution;
              (ii) Determining which projects require review more often than annually and which projects need verification from sources other than the investigators that no material changes have occurred since previous IRB review; and
              (iii) Ensuring prompt reporting to the IRB of proposed changes in a research activity, and for ensuring that investigators will conduct the research activity in accordance with the terms of the IRB approval until any proposed changes have been reviewed and approved by the IRB, except when necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to the subject.
              (4) Establish and follow written procedures for ensuring prompt reporting to the IRB; appropriate institutional officials; the department or agency head; and the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office, or the equivalent office within the appropriate Federal department or agency of
              (i) Any unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others or any serious or continuing noncompliance with this policy or the requirements or determinations of the IRB; and
              (ii) Any suspension or termination of IRB approval.
              (b) Except when an expedited review procedure is used (as described in § 46.110), an IRB must review proposed research at convened meetings at which a majority of the members of the IRB are present, including at least one member whose primary concerns are in nonscientific areas. In order for the research to be approved, it shall receive the approval of a majority of those members present at the meeting.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.109
              IRB review of research.
              (a) An IRB shall review and have authority to approve, require modifications in (to secure approval), or disapprove all research activities covered by this policy, including exempt research activities under § 46.104 for which limited IRB review is a condition of exemption (under § 46.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), and (d)(7), and (8)).
              (b) An IRB shall require that information given to subjects (or legally authorized representatives, when appropriate) as part of informed consent is in accordance with § 46.116. The IRB may require that information, in addition to that specifically mentioned in § 46.116, be given to the subjects when in the IRB's judgment the information would meaningfully add to the protection of the rights and welfare of subjects.
              (c) An IRB shall require documentation of informed consent or may waive documentation in accordance with § 46.117.
              (d) An IRB shall notify investigators and the institution in writing of its decision to approve or disapprove the proposed research activity, or of modifications required to secure IRB approval of the research activity. If the IRB decides to disapprove a research activity, it shall include in its written notification a statement of the reasons for its decision and give the investigator an opportunity to respond in person or in writing.
              (e) An IRB shall conduct continuing review of research requiring review by the convened IRB at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk, not less than once per year, except as described in § 46.109(f).
              (f)(1) Unless an IRB determines otherwise, continuing review of research is not required in the following circumstances:

              (i) Research eligible for expedited review in accordance with § 46.110;
              
              (ii) Research reviewed by the IRB in accordance with the limited IRB review described in § 46.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), or (d)(7) or (8);
              (iii) Research that has progressed to the point that it involves only one or both of the following, which are part of the IRB-approved study:
              (A) Data analysis, including analysis of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, or
              (B) Accessing follow-up clinical data from procedures that subjects would undergo as part of clinical care.
              (2) [Reserved]
              (g) An IRB shall have authority to observe or have a third party observe the consent process and the research.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.110
              Expedited review procedures for certain kinds of research involving no more than minimal risk, and for minor changes in approved research.

              (a) The Secretary of HHS has established, and published as a Notice in the Federal Register, a list of categories of research that may be reviewed by the IRB through an expedited review procedure. The Secretary will evaluate the list at least every 8 years and amend it, as appropriate, after consultation with other federal departments and agencies and after publication in the Federal Register for public comment. A copy of the list is available from the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office.
              (b)(1) An IRB may use the expedited review procedure to review the following:
              (i) Some or all of the research appearing on the list described in paragraph (a) of this section, unless the reviewer determines that the study involves more than minimal risk;
              (ii) Minor changes in previously approved research during the period for which approval is authorized; or
              (iii) Research for which limited IRB review is a condition of exemption under § 46.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), and (d)(7) and (8).
              (2) Under an expedited review procedure, the review may be carried out by the IRB chairperson or by one or more experienced reviewers designated by the chairperson from among members of the IRB. In reviewing the research, the reviewers may exercise all of the authorities of the IRB except that the reviewers may not disapprove the research. A research activity may be disapproved only after review in accordance with the nonexpedited procedure set forth in § 46.108(b).
              (c) Each IRB that uses an expedited review procedure shall adopt a method for keeping all members advised of research proposals that have been approved under the procedure.
              (d) The department or agency head may restrict, suspend, terminate, or choose not to authorize an institution's or IRB's use of the expedited review procedure.
            
            
              § 46.111
              Criteria for IRB approval of research.
              (a) In order to approve research covered by this policy the IRB shall determine that all of the following requirements are satisfied:
              (1) Risks to subjects are minimized:
              (i) By using procedures that are consistent with sound research design and that do not unnecessarily expose subjects to risk, and
              (ii) Whenever appropriate, by using procedures already being performed on the subjects for diagnostic or treatment purposes.

              (2) Risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits, if any, to subjects, and the importance of the knowledge that may reasonably be expected to result. In evaluating risks and benefits, the IRB should consider only those risks and benefits that may result from the research (as distinguished from risks and benefits of therapies subjects would receive even if not participating in the research). The IRB should not consider possible long-range effects of applying knowledge gained in the research (e.g., the possible effects of the research on public policy) as among those research risks that fall within the purview of its responsibility.

              (3) Selection of subjects is equitable. In making this assessment the IRB should take into account the purposes of the research and the setting in which the research will be conducted. The IRB should be particularly cognizant of the special problems of research that involves a category of subjects who are vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, such as children, prisoners, individuals with impaired decision-making capacity, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons.
              (4) Informed consent will be sought from each prospective subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, in accordance with, and to the extent required by, § 46.116.
              (5) Informed consent will be appropriately documented or appropriately waived in accordance with § 46.117.
              (6) When appropriate, the research plan makes adequate provision for monitoring the data collected to ensure the safety of subjects.
              (7) When appropriate, there are adequate provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the confidentiality of data.
              (i) The Secretary of HHS will, after consultation with the Office of Management and Budget's privacy office and other Federal departments and agencies that have adopted this policy, issue guidance to assist IRBs in assessing what provisions are adequate to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the confidentiality of data.
              (ii) [Reserved]
              (8) For purposes of conducting the limited IRB review required by § 46.104(d)(7)), the IRB need not make the determinations at paragraphs (a)(1) through (7) of this section, and shall make the following determinations:
              (i) Broad consent for storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens is obtained in accordance with the requirements of § 46.116(a)(1)-(4), (a)(6), and (d);
              (ii) Broad consent is appropriately documented or waiver of documentation is appropriate, in accordance with § 46.117; and
              (iii) If there is a change made for research purposes in the way the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens are stored or maintained, there are adequate provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the confidentiality of data.
              (b) When some or all of the subjects are likely to be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, such as children, prisoners, individuals with impaired decision-making capacity, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons, additional safeguards have been included in the study to protect the rights and welfare of these subjects.
            
            
              § 46.112
              Review by institution.
              Research covered by this policy that has been approved by an IRB may be subject to further appropriate review and approval or disapproval by officials of the institution. However, those officials may not approve the research if it has not been approved by an IRB.
            
            
              § 46.113
              Suspension or termination of IRB approval of research.
              An IRB shall have authority to suspend or terminate approval of research that is not being conducted in accordance with the IRB's requirements or that has been associated with unexpected serious harm to subjects. Any suspension or termination of approval shall include a statement of the reasons for the IRB's action and shall be reported promptly to the investigator, appropriate institutional officials, and the department or agency head.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.114
              Cooperative research.
              (a) Cooperative research projects are those projects covered by this policy that involve more than one institution. In the conduct of cooperative research projects, each institution is responsible for safeguarding the rights and welfare of human subjects and for complying with this policy.

              (b)(1) Any institution located in the United States that is engaged in cooperative research must rely upon approval by a single IRB for that portion of the research that is conducted in the United States. The reviewing IRB will be identified by the Federal department or agency supporting or conducting the research or proposed by the lead institution subject to the acceptance of the Federal department or agency supporting the research.
              
              (2) The following research is not subject to this provision:
              (i) Cooperative research for which more than single IRB review is required by law (including tribal law passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe); or
              (ii) Research for which any Federal department or agency supporting or conducting the research determines and documents that the use of a single IRB is not appropriate for the particular context.
              (c) For research not subject to paragraph (b) of this section, an institution participating in a cooperative project may enter into a joint review arrangement, rely on the review of another IRB, or make similar arrangements for avoiding duplication of effort.
            
            
              § 46.115
              IRB records.
              (a) An institution, or when appropriate an IRB, shall prepare and maintain adequate documentation of IRB activities, including the following:
              (1) Copies of all research proposals reviewed, scientific evaluations, if any, that accompany the proposals, approved sample consent forms, progress reports submitted by investigators, and reports of injuries to subjects.
              (2) Minutes of IRB meetings, which shall be in sufficient detail to show attendance at the meetings; actions taken by the IRB; the vote on these actions including the number of members voting for, against, and abstaining; the basis for requiring changes in or disapproving research; and a written summary of the discussion of controverted issues and their resolution.
              (3) Records of continuing review activities, including the rationale for conducting continuing review of research that otherwise would not require continuing review as described in § 46.109(f)(1).
              (4) Copies of all correspondence between the IRB and the investigators.
              (5) A list of IRB members in the same detail as described in § 46.108(a)(2).
              (6) Written procedures for the IRB in the same detail as described in § 46.108(a)(3) and (4).
              (7) Statements of significant new findings provided to subjects, as required by § 46.116(c)(5).
              (8) The rationale for an expedited reviewer's determination under § 46.110(b)(1)(i) that research appearing on the expedited review list described in § 46.110(a) is more than minimal risk.
              (9) Documentation specifying the responsibilities that an institution and an organization operating an IRB each will undertake to ensure compliance with the requirements of this policy, as described in § 46.103(e).
              (b) The records required by this policy shall be retained for at least 3 years, and records relating to research that is conducted shall be retained for at least 3 years after completion of the research. The institution or IRB may maintain the records in printed form, or electronically. All records shall be accessible for inspection and copying by authorized representatives of the Federal department or agency at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.116
              General requirements for informed consent.
              (a) General. General requirements for informed consent, whether written or oral, are set forth in this paragraph and apply to consent obtained in accordance with the requirements set forth in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section. Broad consent may be obtained in lieu of informed consent obtained in accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section only with respect to the storage, maintenance, and secondary research uses of identifiable private information and identifiable biospecimens. Waiver or alteration of consent in research involving public benefit and service programs conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local officials is described in paragraph (e) of this section. General waiver or alteration of informed consent is described in paragraph (f) of this section. Except as provided elsewhere in this policy:

              (1) Before involving a human subject in research covered by this policy, an investigator shall obtain the legally effective informed consent of the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative.
              
              (2) An investigator shall seek informed consent only under circumstances that provide the prospective subject or the legally authorized representative sufficient opportunity to discuss and consider whether or not to participate and that minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence.
              (3) The information that is given to the subject or the legally authorized representative shall be in language understandable to the subject or the legally authorized representative.
              (4) The prospective subject or the legally authorized representative must be provided with the information that a reasonable person would want to have in order to make an informed decision about whether to participate, and an opportunity to discuss that information.
              (5) Except for broad consent obtained in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section:
              (i) Informed consent must begin with a concise and focused presentation of the key information that is most likely to assist a prospective subject or legally authorized representative in understanding the reasons why one might or might not want to participate in the research. This part of the informed consent must be organized and presented in a way that facilitates comprehension.
              (ii) Informed consent as a whole must present information in sufficient detail relating to the research, and must be organized and presented in a way that does not merely provide lists of isolated facts, but rather facilitates the prospective subject's or legally authorized representative's understanding of the reasons why one might or might not want to participate.
              (6) No informed consent may include any exculpatory language through which the subject or the legally authorized representative is made to waive or appear to waive any of the subject's legal rights, or releases or appears to release the investigator, the sponsor, the institution, or its agents from liability for negligence.
              (b) Basic elements of informed consent. Except as provided in paragraph (d), (e), or (f) of this section, in seeking informed consent the following information shall be provided to each subject or the legally authorized representative:
              (1) A statement that the study involves research, an explanation of the purposes of the research and the expected duration of the subject's participation, a description of the procedures to be followed, and identification of any procedures that are experimental;
              (2) A description of any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the subject;
              (3) A description of any benefits to the subject or to others that may reasonably be expected from the research;
              (4) A disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or courses of treatment, if any, that might be advantageous to the subject;
              (5) A statement describing the extent, if any, to which confidentiality of records identifying the subject will be maintained;
              (6) For research involving more than minimal risk, an explanation as to whether any compensation and an explanation as to whether any medical treatments are available if injury occurs and, if so, what they consist of, or where further information may be obtained;
              (7) An explanation of whom to contact for answers to pertinent questions about the research and research subjects' rights, and whom to contact in the event of a research-related injury to the subject;
              (8) A statement that participation is voluntary, refusal to participate will involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled, and the subject may discontinue participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled; and
              (9) One of the following statements about any research that involves the collection of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens:

              (i) A statement that identifiers might be removed from the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens and that, after such removal, the information or biospecimens could be used for future research studies or distributed to another investigator for future research studies without additional informed consent from the subject or the legally authorized representative, if this might be a possibility; or
              (ii) A statement that the subject's information or biospecimens collected as part of the research, even if identifiers are removed, will not be used or distributed for future research studies.
              (c) Additional elements of informed consent. Except as provided in paragraph (d), (e), or (f) of this section, one or more of the following elements of information, when appropriate, shall also be provided to each subject or the legally authorized representative:
              (1) A statement that the particular treatment or procedure may involve risks to the subject (or to the embryo or fetus, if the subject is or may become pregnant) that are currently unforeseeable;
              (2) Anticipated circumstances under which the subject's participation may be terminated by the investigator without regard to the subject's or the legally authorized representative's consent;
              (3) Any additional costs to the subject that may result from participation in the research;
              (4) The consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from the research and procedures for orderly termination of participation by the subject;
              (5) A statement that significant new findings developed during the course of the research that may relate to the subject's willingness to continue participation will be provided to the subject;
              (6) The approximate number of subjects involved in the study;
              (7) A statement that the subject's biospecimens (even if identifiers are removed) may be used for commercial profit and whether the subject will or will not share in this commercial profit;
              (8) A statement regarding whether clinically relevant research results, including individual research results, will be disclosed to subjects, and if so, under what conditions; and

              (9) For research involving biospecimens, whether the research will (if known) or might include whole genome sequencing (i.e., sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or exome sequence of that specimen).
              (d) Elements of broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens. Broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens (collected for either research studies other than the proposed research or nonresearch purposes) is permitted as an alternative to the informed consent requirements in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. If the subject or the legally authorized representative is asked to provide broad consent, the following shall be provided to each subject or the subject's legally authorized representative:
              (1) The information required in paragraphs (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(5), and (b)(8) and, when appropriate, (c)(7) and (9) of this section;
              (2) A general description of the types of research that may be conducted with the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens. This description must include sufficient information such that a reasonable person would expect that the broad consent would permit the types of research conducted;
              (3) A description of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens that might be used in research, whether sharing of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens might occur, and the types of institutions or researchers that might conduct research with the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens;
              (4) A description of the period of time that the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens may be stored and maintained (which period of time could be indefinite), and a description of the period of time that the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens may be used for research purposes (which period of time could be indefinite);

              (5) Unless the subject or legally authorized representative will be provided details about specific research studies, a statement that they will not be informed of the details of any specific research studies that might be conducted using the subject's identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, including the purposes of the research, and that they might have chosen not to consent to some of those specific research studies;
              (6) Unless it is known that clinically relevant research results, including individual research results, will be disclosed to the subject in all circumstances, a statement that such results may not be disclosed to the subject; and
              (7) An explanation of whom to contact for answers to questions about the subject's rights and about storage and use of the subject's identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, and whom to contact in the event of a research-related harm.
              (e) Waiver or alteration of consent in research involving public benefit and service programs conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local officials—(1) Waiver. An IRB may waive the requirement to obtain informed consent for research under paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (e)(3) of this section. If an individual was asked to provide broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens in accordance with the requirements at paragraph (d) of this section, and refused to consent, an IRB cannot waive consent for the storage, maintenance, or secondary research use of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens.
              (2) Alteration. An IRB may approve a consent procedure that omits some, or alters some or all, of the elements of informed consent set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (e)(3) of this section. An IRB may not omit or alter any of the requirements described in paragraph (a) of this section. If a broad consent procedure is used, an IRB may not omit or alter any of the elements required under paragraph (d) of this section.
              (3) Requirements for waiver and alteration. In order for an IRB to waive or alter consent as described in this subsection, the IRB must find and document that:
              (i) The research or demonstration project is to be conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local government officials and is designed to study, evaluate, or otherwise examine:
              (A) Public benefit or service programs;
              (B) Procedures for obtaining benefits or services under those programs;
              (C) Possible changes in or alternatives to those programs or procedures; or
              (D) Possible changes in methods or levels of payment for benefits or services under those programs; and
              (ii) The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration.
              (f) General waiver or alteration of consent—(1) Waiver. An IRB may waive the requirement to obtain informed consent for research under paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (f)(3) of this section. If an individual was asked to provide broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens in accordance with the requirements at paragraph (d) of this section, and refused to consent, an IRB cannot waive consent for the storage, maintenance, or secondary research use of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens.
              (2) Alteration. An IRB may approve a consent procedure that omits some, or alters some or all, of the elements of informed consent set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (f)(3) of this section. An IRB may not omit or alter any of the requirements described in paragraph (a) of this section. If a broad consent procedure is used, an IRB may not omit or alter any of the elements required under paragraph (d) of this section.
              (3) Requirements for waiver and alteration. In order for an IRB to waive or alter consent as described in this subsection, the IRB must find and document that:

              (i) The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects;
              
              (ii) The research could not practicably be carried out without the requested waiver or alteration;
              (iii) If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, the research could not practicably be carried out without using such information or biospecimens in an identifiable format;
              (iv) The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects; and
              (v) Whenever appropriate, the subjects or legally authorized representatives will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation.
              (g) Screening, recruiting, or determining eligibility. An IRB may approve a research proposal in which an investigator will obtain information or biospecimens for the purpose of screening, recruiting, or determining the eligibility of prospective subjects without the informed consent of the prospective subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, if either of the following conditions are met:
              (1) The investigator will obtain information through oral or written communication with the prospective subject or legally authorized representative, or
              (2) The investigator will obtain identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens by accessing records or stored identifiable biospecimens.
              (h) Posting of clinical trial consent form. (1) For each clinical trial conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency, one IRB-approved informed consent form used to enroll subjects must be posted by the awardee or the Federal department or agency component conducting the trial on a publicly available Federal Web site that will be established as a repository for such informed consent forms.

              (2) If the Federal department or agency supporting or conducting the clinical trial determines that certain information should not be made publicly available on a Federal Web site (e.g. confidential commercial information), such Federal department or agency may permit or require redactions to the information posted.
              (3) The informed consent form must be posted on the Federal Web site after the clinical trial is closed to recruitment, and no later than 60 days after the last study visit by any subject, as required by the protocol.
              (i) Preemption. The informed consent requirements in this policy are not intended to preempt any applicable Federal, state, or local laws (including tribal laws passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe) that require additional information to be disclosed in order for informed consent to be legally effective.
              (j) Emergency medical care. Nothing in this policy is intended to limit the authority of a physician to provide emergency medical care, to the extent the physician is permitted to do so under applicable Federal, state, or local law (including tribal law passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe).
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.117
              Documentation of informed consent.
              (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, informed consent shall be documented by the use of a written informed consent form approved by the IRB and signed (including in an electronic format) by the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative. A written copy shall be given to the person signing the informed consent form.
              (b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the informed consent form may be either of the following:
              (1) A written informed consent form that meets the requirements of § 46.116. The investigator shall give either the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative adequate opportunity to read the informed consent form before it is signed; alternatively, this form may be read to the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative.

              (2) A short form written informed consent form stating that the elements of informed consent required by § 46.116 have been presented orally to the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, and that the key information required by § 46.116(a)(5)(i) was presented first to the subject, before other information, if any, was provided. The IRB shall approve a written summary of what is to be said to the subject or the legally authorized representative. When this method is used, there shall be a witness to the oral presentation. Only the short form itself is to be signed by the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative. However, the witness shall sign both the short form and a copy of the summary, and the person actually obtaining consent shall sign a copy of the summary. A copy of the summary shall be given to the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, in addition to a copy of the short form.
              (c)(1) An IRB may waive the requirement for the investigator to obtain a signed informed consent form for some or all subjects if it finds any of the following:
              (i) That the only record linking the subject and the research would be the informed consent form and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each subject (or legally authorized representative) will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the research, and the subject's wishes will govern;
              (ii) That the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context; or
              (iii) If the subjects or legally authorized representatives are members of a distinct cultural group or community in which signing forms is not the norm, that the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and provided there is an appropriate alternative mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained.
              (2) In cases in which the documentation requirement is waived, the IRB may require the investigator to provide subjects or legally authorized representatives with a written statement regarding the research.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
            
            
              § 46.118
              Applications and proposals lacking definite plans for involvement of human subjects.
              Certain types of applications for grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts are submitted to Federal departments or agencies with the knowledge that subjects may be involved within the period of support, but definite plans would not normally be set forth in the application or proposal. These include activities such as institutional type grants when selection of specific projects is the institution's responsibility; research training grants in which the activities involving subjects remain to be selected; and projects in which human subjects' involvement will depend upon completion of instruments, prior animal studies, or purification of compounds. Except for research waived under § 46.101(i) or exempted under § 46.104, no human subjects may be involved in any project supported by these awards until the project has been reviewed and approved by the IRB, as provided in this policy, and certification submitted, by the institution, to the Federal department or agency component supporting the research.
            
            
              § 46.119
              Research undertaken without the intention of involving human subjects.
              Except for research waived under § 46.101(i) or exempted under § 46.104, in the event research is undertaken without the intention of involving human subjects, but it is later proposed to involve human subjects in the research, the research shall first be reviewed and approved by an IRB, as provided in this policy, a certification submitted by the institution to the Federal department or agency component supporting the research, and final approval given to the proposed change by the Federal department or agency component.
            
            
              § 46.120
              Evaluation and disposition of applications and proposals for research to be conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency.

              (a) The department or agency head will evaluate all applications and proposals involving human subjects submitted to the Federal department or agency through such officers and employees of the Federal department or agency and such experts and consultants as the department or agency head determines to be appropriate. This evaluation will take into consideration the risks to the subjects, the adequacy of protection against these risks, the potential benefits of the research to the subjects and others, and the importance of the knowledge gained or to be gained.
              (b) On the basis of this evaluation, the department or agency head may approve or disapprove the application or proposal, or enter into negotiations to develop an approvable one.
            
            
              § 46.121
              [Reserved]
            
            
              § 46.122
              Use of Federal funds.
              Federal funds administered by a Federal department or agency may not be expended for research involving human subjects unless the requirements of this policy have been satisfied.
            
            
              § 46.123
              Early termination of research support: Evaluation of applications and proposals.
              (a) The department or agency head may require that Federal department or agency support for any project be terminated or suspended in the manner prescribed in applicable program requirements, when the department or agency head finds an institution has materially failed to comply with the terms of this policy.
              (b) In making decisions about supporting or approving applications or proposals covered by this policy the department or agency head may take into account, in addition to all other eligibility requirements and program criteria, factors such as whether the applicant has been subject to a termination or suspension under paragraph (a) of this section and whether the applicant or the person or persons who would direct or has/have directed the scientific and technical aspects of an activity has/have, in the judgment of the department or agency head, materially failed to discharge responsibility for the protection of the rights and welfare of human subjects (whether or not the research was subject to federal regulation).
            
            
              § 46.124
              Conditions.
              With respect to any research project or any class of research projects the department or agency head of either the conducting or the supporting Federal department or agency may impose additional conditions prior to or at the time of approval when in the judgment of the department or agency head additional conditions are necessary for the protection of human subjects.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Additional Protections for Pregnant Women, Human Fetuses and Neonates Involved in Research
            
              Source:
              66 FR 56778, Nov. 13, 2001, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 46.201
              To what do these regulations apply?
              (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this subpart applies to all research involving pregnant women, human fetuses, neonates of uncertain viability, or nonviable neonates conducted or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). This includes all research conducted in DHHS facilities by any person and all research conducted in any facility by DHHS employees.
              (b) The exemptions at § 46.101(b)(1) through (6) are applicable to this subpart.
              (c) The provisions of § 46.101(c) through (i) are applicable to this subpart. Reference to State or local laws in this subpart and in § 46.101(f) is intended to include the laws of federally recognized American Indian and Alaska Native Tribal Governments.
              (d) The requirements of this subpart are in addition to those imposed under the other subparts of this part.
            
            
              § 46.202
              Definitions.
              The definitions in § 46.102 shall be applicable to this subpart as well. In addition, as used in this subpart:
              (a) Dead fetus means a fetus that exhibits neither heartbeat, spontaneous respiratory activity, spontaneous movement of voluntary muscles, nor pulsation of the umbilical cord.

              (b) Delivery means complete separation of the fetus from the woman by expulsion or extraction or any other means.
              (c) Fetus means the product of conception from implantation until delivery.
              (d) Neonate means a newborn.
              (e) Nonviable neonate means a neonate after delivery that, although living, is not viable.
              (f) Pregnancy encompasses the period of time from implantation until delivery. A woman shall be assumed to be pregnant if she exhibits any of the pertinent presumptive signs of pregnancy, such as missed menses, until the results of a pregnancy test are negative or until delivery.
              (g) Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services and any other officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services to whom authority has been delegated.

              (h) Viable, as it pertains to the neonate, means being able, after delivery, to survive (given the benefit of available medical therapy) to the point of independently maintaining heartbeat and respiration. The Secretary may from time to time, taking into account medical advances, publish in the Federal Register guidelines to assist in determining whether a neonate is viable for purposes of this subpart. If a neonate is viable then it may be included in research only to the extent permitted and in accordance with the requirements of subparts A and D of this part.
            
            
              § 46.203
              Duties of IRBs in connection with research involving pregnant women, fetuses, and neonates.
              In addition to other responsibilities assigned to IRBs under this part, each IRB shall review research covered by this subpart and approve only research which satisfies the conditions of all applicable sections of this subpart and the other subparts of this part.
            
            
              § 46.204
              Research involving pregnant women or fetuses.
              Pregnant women or fetuses may be involved in research if all of the following conditions are met:
              (a) Where scientifically appropriate, preclinical studies, including studies on pregnant animals, and clinical studies, including studies on nonpregnant women, have been conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks to pregnant women and fetuses;
              (b) The risk to the fetus is caused solely by interventions or procedures that hold out the prospect of direct benefit for the woman or the fetus; or, if there is no such prospect of benefit, the risk to the fetus is not greater than minimal and the purpose of the research is the development of important biomedical knowledge which cannot be obtained by any other means;
              (c) Any risk is the least possible for achieving the objectives of the research;
              (d) If the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit to the pregnant woman, the prospect of a direct benefit both to the pregnant woman and the fetus, or no prospect of benefit for the woman nor the fetus when risk to the fetus is not greater than minimal and the purpose of the research is the development of important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained by any other means, her consent is obtained in accord with the informed consent provisions of subpart A of this part;
              (e) If the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit solely to the fetus then the consent of the pregnant woman and the father is obtained in accord with the informed consent provisions of subpart A of this part, except that the father's consent need not be obtained if he is unable to consent because of unavailability, incompetence, or temporary incapacity or the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest.
              (f) Each individual providing consent under paragraph (d) or (e) of this section is fully informed regarding the reasonably foreseeable impact of the research on the fetus or neonate;
              (g) For children as defined in § 46.402(a) who are pregnant, assent and permission are obtained in accord with the provisions of subpart D of this part;
              (h) No inducements, monetary or otherwise, will be offered to terminate a pregnancy;

              (i) Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in any decisions as to the timing, method, or procedures used to terminate a pregnancy; and
              
              (j) Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in determining the viability of a neonate.
            
            
              § 46.205
              Research involving neonates.
              (a) Neonates of uncertain viability and nonviable neonates may be involved in research if all of the following conditions are met:
              (1) Where scientifically appropriate, preclinical and clinical studies have been conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks to neonates.
              (2) Each individual providing consent under paragraph (b)(2) or (c)(5) of this section is fully informed regarding the reasonably foreseeable impact of the research on the neonate.
              (3) Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in determining the viability of a neonate.
              (4) The requirements of paragraph (b) or (c) of this section have been met as applicable.
              (b) Neonates of uncertain viability. Until it has been ascertained whether or not a neonate is viable, a neonate may not be involved in research covered by this subpart unless the following additional conditions are met:
              (1) The IRB determines that:
              (i) The research holds out the prospect of enhancing the probability of survival of the neonate to the point of viability, and any risk is the least possible for achieving that objective, or
              (ii) The purpose of the research is the development of important biomedical knowledge which cannot be obtained by other means and there will be no added risk to the neonate resulting from the research; and
              (2) The legally effective informed consent of either parent of the neonate or, if neither parent is able to consent because of unavailability, incompetence, or temporary incapacity, the legally effective informed consent of either parent's legally authorized representative is obtained in accord with subpart A of this part, except that the consent of the father or his legally authorized representative need not be obtained if the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest.
              (c) Nonviable neonates. After delivery nonviable neonate may not be involved in research covered by this subpart unless all of the following additional conditions are met:
              (1) Vital functions of the neonate will not be artificially maintained;
              (2) The research will not terminate the heartbeat or respiration of the neonate;
              (3) There will be no added risk to the neonate resulting from the research;
              (4) The purpose of the research is the development of important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained by other means; and
              (5) The legally effective informed consent of both parents of the neonate is obtained in accord with subpart A of this part, except that the waiver and alteration provisions of § 46.116(c) and (d) do not apply. However, if either parent is unable to consent because of unavailability, incompetence, or temporary incapacity, the informed consent of one parent of a nonviable neonate will suffice to meet the requirements of this paragraph (c)(5), except that the consent of the father need not be obtained if the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest. The consent of a legally authorized representative of either or both of the parents of a nonviable neonate will not suffice to meet the requirements of this paragraph (c)(5).
              (d) Viable neonates. A neonate, after delivery, that has been determined to be viable may be included in research only to the extent permitted by and in accord with the requirements of subparts A and D of this part.
            
            
              § 46.206
              Research involving, after delivery, the placenta, the dead fetus or fetal material.
              (a) Research involving, after delivery, the placenta; the dead fetus; macerated fetal material; or cells, tissue, or organs excised from a dead fetus, shall be conducted only in accord with any applicable Federal, State, or local laws and regulations regarding such activities.

              (b) If information associated with material described in paragraph (a) of this section is recorded for research purposes in a manner that living individuals can be identified, directly or through identifiers linked to those individuals, those individuals are research subjects and all pertinent subparts of this part are applicable.
            
            
              § 46.207
              Research not otherwise approvable which presents an opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of pregnant women, fetuses, or neonates.
              The Secretary will conduct or fund research that the IRB does not believe meets the requirements of § 46.204 or § 46.205 only if:
              (a) The IRB finds that the research presents a reasonable opportunity to further the understanding, prevention, or alleviation of a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of pregnant women, fetuses or neonates; and

              (b) The Secretary, after consultation with a panel of experts in pertinent disciplines (for example: science, medicine, ethics, law) and following opportunity for public review and comment, including a public meeting announced in the Federal Register, has determined either:
              (1) That the research in fact satisfies the conditions of § 46.204, as applicable; or
              (2) The following:
              (i) The research presents a reasonable opportunity to further the understanding, prevention, or alleviation of a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of pregnant women, fetuses or neonates;
              (ii) The research will be conducted in accord with sound ethical principles; and
              (iii) Informed consent will be obtained in accord with the informed consent provisions of subpart A and other applicable subparts of this part.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Additional Protections Pertaining to Biomedical and Behavioral Research Involving Prisoners as Subjects
            
              Source:
              43 FR 53655, Nov. 16, 1978, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 46.301
              Applicability.
              (a) The regulations in this subpart are applicable to all biomedical and behavioral research conducted or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services involving prisoners as subjects.
              (b) Nothing in this subpart shall be construed as indicating that compliance with the procedures set forth herein will authorize research involving prisoners as subjects, to the extent such research is limited or barred by applicable State or local law.
              (c) The requirements of this subpart are in addition to those imposed under the other subparts of this part.
            
            
              § 46.302
              Purpose.
              Inasmuch as prisoners may be under constraints because of their incarceration which could affect their ability to make a truly voluntary and uncoerced decision whether or not to participate as subjects in research, it is the purpose of this subpart to provide additional safeguards for the protection of prisoners involved in activities to which this subpart is applicable.
            
            
              § 46.303
              Definitions.
              As used in this subpart:
              (a) Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services and any other officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services to whom authority has been delegated.
              (b) DHHS means the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (c) Prisoner means any individual involuntarily confined or detained in a penal institution. The term is intended to encompass individuals sentenced to such an institution under a criminal or civil statute, individuals detained in other facilities by virtue of statutes or commitment procedures which provide alternatives to criminal prosecution or incarceration in a penal institution, and individuals detained pending arraignment, trial, or sentencing.
              (d) Minimal risk is the probability and magnitude of physical or psychological harm that is normally encountered in the daily lives, or in the routine medical, dental, or psychological examination of healthy persons.
            
            
              
              § 46.304
              Composition of Institutional Review Boards where prisoners are involved.
              In addition to satisfying the requirements in § 46.107 of this part, an Institutional Review Board, carrying out responsibilities under this part with respect to research covered by this subpart, shall also meet the following specific requirements:
              (a) A majority of the Board (exclusive of prisoner members) shall have no association with the prison(s) involved, apart from their membership on the Board.
              (b) At least one member of the Board shall be a prisoner, or a prisoner representative with appropriate background and experience to serve in that capacity, except that where a particular research project is reviewed by more than one Board only one Board need satisfy this requirement.
              [43 FR 53655, Nov. 16, 1978, as amended at 46 FR 8386, Jan. 26, 1981]
            
            
              § 46.305
              Additional duties of the Institutional Review Boards where prisoners are involved.
              (a) In addition to all other responsibilities prescribed for Institutional Review Boards under this part, the Board shall review research covered by this subpart and approve such research only if it finds that:
              (1) The research under review represents one of the categories of research permissible under § 46.306(a)(2);
              (2) Any possible advantages accruing to the prisoner through his or her participation in the research, when compared to the general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities and opportunity for earnings in the prison, are not of such a magnitude that his or her ability to weigh the risks of the research against the value of such advantages in the limited choice environment of the prison is impaired;
              (3) The risks involved in the research are commensurate with risks that would be accepted by nonprisoner volunteers;
              (4) Procedures for the selection of subjects within the prison are fair to all prisoners and immune from arbitrary intervention by prison authorities or prisoners. Unless the principal investigator provides to the Board justification in writing for following some other procedures, control subjects must be selected randomly from the group of available prisoners who meet the characteristics needed for that particular research project;
              (5) The information is presented in language which is understandable to the subject population;
              (6) Adequate assurance exists that parole boards will not take into account a prisoner's participation in the research in making decisions regarding parole, and each prisoner is clearly informed in advance that participation in the research will have no effect on his or her parole; and
              (7) Where the Board finds there may be a need for follow-up examination or care of participants after the end of their participation, adequate provision has been made for such examination or care, taking into account the varying lengths of individual prisoners' sentences, and for informing participants of this fact.
              (b) The Board shall carry out such other duties as may be assigned by the Secretary.
              (c) The institution shall certify to the Secretary, in such form and manner as the Secretary may require, that the duties of the Board under this section have been fulfilled.
            
            
              § 46.306
              Permitted research involving prisoners.
              (a) Biomedical or behavioral research conducted or supported by DHHS may involve prisoners as subjects only if:
              (1) The institution responsible for the conduct of the research has certified to the Secretary that the Institutional Review Board has approved the research under § 46.305 of this subpart; and
              (2) In the judgment of the Secretary the proposed research involves solely the following:
              (i) Study of the possible causes, effects, and processes of incarceration, and of criminal behavior, provided that the study presents no more than minimal risk and no more than inconvenience to the subjects;

              (ii) Study of prisons as institutional structures or of prisoners as incarcerated persons, provided that the study presents no more than minimal risk and no more than inconvenience to the subjects;

              (iii) Research on conditions particularly affecting prisoners as a class (for example, vaccine trials and other research on hepatitis which is much more prevalent in prisons than elsewhere; and research on social and psychological problems such as alcoholism, drug addiction and sexual assaults) provided that the study may proceed only after the Secretary has consulted with appropriate experts including experts in penology medicine and ethics, and published notice, in the Federal Register, of his intent to approve such research; or

              (iv) Research on practices, both innovative and accepted, which have the intent and reasonable probability of improving the health or well-being of the subject. In cases in which those studies require the assignment of prisoners in a manner consistent with protocols approved by the IRB to control groups which may not benefit from the research, the study may proceed only after the Secretary has consulted with appropriate experts, including experts in penology medicine and ethics, and published notice, in the Federal Register, of his intent to approve such research.
              (b) Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, biomedical or behavioral research conducted or supported by DHHS shall not involve prisoners as subjects.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Additional Protections for Children Involved as Subjects in Research
            
              Source:
              48 FR 9818, Mar. 8, 1983, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 46.401
              To what do these regulations apply?
              (a) This subpart applies to all research involving children as subjects, conducted or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (1) This includes research conducted by Department employees, except that each head of an Operating Division of the Department may adopt such nonsubstantive, procedural modifications as may be appropriate from an administrative standpoint.
              (2) It also includes research conducted or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services outside the United States, but in appropriate circumstances, the Secretary may, under paragraph (e) of § 46.101 of subpart A, waive the applicability of some or all of the requirements of these regulations for research of this type.
              (b) Exemptions at § 46.101(b)(1) and (b)(3) through (b)(6) are applicable to this subpart. The exemption at § 46.101(b)(2) regarding educational tests is also applicable to this subpart. However, the exemption at § 46.101(b)(2) for research involving survey or interview procedures or observations of public behavior does not apply to research covered by this subpart, except for research involving observation of public behavior when the investigator(s) do not participate in the activities being observed.
              (c) The exceptions, additions, and provisions for waiver as they appear in paragraphs (c) through (i) of § 46.101 of subpart A are applicable to this subpart.
              [48 FR 9818, Mar. 8, 1983; 56 FR 28032, June 18, 1991; 56 FR 29757, June 28, 1991]
            
            
              § 46.402
              Definitions.
              The definitions in § 46.102 of subpart A shall be applicable to this subpart as well. In addition, as used in this subpart:
              (a) Children are persons who have not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research, under the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted.
              (b) Assent means a child's affirmative agreement to participate in research. Mere failure to object should not, absent affirmative agreement, be construed as assent.
              (c) Permission means the agreement of parent(s) or guardian to the participation of their child or ward in research.
              (d) Parent means a child's biological or adoptive parent.
              (e) Guardian means an individual who is authorized under applicable State or local law to consent on behalf of a child to general medical care.
            
            
              
              § 46.403
              IRB duties.
              In addition to other responsibilities assigned to IRBs under this part, each IRB shall review research covered by this subpart and approve only research which satisfies the conditions of all applicable sections of this subpart.
            
            
              § 46.404
              Research not involving greater than minimal risk.
              HHS will conduct or fund research in which the IRB finds that no greater than minimal risk to children is presented, only if the IRB finds that adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children and the permission of their parents or guardians, as set forth in § 46.408.
            
            
              § 46.405
              Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the individual subjects.
              HHS will conduct or fund research in which the IRB finds that more than minimal risk to children is presented by an intervention or procedure that holds out the prospect of direct benefit for the individual subject, or by a monitoring procedure that is likely to contribute to the subject's well-being, only if the IRB finds that:
              (a) The risk is justified by the anticipated benefit to the subjects;
              (b) The relation of the anticipated benefit to the risk is at least as favorable to the subjects as that presented by available alternative approaches; and
              (c) Adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children and permission of their parents or guardians, as set forth in § 46.408.
            
            
              § 46.406
              Research involving greater than minimal risk and no prospect of direct benefit to individual subjects, but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subject's disorder or condition.
              HHS will conduct or fund research in which the IRB finds that more than minimal risk to children is presented by an intervention or procedure that does not hold out the prospect of direct benefit for the individual subject, or by a monitoring procedure which is not likely to contribute to the well-being of the subject, only if the IRB finds that:
              (a) The risk represents a minor increase over minimal risk;
              (b) The intervention or procedure presents experiences to subjects that are reasonably commensurate with those inherent in their actual or expected medical, dental, psychological, social, or educational situations;
              (c) The intervention or procedure is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subjects' disorder or condition which is of vital importance for the understanding or amelioration of the subjects' disorder or condition; and
              (d) Adequate provisions are made for soliciting assent of the children and permission of their parents or guardians, as set forth in § 46.408.
            
            
              § 46.407
              Research not otherwise approvable which presents an opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children.
              HHS will conduct or fund research that the IRB does not believe meets the requirements of § 46.404, § 46.405, or § 46.406 only if:
              (a) The IRB finds that the research presents a reasonable opportunity to further the understanding, prevention, or alleviation of a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children; and
              (b) The Secretary, after consultation with a panel of experts in pertinent disciplines (for example: science, medicine, education, ethics, law) and following opportunity for public review and comment, has determined either:
              (1) That the research in fact satisfies the conditions of § 46.404, § 46.405, or § 46.406, as applicable, or
              (2) The following:
              (i) The research presents a reasonable opportunity to further the understanding, prevention, or alleviation of a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children;
              (ii) The research will be conducted in accordance with sound ethical principles;
              (iii) Adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of children and the permission of their parents or guardians, as set forth in § 46.408.
            
            
              
              § 46.408
              Requirements for permission by parents or guardians and for assent by children.
              (a) In addition to the determinations required under other applicable sections of this subpart, the IRB shall determine that adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children, when in the judgment of the IRB the children are capable of providing assent. In determining whether children are capable of assenting, the IRB shall take into account the ages, maturity, and psychological state of the children involved. This judgment may be made for all children to be involved in research under a particular protocol, or for each child, as the IRB deems appropriate. If the IRB determines that the capability of some or all of the children is so limited that they cannot reasonably be consulted or that the intervention or procedure involved in the research holds out a prospect of direct benefit that is important to the health or well-being of the children and is available only in the context of the research, the assent of the children is not a necessary condition for proceeding with the research. Even where the IRB determines that the subjects are capable of assenting, the IRB may still waive the assent requirement under circumstances in which consent may be waived in accord with § 46.116 of subpart A.
              (b) In addition to the determinations required under other applicable sections of this subpart, the IRB shall determine, in accordance with and to the extent that consent is required by § 46.116 of subpart A, that adequate provisions are made for soliciting the permission of each child's parents or guardian. Where parental permission is to be obtained, the IRB may find that the permission of one parent is sufficient for research to be conducted under § 46.404 or § 46.405. Where research is covered by §§ 46.406 and 46.407 and permission is to be obtained from parents, both parents must give their permission unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child.
              (c) In addition to the provisions for waiver contained in § 46.116 of subpart A, if the IRB determines that a research protocol is designed for conditions or for a subject population for which parental or guardian permission is not a reasonable requirement to protect the subjects (for example, neglected or abused children), it may waive the consent requirements in subpart A of this part and paragraph (b) of this section, provided an appropriate mechanism for protecting the children who will participate as subjects in the research is substituted, and provided further that the waiver is not inconsistent with Federal, state or local law. The choice of an appropriate mechanism would depend upon the nature and purpose of the activities described in the protocol, the risk and anticipated benefit to the research subjects, and their age, maturity, status, and condition.
              (d) Permission by parents or guardians shall be documented in accordance with and to the extent required by § 46.117 of subpart A.
              (e) When the IRB determines that assent is required, it shall also determine whether and how assent must be documented.
            
            
              § 46.409
              Wards.
              (a) Children who are wards of the state or any other agency, institution, or entity can be included in research approved under § 46.406 or § 46.407 only if such research is:
              (1) Related to their status as wards; or
              (2) Conducted in schools, camps, hospitals, institutions, or similar settings in which the majority of children involved as subjects are not wards.

              (b) If the research is approved under paragraph (a) of this section, the IRB shall require appointment of an advocate for each child who is a ward, in addition to any other individual acting on behalf of the child as guardian or in loco parentis. One individual may serve as advocate for more than one child. The advocate shall be an individual who has the background and experience to act in, and agrees to act in, the best interests of the child for the duration of the child's participation in the research and who is not associated in any way (except in the role as advocate or member of the IRB) with the research, the investigator(s), or the guardian organization.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Registration of Institutional Review Boards
            
              Source:
              74 FR 2405, Jan. 15, 2009, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 46.501
              What IRBs must be registered?
              Each IRB that is designated by an institution under an assurance of compliance approved for federalwide use by the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) under § 46.103(a) and that reviews research involving human subjects conducted or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) must be registered with HHS. An individual authorized to act on behalf of the institution or organization operating the IRB must submit the registration information.
            
            
              § 46.502
              What information must be provided when registering an IRB?
              The following information must be provided to HHS when registering an IRB:
              (a) The name, mailing address, and street address (if different from the mailing address) of the institution or organization operating the IRB(s); and the name, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail address of the senior officer or head official of that institution or organization who is responsible for overseeing activities performed by the IRB.
              (b) The name, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail address of the contact person providing the registration information.
              (c) The name, if any, assigned to the IRB by the institution or organization, and the IRB's mailing address, street address (if different from the mailing address), phone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail address.
              (d) The name, phone number, and electronic mail address of the IRB chairperson.
              (e)(1) The approximate numbers of:
              (i) All active protocols; and
              (ii) Active protocols conducted or supported by HHS.
              (2) For purpose of this regulation, an “active protocol” is any protocol for which the IRB conducted an initial review or a continuing review at a convened meeting or under an expedited review procedure during the preceding twelve months.
              (f) The approximate number of full-time equivalent positions devoted to the IRB's administrative activities.
            
            
              § 46.503
              When must an IRB be registered?
              An IRB must be registered before it can be designated under an assurance approved for federalwide use by OHRP under § 46.103(a). IRB registration becomes effective when reviewed and accepted by OHRP. The registration will be effective for 3 years.
            
            
              § 46.504
              How must an IRB be registered?
              Each IRB must be registered electronically through http://ohrp.cit.nih.gov/efile unless an institution or organization lacks the ability to register its IRB(s) electronically. If an institution or organization lacks the ability to register an IRB electronically, it must send its IRB registration information in writing to OHRP.
            
            
              § 46.505
              When must IRB registration information be renewed or updated?
              (a) Each IRB must renew its registration every 3 years.
              (b) The registration information for an IRB must be updated within 90 days after changes occur regarding the contact person who provided the IRB registration information or the IRB chairperson. The updated registration information must be submitted in accordance with § 46.504.
              (c) Any renewal or update that is submitted to, and accepted by, OHRP begins a new 3-year effective period.
              (d) An institution's or organization's decision to disband a registered IRB which it is operating also must be reported to OHRP in writing within 30 days after permanent cessation of the IRB's review of HHS-conducted or -supported research.
            
          
        
        
          
          Pt. 50
          PART 50—U.S. EXCHANGE VISITOR PROGRAM—REQUEST FOR WAIVER OF THE TWO-YEAR FOREIGN RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT
          
            Sec.
            50.1
            Authority.
            50.2
            Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board.
            50.3
            Policy.
            50.4
            Waivers for research.
            50.5
            Waivers for the delivery of health care service.
            50.6
            Procedures for submission of application to HHS.
            50.7
            Personal hardship, persecution and visa extension considerations.
            50.8
            Compliance.
          
          
            Authority:
            75 Stat. 527 (22 U.S.C. 2451 et seq.); 84 Stat. 116 (8 U.S.C. 1182(e)).
          
          
            Source:
            49 FR 9900, Mar. 16, 1984, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 50.1
            Authority.
            Under the authority of Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 (75 Stat. 527) and the Immigration and Nationality Act as amended (84 Stat. 116), the Department of Health and Human Services is an “interested United States Government agency” with the authority to request the Department of State to recommend to the Attorney General waiver of the two-year foreign residence requirement for Exchange Visitors under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Program. HHS eligibility requirement criteria for waivers are in addition to and independent of the existing waiver and visa criteria established by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), the Department of State, and the Department of Labor. The waiver regulations described in this part do not relieve alien physicians seeking a waiver of the 2-year foreign residence requirement from complying with the terms and conditions imposed on their admission to the United States.
            [67 FR 77695, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
          
            § 50.2
            Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board.
            (a) Establishment. The Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board is established to carry out the Department's responsibilities under the Exchange Visitor Program.
            (b) Functions. The Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board is responsible for making thorough and equitable evaluations of applications submitted by institutions, acting on behalf of Exchange Visitors, to HHS for a favorable recommendation to the Department of State that the two-year foreign residence requirement for Exchange Visitors under the Exchange Visitor Program be waived.
            (c) Membership. The Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board consists of no fewer than three members and two alternates, of whom no fewer than three will consider any particular application. The Director of the Office of Global Health Affairs, Office of the Secretary, is an ex officio member of the Board and serves as its Chairman. The Director may designate a staff member of the Office of the Secretary to serve as member and Chairman of the Board in the Director's absence. The Assistant Secretary for Health appoints two regularly assigned members and two alternates to consider applications concerning health, biomedical research, and related fields. The Chairman may request the heads of operating divisions of the Department to appoint additional members to consider applications in other fields of interest to the Department. The Board may obtain expert advisory opinions from other sources. The Board may establish a workgroup from the operating divisions of the Department to consider applications for waivers based on the need for the delivery of health care services to underserved populations.
            [49 FR 9900, Mar. 16, 1984, as amended at 67 FR 77695, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
          
            § 50.3
            Policy.
            (a) Policy for waivers. The Department of Health and Human Services endorses the philosophy that Exchange Visitors are committed to return home for at least two years after completing their program. This requirement was imposed to prevent the Program from becoming a stepping stone to immigration and to ensure that Exchange Visitors make available to their home countries their new knowledge and skills obtained in the United States. The Department will request waivers for the delivery of health care service to carry out the Department's mission to increase access to care for the nation's most medically underserved individuals. However, in keeping with the philosophy of the Program, the Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board may determine the appropriate numbers and geographic areas for waivers for the delivery of health care service.
            (b) Criteria for waivers. The Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board carefully applies stringent and restrictive criteria to its consideration of requests that it support waivers for Exchange Visitors. Each application is evaluated individually based on the facts available.
            (c) Waiver for members of Exchange Visitor's family. Where a decision is made to request a waiver for an Exchange Visitor, a waiver will also be requested for the spouse and children, if any, if they have J-2 visa status. When both members of a married couple are Exchange Visitors in their own right (i.e., each has J-1 visa status), separate applications must be submitted for each of them.
            [67 FR 77696, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
          
            § 50.4
            Waivers for research.
            In determining whether to request a waiver for an Exchange Visitor engaged in the conduct of research, the Board considers the following key factors:
            (a) The program or activity at the applicant institution or organization in which the Exchange Visitor is employed must be of high priority and of national or international significance in an area of interest to the Department.
            (b) The Exchange Visitor must be needed as an integral part of the program or activity, or of an essential component thereof, so that loss of his/her services would necessitate discontinuance of the program, or a major phase of it. Specific evidence must be provided on how the loss or unavailability of the individual's services would adversely affect the initiation, continuance, completion, or success of the program or activity. The applicant organization/institution must clearly demonstrate that a suitable replacement for the Exchange Visitor cannot be found through recruitment or any other means. The Board will not request a waiver when the principal problem appears to be one of administrative, budgetary, or program inconvenience to the institution or other employer.
            (c) The Exchange Visitor must possess outstanding qualifications, training and experience well beyond the usually expected accomplishments at the graduate, postgraduate, and residency levels, and must clearly demonstrate the capability to make original and significant contributions to the program. The Board will not request a waiver simply because an individual has specialized training or experience or is occupying a senior staff position in a university, hospital, or other institution.
            [67 FR 77696, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
          
            § 50.5
            Waivers for the delivery of health care service.
            In determining whether to request a waiver for an Exchange Visitor to deliver health care service, the Board will consider information from and coordinate with State Departments of Public Health (or the equivalent), other “interested government agencies” which request waivers, and other relevant agencies. The Board requires the following criteria for requests for waivers for the delivery of health care service:
            (a) The Exchange Visitor must submit a statement that he or she does not have pending and will not submit any other “interested government agency” waiver request while HHS processes the waiver request being submitted.

            (b) Waivers are limited to primary care physicians and general psychiatrists who have completed their primary care or psychiatric residency training programs no more than12 months before the date of commencement of employment under the contract described in subparagraph (d). This 12-month eligibility limitation is to ensure that the physicians' primary care training is current and they are not engaged in subspecialty training. This HHS eligibility requirement relates only to eligibility for an HHS waiver request and does not relieve physicians of the responsibility to maintain lawful status. Alien physicians are strongly encouraged to begin the waiver process as early as they possibly can while still in the residency training program. Early filing of the waiver request by the alien physician, coupled with timely processing of the request by the relevant government agencies, will facilitate the timely completion of the waiver process before the authorized J-1 admission expires, and the physician's subsequent application for change of nonimmigrant status from J-1 to H-1B.
            (c) Primary care physicians are defined as: physicians practicing general internal medicine, pediatrics, family practice or obstetrics/gynecology willing to work in a primary care Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) or Medically Underserved Area or Population (MUA/P); and general psychiatrists who are willing to work in a Mental Health HPSA. Note: these HHS eligibility criteria for waivers are in addition to and independent of the existing waiver and visa criteria established by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), the Department of State, and the Department of Labor.
            (d) The Exchange Visitor must have entered a contract with the applicant employer. This contract must:
            (1) Require the Exchange Visitor to provide primary medical care in a facility physically located in an HHS-designated primary care HPSA or MUA/P, or general psychiatric care in a Mental Health HPSA.
            (2) Require the Exchange Visitor to complete a term of employment of not less than three years providing primary care health services for not less than 40 hours per week.
            (3) Require the Exchange Visitor to:
            (i) Be licensed by the State where he or she will practice;
            (ii) Have completed a residency in one of the following specialties: family practice, general pediatrics, obstetrics/gynecology, general internal medicine, or general psychiatry; and
            (iii) Be either board certified or board eligible in the relevant primary care discipline.
            (4) Be terminable only for cause until completion of the three-year commitment, except that, with the agreement of the alien physician, the employer may assign the contract to another eligible employer with the prior approval of HHS and compliance with all applicable INS and Department of Labor requirements. Prior to approving an assignment of the contract, HHS will review and consider the health care needs of the alien physician's current and proposed new locations, as well as the reasons for the request.
            (5) Not contain a restrictive covenant or non-compete clause which prevents or discourages the physician from continuing to practice in any HHS-designated primary care HPSA or MUA/P or Mental Health HPSA after the period of obligation under the contract has expired.
            (6) Provide that any amendment to the contract complies with all applicable Federal statutes, regulations and HHS policy.
            (7) Be consistent with all applicable Federal statutes, regulations and HHS policy.
            (e) The facility or practice sponsoring the physician:
            (1) Must provide health services to individuals without discriminating against them because either they are unable to pay for those services or payment for those health services will be made under Medicare or Medicaid.
            (2) May charge no more than the usual and customary rate prevailing in the geographic area in which the services are provided.
            (3) Must provide care on a sliding fee scale for persons at or below 200 percent of poverty income level. Persons with third-party insurance may be charged the full fee for service.
            (4) Must post a notice in a conspicuous location in the patient waiting area at the practice site to notify patients of the charges for service as required in this paragraph.
            (5) Must provide evidence that the applicant facility made unsuccessful efforts to recruit a physician who is a United States physician for the position to be filled by the Exchange Visitor.

            (6) Must provide a statement by the head of the facility to confirm the facility is located in a specific, designated HPSA or MUA/P, and that it provides medical care to Medicaid and Medicare eligible patients and to the uninsured indigent.
            (f) The employer and the alien physician must submit information to the Secretary at the times and in the manner that the Secretary may reasonably require.
            [67 FR 77696, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
          
            § 50.6
            Procedures for submission of application to HHS.
            (a) The Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board will review applications submitted by private or non-federal institutions, organizations, or agencies or by a component agency of HHS. The Board will not accept applications submitted by Exchange Visitors or, unless under extenuating and exceptional circumstances, other U.S. Government Agencies.
            (b) Applications, instruction sheets and information are available from the Executive Secretary, Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board. An authorized official of the applicant institution (educational institution, hospital, laboratory, corporation, etc.) must sign the completed application. The applicant institution must send the completed application to the address indicated on the instruction sheet.
            [67 FR 77697, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
          
            § 50.7
            Personal hardship, persecution and visa extension considerations.
            (a) It is not within the Department's jurisdiction to consider applications for waiver based on:
            (1) Exceptional hardship to the exchange visitor's American or legally resident alien spouse or child; or
            (2) The alien's unwillingness to return to the country of his/her nationality or last residence on the grounds that he/she or family members would be subject to persecution on account of race, religion or political opinion.
            (b) Likewise, this Department is not responsible for considering requests to extend visas.
            (c) Inquiries concerning the above should be directed to the District Office of the Immigration and Naturalization Service which has jurisdiction over the exchange visitor's place of residence in the United States.
            [49 FR 9900, Mar. 16, 1984. Redesignated at 67 FR 77696, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
          
            § 50.8
            Compliance.
            If an alien physician acquires H-1B nonimmigrant status following approval by the INS of a request for waiver, then he or she becomes subject not only to the terms and conditions of the waiver, but also the terms and conditions of the H-1B nonimmigrant status. Failure to comply with those conditions will make that physician subject to removal from the United States by the INS.
            [67 FR 77697, Dec. 19, 2002]
          
        
        
          Pt. 51
          PART 51—CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO REDUCE RELIANCE ON ALIEN PHYSICIANS
          
            Sec.
            51.1
            Purpose.
            51.2
            Application.
            51.3
            Who is eligible to apply?
            51.4
            How will the plans be evaluated?
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 212, Immigration and Nationality Act, Pub. L. 82-114, as amended by Pub. L. 97-116, 95 Stat. 1611 (8 U.S.C. 1182(j)(2)(A)).
          
          
            Source:
            48 FR 2539, Jan. 20, 1983, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 51.1
            Purpose.
            The purpose of this regulation is to establish criteria for review and evaluation of the comprehensive plans of Graduate Medical Education Programs to reduce reliance on alien physicians, as required by the Immigration and Nationality Act Amendments of 1981, Pub. L. 97-116, for the waiver of certain requirements for exchange visitors who are coming to the United States to participate in programs of graduate medical education or training.
          
          
            § 51.2
            Application.

            Materials covering procedures for applying for substantial disruption waivers (including the comprehensive plan) may be obtained from the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates, 3624 Market Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.
            
            
              
              Explanatory Note:

              The Department of State entered into an agreement with the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates in 1971 whereby the latter was designated the authority to administer the issuance of the Form IAP-66 in all cases involving the admission, certification, transfer or extension of stay for foreign physicians in exchange visitor status who are receiving graduate medical education or training. The Commission was further designated the authority (Federal Register, Volume 44, No. 59, March 26, 1979), to process waiver requests under the “substantial disruption” provision of Pub. L. 94-484, as amended, within criteria to be provided by the United States Information Agency on advice from the Department of Health and Human Services (formerly Department of Health, Education, and Welfare).
            
          
          
            § 51.3
            Who is eligible to apply?
            Sponsors which had alien physicians in their exchange visitor programs on January 10, 1978, are eligible to apply. For purposes of this regulation, the term “program” relates to a graduate medical education program having an exchange visitor program for physicians participating in graduate medical education or training. An “exchange visitor program” is a program of a sponsor, designed to promote interchange of persons, knowledge and skills, and the interchange of developments in the field of education, the arts and sciences, and is concerned with one or more categories of participants to promote mutual understanding between the people of the United States and the people of other countries.
          
          
            § 51.4
            How will the plans be evaluated?
            After consultation with the Federal Substantial Disruption Waiver Board (seven Federal representatives charged with the responsibility of reviewing substantial disruption waiver applications), the Secretary of Health and Human Services will make recommendations to the Director, United States Information Agency, for the purpose of granting waivers. The Secretary will consider the following factors in determining whether or not a plan is satisfactory:
            (a) The extent of the specific problems that the program or institution anticipates without a waiver, including, for example,
            (1) Curtailment of services currently provided,
            (2) Downgrading of medical care currently being provided,
            (3) Reduction in the number of inpatients and outpatients receiving care,
            (4) Inadequate medical coverage for population served, or
            (5) Inadequate supervision of junior residents.
            (b) The adequacy of the alternative resources and methods (including use of physician assistants (as defined in 42 CFR 57.802), nurse practitioners (as defined in 42 CFR 57.2402), and other non-physician providers) that have been considered and have been and will be applied to reduce such disruption in the delivery of health services, especially in primary medical care manpower shortage areas, as established under section 332 of the Public Health Service Act, and for medicaid patients. This may include, for example:
            (1) Greater reliance on fully licensed physicians, and on physician assistants, nurse practitioners and other non-physician personnel in an expanded role in the delivery of health care, such as admission patient histories, making patient rounds, recording patient progress notes, doing the initial and follow-up evaluation of patients, performing routine laboratory and related studies, or
            (2) Utilization of the team approach to health care delivery (individuals functioning as an integral part of an interprofessional team of health personnel organized under the leadership of a physician working toward more efficient and/or more effective delivery of health services).
            (c) The extent to which changes (including improvement of educational and medical services) have been considered and which have been or will be applied to make the program more attractive to graduates of medical schools who are citizens of the United States, as demonstrated, for example, by:
            (1) Adding additional services to the existing programs to provide a broader educational experience for residents,

            (2) Expanding affiliations with other residency programs to offer a broader experience for residents,
            
            (3) Expanding undergraduate clerkships to provide a broader educational experience.
            (4) Creating or modifying administrative units which will provide broader clinical experiences, or
            (5) Initiating research projects.
            (d) The adequacy of the recruitment efforts which have been and will be undertaken to attract graduates of medical schools who are citizens of the United States, as demonstrated, for example, by:
            (1) Broad-based advertisement of the program and of the institution through notices in journals, contacts with medical schools, etc.
            (2) Forming committees for the purpose of recruiting U.S. citizens.
            (3) Working with national organizations which are involved with medical students and U.S. graduate medical trainees, e.g., the American Medical Student Association and the Physician National House Staff Association, to attract U.S. citizens.
            (e) The extent to which the program on a year-by-year basis has phased down its dependence upon aliens who are graduates of foreign medical schools so that the program will not be dependent upon the admission to the program of any additional such aliens after December 31, 1983.
          
        
        
          Pt. 57
          PART 57—VOLUNTEER SERVICES
          
            Sec.
            57.1
            Applicability.
            57.2
            Definitions.
            57.3
            Volunteer service programs.
            57.4
            Acceptance and use of volunteer services.
            57.5
            Services and benefits available to volunteers.
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 223, 58 Stat. 683, as amended by 81 Stat. 539: 42 U.S.C. 217b.
          
          
            Source:
            34 FR 13868, Aug. 29, 1969, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 57.1
            Applicability.
            The regulations in this part apply to the acceptance of volunteer and uncompensated services for use in the operation of any health care facility of the Department or in the provision of health care.
          
          
            § 57.2
            Definitions.
            As used in the regulations in this part:
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
            
              Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              Volunteer services are services performed by individuals (hereafter called volunteers) whose services have been offered to the Government and accepted under a formal agreement on a without compensation basis for use in the operation of a health care facility or in the provision of health care.
            
              Health care means services to patients in Department facilities, beneficiaries of the Federal Government, or individuals or groups for whom health services are authorized under the programs of the Department.
            
              Health care facility means a hospital, clinic, health center, or other facility established for the purpose of providing health care.
          
          
            § 57.3
            Volunteer service programs.
            Programs for the use of volunteer services may be established by the Secretary, or his designee, to broaden and strengthen the delivery of health services, contribute to the comfort and well being of patients in Department hospitals or clinics, or expand the services required in the operation of a health care facility. Volunteers may be used to supplement, but not to take the place of, personnel whose services are obtained through the usual employment procedures.
          
          
            § 57.4
            Acceptance and use of volunteer services.
            The Secretary, or his designee, shall establish requirements for: Accepting volunteer services from individuals or groups of individuals, using volunteer services, giving appropriate recognition to volunteers, and maintaining records of volunteer services.
          
          
            § 57.5
            Services and benefits available to volunteers.
            (a) The following provisions of law may be applicable to volunteers whose services are offered and accepted under the regulations in this part:

            (1) Subchapter I of Chapter 81 of Title 5 of the United States Code relating to medical services for work related injuries;
            (2) Title 28 of the United States Code relating to tort claims;
            (3) Section 7903 of Title 5 of the United States Code relating to protective clothing and equipment; and
            (4) Section 5703 of Title 5 of the United States Code relating to travel and transportation expenses.
            (b) Volunteers may also be provided such other benefits as are authorized by law or by administrative action of the Secretary or his designee.
          
        
        
          Pt. 60
          PART 60—NATIONAL PRACTITIONER DATA BANK
          
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              Sec.
              60.1
              The National Practitioner Data Bank.
              60.2
              Applicability.
              60.3
              Definitions.
            
            
              Subpart B—Reporting of Information
              60.4
              How information must be reported.
              60.5
              When information must be reported.
              60.6
              Reporting errors, omissions, revisions, or whether an action is on appeal.
              60.7
              Reporting medical malpractice payments.
              60.8
              Reporting licensure actions taken by Boards of Medical Examiners.
              60.9
              Reporting licensure and certification actions taken by states.
              60.10
              Reporting Federal licensure and certification actions.
              60.11
              Reporting negative actions or findings taken by peer review organizations or private accreditation entities.
              60.12
              Reporting adverse actions taken against clinical privileges.
              60.13
              Reporting Federal or state criminal convictions related to the delivery of a health care item or service.
              60.14
              Reporting civil judgments related to the delivery of a health care item or service.
              60.15
              Reporting exclusions from participation in Federal or state health care programs.
              60.16
              Reporting other adjudicated actions or decisions.
            
            
              Subpart C—Disclosure of Information by the National Practitioner Data Bank
              60.17
              Information which hospitals must request from the National Practitioner Data Bank.
              60.18
              Requesting information from the National Practitioner Data Bank.
              60.19
              Fees applicable to requests for information.
              60.20
              Confidentiality of National Practitioner Data Bank information.
              60.21
              How to dispute the accuracy of National Practitioner Data Bank information.
              60.22
              Immunity.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 11101-11152; 42 U.S.C. 1396r-2; 42 U.S.C. 1320a-7e
          
          
            Source:
            78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            
              § 60.1
              The National Practitioner Data Bank.

              The Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (HCQIA), as amended, title IV of Public Law 99-660 (42 U.S.C. 11101 et seq.) (hereinafter referred to as “title IV”), authorizes the Secretary to establish (either directly or by contract) a National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) to collect and release certain information relating to the professional competence and conduct of physicians, dentists, and other health care practitioners. Section 1921 of the Social Security Act (hereinafter referred to as “section 1921”), as amended, (42 U.S.C. 1396r-2) expanded the requirements under the NPDB and requires each state to adopt a system of reporting to the Secretary adverse licensure or certification actions taken against health care practitioners, health care entities, providers, and suppliers, as well as certain final adverse actions taken by state law and fraud enforcement agencies against health care practitioners, providers, and suppliers. Section 1128E of the Social Security Act (hereinafter referred to as “section 1128E”), as amended, (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7e) authorizes the Secretary to implement a national healthcare fraud and abuse data collection program for the reporting and disclosing of certain final adverse actions taken by Federal Government agencies and health plans against health care practitioners, providers, and suppliers. Information from section 1921 and section 1128E is to be reported and distributed through the NPDB. The regulations in this part set forth the reporting and disclosure requirements for the NPDB, as well as procedures to dispute the accuracy of information contained in the NPDB.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.2
              Applicability.
              The regulations in this part establish reporting requirements applicable to hospitals, health care entities, Boards of Medical Examiners, and professional societies of health care practitioners which take adverse licensure or professional review actions; state licensing or certification authorities, peer review organizations, and private accreditation entities that take licensure or certification actions or negative actions or findings against health care practitioners, health care entities, providers, or suppliers; entities (including insurance companies) making payments as a result of medical malpractice actions or claims; and Federal government agencies, state law and fraud enforcement agencies and health plans that take final adverse actions against health care practitioners, providers, and suppliers. They also establish procedures to enable individuals or entities to obtain information from the NPDB or to dispute the accuracy of NPDB information.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.3
              Definitions.
              
                Adversely affecting means reducing, restricting, suspending, revoking, or denying clinical privileges or membership in a health care entity.
              
                Affiliated or associated refers to health care entities with which a subject of a final adverse action has a business or professional relationship. This includes, but is not limited to, organizations, associations, corporations, or partnerships. This also includes a professional corporation or other business entity composed of a single individual.
              
                Board of Medical Examiners, or Board, means a body or subdivision of such body which is designated by a state for the purpose of licensing, monitoring, and disciplining physicians or dentists. This term includes a Board of Osteopathic Examiners or its subdivision, a Board of Dentistry or its subdivision, or an equivalent body as determined by the state. Where the Secretary, pursuant to section 423(c)(2) of the HCQIA (42 U.S.C. 11112(c)), has designated an alternate entity to carry out the reporting activities of § 60.12 of this part due to a Board's failure to comply with § 60.8 of this part, the term Board of Medical Examiners or Board refers to this alternate entity.
              
                Civil judgment means a court-ordered action rendered in a Federal or state court proceeding, other than a criminal proceeding. This reporting requirement does not include Consent Judgments that have been agreed upon and entered to provide security for civil settlements in which there was no finding or admission of liability.
              
                Clinical privileges means the authorization by a health care entity to a health care practitioner for the provision of health care services, including privileges and membership on the medical staff.
              
                Criminal conviction means a conviction as described in section 1128(i) of the Social Security Act.
              
                Dentist means a doctor of dental surgery, doctor of dental medicine, or the equivalent who is legally authorized to practice dentistry by a state (or who, without authority, holds himself or herself out to be so authorized).
              
                Exclusion means a temporary or permanent debarment of an individual or entity from participation in any Federal or state health-related program, in accordance with which items or services furnished by such person or entity will not be reimbursed under any Federal or state health-related program.
              
                Federal Government agency includes, but is not limited to:
              (1) The U.S. Department of Justice;
              (2) The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services;
              (3) Federal law enforcement agencies, including law enforcement investigators;
              (4) Any other Federal agency that either administers or provides payment for the delivery of health care services, including, but not limited to the U.S. Department of Defense and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; and

              (5) Federal agencies responsible for the licensing and certification of health care practitioners, providers, and suppliers.
              
              
                Formal peer review process means the conduct of professional review activities through formally adopted written procedures which provide for adequate notice and an opportunity for a hearing.
              
                Formal proceeding means a proceeding held before a state licensing or certification authority, peer review organization, or private accreditation entity that maintains defined rules, policies, or procedures for such a proceeding.
              
                Health care entity means, for purposes of this part:
              (1) A hospital;
              (2) An entity that provides health care services, and engages in professional review activity through a formal peer review process for the purpose of furthering quality health care, or a committee of that entity; or
              (3) A professional society or a committee or agent thereof, including those at the national, state, or local level, of health care practitioners that engages in professional review activity through a formal peer review process, for the purpose of furthering quality health care.
              (4) For purposes of paragraph (2) of this definition, an entity includes: a health maintenance organization which is licensed by a state or determined to be qualified as such by the Department of Health and Human Services; and any group or prepaid medical or dental practice which meets the criteria of paragraph (2).
              
                Health care practitioner, licensed health care practitioner, licensed practitioner, or practitioner means an individual who is licensed or otherwise authorized by a state to provide health care services (or any individual who, without authority, holds himself or herself out to be so licensed or authorized).
              
                Health care provider means, for purposes of this part, a provider of services as defined in section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act; any organization (including a health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization or group medical practice) that provides health care services and follows a formal peer review process for the purpose of furthering quality health care, and any other organization that, directly or through contracts, provides health care services.
              
                Health care supplier means, for purposes of this part, a provider of medical and other health care services as described in section 1861(s) of the Social Security Act; or any individual or entity, other than a provider, who furnishes, whether directly or indirectly, or provides access to, health care services, supplies, items, or ancillary services (including, but not limited to, durable medical equipment suppliers, manufacturers of health care items, pharmaceutical suppliers and manufacturers, health record services [such as medical, dental, and patient records], health data suppliers, and billing and transportation service suppliers). The term also includes any individual or entity under contract to provide such supplies, items, or ancillary services; health plans as defined in this section (including employers that are self-insured); and health insurance producers (including but not limited to agents, brokers, solicitors, consultants, and reinsurance intermediaries).
              
                Health plan means, for purposes of this part, a plan, program or organization that provides health benefits, whether directly, through insurance, reimbursement or otherwise, and includes but is not limited to:
              (1) A policy of health insurance;
              (2) A contract of a service benefit organization;
              (3) A membership agreement with a health maintenance organization or other prepaid health plan;
              (4) A plan, program, agreement, or other mechanism established, maintained, or made available by a self-insured employer or group of self-insured employers, a health care practitioner, provider, or supplier group, third-party administrator, integrated health care delivery system, employee welfare association, public service group or organization or professional association;
              (5) An insurance company, insurance service, or insurance organization that is licensed to engage in the business of selling health care insurance in a state and which is subject to state law which regulates health insurance; and
              (6) An organization that provides benefit plans whose coverage is limited to outpatient prescription drugs.
              
                Hospital means, for purposes of this part, an entity described in paragraphs (1) and (7) of section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act.
              
                Medical malpractice action or claim means a written complaint or claim demanding payment based on a health care practitioner's provision of or failure to provide health care services, and includes the filing of a cause of action based on the law of tort, brought in any state or Federal court or other adjudicative body.
              
                Negative action or finding by a Federal or State licensing or certification authority, peer review organization, or private accreditation entity means:
              (1) A final determination of denial or termination of an accreditation status from a private accreditation entity that indicates a risk to the safety of a patient(s) or quality of health care services;
              (2) Any recommendation by a peer review organization to sanction a health care practitioner; or
              (3) Any negative action or finding that, under the state's law, is publicly available information and is rendered by a licensing or certification authority, including but not limited to, limitations on the scope of practice, liquidations, injunctions, and forfeitures. This definition also includes final adverse actions rendered by a Federal or state licensing or certification authority, such as exclusions, revocations, or suspension of license or certification, that occur in conjunction with settlements in which no finding of liability has been made (although such a settlement itself is not reportable under the statute). This definition excludes administrative fines or citations and corrective action plans and other personnel actions, unless they are:
              (i) Connected to the delivery of health care services; or
              (ii) Taken in conjunction with other adverse licensure or certification actions such as revocation, suspension, censure, reprimand, probation, or surrender.
              
                Organization name means the subject's business or employer at the time the underlying acts occurred. If more than one business or employer is applicable, the one most closely related to the underlying acts should be reported as the “organization name,” with the others being reported as “affiliated or associated health care entities.”
              
                Organization type means a description of the nature of that business or employer.
              
                Other adjudicated actions or decisions means formal or official final actions taken against a health care practitioner, provider, or supplier by a Federal governmental agency, a state law or fraud enforcement agency, or a health plan, which include the availability of a due process mechanism, and are based on acts or omissions that affect or could affect the payment, provision, or delivery of a health care item or service. For example, a formal or official final action taken by a Federal governmental agency, a state law or fraud enforcement agency, or a health plan may include, but is not limited to, a personnel-related action such as suspensions without pay, reductions in pay, reductions in grade for cause, terminations, or other comparable actions. A hallmark of any valid adjudicated action or decision is the availability of a due process mechanism. The fact that the subject elects not to use the due process mechanism provided by the authority bringing the action is immaterial, as long as such a process is available to the subject before the adjudicated action or decision is made final. In general, if an “adjudicated action or decision” follows an agency's established administrative procedures (which ensure that due process is available to the subject of the final adverse action), it would qualify as a reportable action under this definition. This definition specifically excludes clinical privileging actions taken by Federal Government agencies or state law and fraud enforcement agencies and similar paneling decisions made by health plans. This definition does not include overpayment determinations made by Federal or state government programs, their contractors or health plans, and it does not include denial of claims determinations made by Federal Government agencies, state law or fraud enforcement agencies, or health plans. This definition also does not include business or administrative decisions taken by health plans that result in contract terminations unrelated to health care fraud or abuse or quality of care (e.g., when a practitioner's contract is terminated because the practitioner no longer practices at a facility in the health plan's network, or a health plan terminates all provider contracts in a certain geographic area because it ceases business operations in that area). For health plans that are not government entities, an action taken following adequate notice and the opportunity for a hearing that meets the standards of due process set out in section 412(b) of the HCQIA (42 U.S.C. 11112(b)) also would qualify as a reportable action under this definition.
              
                Peer review organization means, for purposes of this part, an organization with the primary purpose of evaluating the quality of patient care practices or services ordered or performed by health care practitioners measured against objective criteria which define acceptable and adequate practice through an evaluation by a sufficient number of health care practitioners in such an area to ensure adequate peer review. The organization has due process mechanisms available to health care practitioners. This definition excludes utilization and quality control peer review organizations described in Part B of Title XI of the Social Security Act (referred to as QIOs) and other organizations funded by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) to support the QIO program.
              
                Physician means, for purposes of this part, a doctor of medicine or osteopathy legally authorized to practice medicine or surgery by a state (or who, without authority, holds himself or herself out to be so authorized).
              
                Private accreditation entity means an entity or organization that:
              (1) Evaluates and seeks to improve the quality of health care provided by a health care entity, provider, or supplier;
              (2) Measures a health care entity's, provider's, or supplier's performance based on a set of standards and assigns a level of accreditation;
              (3) Conducts ongoing assessments and periodic reviews of the quality of health care provided by a health care entity, provider, or supplier; and
              (4) Has due process mechanisms available to health care entities, providers, or suppliers.
              
                Professional review action means an action or recommendation of a health care entity:
              (1) Taken in the course of professional review activity;
              (2) Based on the professional competence or professional conduct of an individual health care practitioner which affects or could affect adversely the health or welfare of a patient or patients; and
              (3) Which adversely affects or may adversely affect the clinical privileges or membership in a professional society of the health care practitioner.
              (4) This term excludes actions which are primarily based on:
              (i) The health care practitioner's association, or lack of association, with a professional society or association;
              (ii) The health care practitioner's fees or the health care practitioner's advertising or engaging in other competitive acts intended to solicit or retain business;
              (iii) The health care practitioner's participation in prepaid group health plans, salaried employment, or any other manner of delivering health services whether on a fee-for-service or other basis;
              (iv) A health care practitioner's association with, supervision of, delegation of authority to, support for, training of, or participation in a private group practice with, a member or members of a particular class of health care practitioner or professional; or
              (v) Any other matter that does not relate to the competence or professional conduct of a health care practitioner.
              
                Professional review activity means an activity of a health care entity with respect to an individual health care practitioner:
              (1) To determine whether the health care practitioner may have clinical privileges with respect to, or membership in, the entity;
              (2) To determine the scope or conditions of such privileges or membership; or

              (3) To change or modify such privileges or membership.
              
              
                Quality Improvement Organization means a utilization and quality control peer review organization (as defined in part B of title XI of the Social Security Act) that:
              (1)(i) Is composed of a substantial number of the licensed doctors of medicine and osteopathy engaged in the practice of medicine or surgery in the area and who are representative of the practicing physicians in the area, designated by the Secretary under section 1153, with respect to which the entity shall perform services under this part, or
              (ii) Has available to it, by arrangement or otherwise, the services of a sufficient number of licensed doctors of medicine or osteopathy engaged in the practice of medicine or surgery in such area to assure that adequate peer review of the services provided by the various medical specialties and subspecialties can be assured;
              (2) Is able, in the judgment of the Secretary, to perform review functions required under section 1154 in a manner consistent with the efficient and effective administration of this part and to perform reviews of the pattern of quality of care in an area of medical practice where actual performance is measured against objective criteria which define acceptable and adequate practice; and
              (3) Has at least one individual who is a representative of consumers on its governing body.
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services and any other officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services to whom the authority involved has been delegated.
              
                State means the fifty states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
              
                State law or fraud enforcement agency includes, but is not limited to:
              (1) A state law enforcement agency;
              (2) A state Medicaid fraud control unit (as defined in section 1903(q) of the Social Security Act); and
              (3) A state agency administering (including those providing payment for services) or supervising the administration of a state health care program (as defined in section 1128(h) of the Social Security Act).
              
                State licensing or certification agency includes, but is not limited to, any authority of a state (or of a political subdivision thereof) responsible for the licensing or certification of health care practitioners (or any peer review organization or private accreditation entity reviewing the services provided by health care practitioners), health care entities, providers, or suppliers. Examples of such state agencies include Departments of Professional Regulation, Health, Social Services (including State Survey and Certification and Medicaid Single State agencies), Commerce, and Insurance.
              
                Voluntary surrender of license or certification means a surrender made after a notification of investigation or a formal official request by a Federal or state licensing or certification authority for a health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier to surrender the license or certification (including certification agreements or contracts for participation in Federal or state health care programs). The definition also includes those instances where a health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier voluntarily surrenders a license or certification (including program participation agreements or contracts) in exchange for a decision by the licensing or certification authority to cease an investigation or similar proceeding, or in return for not conducting an investigation or proceeding, or in lieu of a disciplinary action.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Reporting of Information
            
              § 60.4
              How information must be reported.
              Information must be reported to the NPDB as required under §§ 60.7, 60.8, 60.9, 60.10, 60.11, 60.12, 60.13, 60.14, 60.15 and 60.16 in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
            
            
              § 60.5
              When information must be reported.

              Information required under §§ 60.7, 60.8, and 60.12 must be submitted to the NPDB within 30 days following the action to be reported, beginning with actions occurring on or after September 1, 1990; information required under § 60.11 must be submitted to the NPDB within 30 days following the action to be reported, beginning with actions occurring on or after January 1, 1992; and information required under §§ 60.9, 60.10, 60.13, 60.14, 60.15, and 60.16 must be submitted to the NPDB within 30 days following the action to be reported, beginning with actions occurring on or after August 21, 1996. Persons or entities responsible for submitting reports of malpractice payments (§ 60.7), negative actions or findings (§ 60.11), or adverse actions (§ 60.12) must additionally provide to their respective state authorities a copy of the report they submit to the NPDB. Following is the list of reportable actions:
              (a) Malpractice payments (§ 60.7);
              (b) Licensure and certification actions (§§ 60.8, 60.9, and 60.10);
              (c) Negative actions or findings (§ 60.11);
              (d) Adverse actions (§ 60.12);
              (e) Health Care-related Criminal Convictions (§ 60.13);
              (f) Health Care-related Civil Judgments (§ 60.14);
              (g) Exclusions from Federal or state health care programs (§ 60.15); and
              (h) Other adjudicated actions of decisions (§ 60.16).
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.6
              Reporting errors, omissions, revisions or whether an action is on appeal.
              (a) Persons and entities are responsible for the accuracy of information which they report to the NPDB. If errors or omissions are found after information has been reported, the person or entity which reported it must send an addition or correction to the NPDB and, in the case of reports made under § 60.12 of this part, also to the Board of Medical Examiners, as soon as possible. The NPDB will not accept requests for readjudication of the case by the NPDB, and will not examine the underlying merits of a reportable action.
              (b) An individual or entity which reports information on licensure or certification, negative actions or findings, clinical privileges, criminal convictions, civil or administrative judgments, exclusions, or adjudicated actions or decisions under § 60.8, § 60.9, § 60.10, § 60.11, § 60.12, § 60.13, § 60.14, § 60.15, or § 60.16 must also report any revision of the action originally reported. Revisions include, but are not limited to, reversal of a professional review action or reinstatement of a license. In the case of actions reported under § 60.9, § 60.10, § 60.13, § 60.14, § 60.15 or § 60.16, revisions also include whether an action is on appeal. Revisions are subject to the same time constraints and procedures of § 60.5, § 60.8, § 60.9, § 60.10, § 60.11, § 60.12, § 60.13, § 60.14, § 60.15, or § 60.16 as applicable to the original action which was reported.
              (c) The subject will be sent a copy of all reports, including revisions and corrections to the report.
              (d) Upon receipt of a report, the subject:
              (1) Can accept the report as written;
              (2) May provide a statement to the NPDB that will be permanently appended to the report, either directly or through a designated representative; (The NPDB will distribute the statement to queriers, where identifiable, and to the reporting entity and the subject of the report. Only the subject can, upon request, make changes to the statement. The NPDB will not edit the statement; however the NPDB reserves the right to redact personal identifying and offensive language that does not change the factual nature of the statement.); or
              (3) May follow the dispute process in accordance with § 60.21.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.7
              Reporting medical malpractice payments.
              (a) Who must report. Each entity, including an insurance company, which makes a payment under an insurance policy, self-insurance, or otherwise, for the benefit of a health care practitioner in settlement of or in satisfaction in whole or in part of a claim or a judgment against such health care practitioner for medical malpractice, must report information as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section to the NPDB and to the appropriate state licensing board(s) in the state in which the act or omission upon which the medical malpractice claim was based. For purposes of this section, the waiver of an outstanding debt is not construed as a “payment” and is not required to be reported.
              (b) What information must be reported. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section must report the following information:
              (1) With respect to the health care practitioner for whose benefit the payment is made:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Work address,
              (iii) Home address, if known,
              (iv) Social Security Number, if known, and if obtained in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a note),
              (v) Date of birth,
              (vi) Name of each professional school attended and year of graduation,
              (vii) For each professional license: the license number, the field of licensure, and the name of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (viii) Drug Enforcement Administration registration number, if known, and
              (ix) Name of each hospital with which he or she is affiliated, if known;
              (2) With respect to the reporting entity:
              (i) Name and address of the entity making the payment,
              (ii) Name, title, and telephone number of the responsible official submitting the report on behalf of the entity, and
              (iii) Relationship of the reporting entity to the health care practitioner for whose benefit the payment is made;
              (3) With respect to the judgment or settlement resulting in the payment:
              (i) Where an action or claim has been filed with an adjudicative body, identification of the adjudicative body and the case number,
              (ii) Date or dates on which the act(s) or omission(s) which gave rise to the action or claim occurred,
              (iii) Date of judgment or settlement,
              (iv) Amount paid, date of payment, and whether payment is for a judgment or a settlement,
              (v) Description and amount of judgment or settlement and any conditions attached thereto, including terms of payment,
              (vi) A description of the acts or omissions and injuries or illnesses upon which the action or claim was based,
              (vii) Classification of the acts or omissions in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary, and

              (viii) Other information as required by the Secretary from time to time after publication in the Federal Register and after an opportunity for public comment.
              (c) Sanctions. Any entity that fails to report information on a payment required to be reported under this section is subject to a civil money penalty not to exceed the amount specified at 42 CFR 1003.103(c).
              (d) Interpretation of information. A payment in settlement of a medical malpractice action or claim shall not be construed as creating a presumption that medical malpractice has occurred.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.8
              Reporting licensure actions taken by Boards of Medical Examiners.
              (a) What actions must be reported. Each Board of Medical Examiners must report to the NPDB any action based on reasons relating to a physician's or dentist's professional competence or professional conduct:
              (1) Which revokes or suspends (or otherwise restricts) a physician's or dentist's license,
              (2) Which censures, reprimands, or places on probation a physician or dentist, or
              (3) Under which a physician's or dentist's license is surrendered.
              (b) Information that must be reported. The Board must report the following information for each action:
              (1) The physician's or dentist's name,
              (2) The physician's or dentist's work address,
              (3) The physician's or dentist's home address, if known,

              (4) The physician's or dentist's Social Security number or Individual Tax Identification Number (ITIN), if known, and if obtained in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a note),
              (5) National Provider Identifier (NPI),
              (6) The physician's or dentist's date of birth,
              (7) Name of each professional school attended by the physician or dentist and year of graduation,
              (8) For each professional license, the physician's or dentist's license number, the field of licensure and the name of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (9) The physician's or dentist's Drug Enforcement Administration registration number, if known,
              (10) A description of the acts or omissions or other reasons for the action taken,
              (11) A description of the Board action, the date the action was taken, its effective date and duration,
              (12) Classification of the action in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary, and

              (13) Other information as required by the Secretary from time to time after publication in the Federal Register and after an opportunity for public comment.
              (c) Sanctions. If, after notice of noncompliance and providing opportunity to correct noncompliance, the Secretary determines that a Board has failed to submit a report as required by this section, the Secretary will designate another qualified entity for the reporting of information under § 60.12 of this part.
            
            
              § 60.9
              Reporting licensure and certification actions taken by states.
              (a) What actions must be reported. Each state is required to adopt a system of reporting to the NPDB actions, as listed below, which are taken against a health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier (all as defined in § 60.3 of this part). The actions taken must be as a result of formal proceedings (as defined in § 60.3). The actions which must be reported are:
              (1) Any adverse action taken by the licensing or certification authority of the state as a result of a formal proceeding, including revocation or suspension of a license, or certification agreement or contract for participation in a government health care program (and the length of any such suspension), reprimand, censure, or probation;
              (2) Any dismissal or closure of the formal proceeding by reason of the health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier surrendering the license or certification agreement or contract for participation in a government health care program, or leaving the state or jurisdiction;
              (3) Any other loss of license or loss of the certification agreement or contract for participation in a government health care program, or the right to apply for, or renew, a license or certification agreement or contract of the health care practitioner, health care entity, provider or supplier, whether by operation of law, voluntary surrender, nonrenewal (excluding non-renewals due to nonpayment of fees, retirement, or change to inactive status), or otherwise;
              (4) Any negative action or finding by such authority, organization, or entity regarding the health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier.
              (b) What information must be reported. Each state must report the following information (not otherwise reported under § 60.8 of this part):
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Social Security Number or ITIN, if known, and if obtained in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a note),
              (iii) Home address or address of record,
              (iv) Sex, and
              (v) Date of birth.
              (2) If the subject is an individual, employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) Organization name and type,
              (ii) Occupation and specialty, if applicable,
              (iii) National Provider Identifier (NPI),

              (iv) Name of each professional school attended and year of graduation, and
              
              (v) With respect to the professional license (including professional certification and registration) on which the reported action was taken, the license number, the field of licensure, and the name of the state or territory in which the license is held.
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Business address,
              (iii) Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN), or Social Security Number when used by the subject as a Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN),
              (iv) The NPI,
              (v) Type of organization, and
              (vi) With respect to the license (including certification and registration) on which the reported action was taken, the license and the name of the state or territory in which the license is held.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) A narrative description of the acts or omissions and injuries upon which the reported action was based,
              (ii) Classification of the acts or omissions in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary,
              (iii) Classification of the action taken in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary, and the amount of any monetary penalty resulting from the reported action,
              (iv) The date the action was taken, its effective date and duration,
              (v) Name of the agency taking the action,
              (vi) Name and address of the reporting entity, and
              (vii) The name, title and telephone number of the responsible official submitting the report on behalf of the reporting entity.
              (c) What information may be reported, if known. Reporting entities described in paragraph (a) of this section may voluntarily report, if known, the following information:
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address,
              (iii) FEIN, when used by the individual as a TIN, and
              (iv) If deceased, date of death.
              (2) If the subject is an individual, employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) Other state professional license number(s), field(s) of licensure, and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (ii) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Unique Physician Identification Number(s) (UPIN), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s),
              (iii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (iv) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address(es) used,
              (iii) Other FEIN(s) or Social Security Number(s) used,
              (iv) Other NPI(s) used,
              (v) Other state license number(s) and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (vi) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA) number(s), Food and Drug Administration (FDA) number(s), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s),
              (vii) Names and titles of principal officers and owners,
              (viii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (ix) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) Whether the subject will be automatically reinstated.
              (ii) The date of appeal, if any.
              (d) Access to documents. Each state must provide the Secretary (or an entity designated by the Secretary) with access to the documents underlying the actions described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (4) of this section, as may be necessary for the Secretary to determine the facts and circumstances concerning the actions and determinations for the purpose of carrying out section 1921.
              (e) Sanctions for failure to report. The Secretary will provide for a publication of a public report that identifies failures to report information on adverse actions as required to be reported under this section.
            
            
              § 60.10
              Reporting Federal licensure and certification actions.
              (a) What actions must be reported. Federal licensing and certification agencies must report to the NPDB the following final adverse actions that are taken against a health care practitioner, physician, dentist, provider, or supplier (regardless of whether the final adverse action is the subject of a pending appeal):
              (1) Formal or official actions, such as revocation or suspension of a license or certification agreement or contract for participation in government health care programs (and the length of any such suspension), reprimand, censure or probation,
              (2) Any dismissal or closure of the proceedings by reason of the health care practitioner, provider, or supplier surrendering their license or certification agreement or contract for participation in government health care programs, or leaving the state or jurisdiction,
              (3) Any other loss of the license or loss of the certification agreement or contract for participation in government health care programs, or the right to apply for, or renew, a license or certification agreement or contract of the health care practitioner, provider, or supplier, whether by operation of law, voluntary surrender, nonrenewal (excluding non-renewals due to nonpayment of fees, retirement, or change to inactive status), or otherwise, and
              (4) Any other negative action or finding by such Federal agency that is publicly available information.
              (b) What information must be reported. Each Federal agency described in paragraph (a) of this section must report the following information:
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Social Security Number or ITIN,
              (iii) Home address or address of record,
              (iv) Sex, and
              (v) Date of birth.
              (2) If the subject is an individual, employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) Organization name and type,
              (ii) Occupation and specialty, if applicable,
              (iii) National Provider Identifier (NPI),
              (iv) Name of each professional school attended and year of graduation, and
              (v) With respect to the state professional license (including professional certification and registration) on which the reported action was taken, the license number, the field of licensure, and the name of the state or territory in which the license is held.
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Business address,
              (iii) Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN), or Social Security Number (or ITIN) when used by the subject as a Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN),
              (iv) The NPI,
              (v) Type of organization, and
              (vi) With respect to the state license (including certification and registration) on which the reported action was taken, the license and the name of the state or territory in which the license is held.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) A narrative description of the acts or omissions and injuries upon which the reported action was based,
              (ii) Classification of the acts or omissions in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary,
              (iii) Classification of the action taken in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary, and the amount of any monetary penalty resulting from the reported action,
              (iv) The date the action was taken, its effective date and duration,
              (v) Name of the agency taking the action,

              (vi) Name and address of the reporting entity, and
              
              (vii) The name, title, and telephone number of the responsible official submitting the report on behalf of the reporting entity.
              (c) What information may be reported, if known. Reporting entities described in paragraph (a) of this section may voluntarily report, if known, the following information:
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address,
              (iii) FEIN, when used by the individual as a TIN, and
              (iv) If deceased, date of death.
              (2) If the subject is an individual, employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) Other state professional license number(s), field(s) of licensure, and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (ii) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Unique Physician Identification Number(s) (UPIN), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s),
              (iii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (iv) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address(es) used,
              (iii) Other FEIN(s) or Social Security Number(s) used,
              (iv) Other NPI(s) used,
              (v) Other state license number(s) and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (vi) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA) number(s), Food and Drug Administration (FDA) number(s), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s),
              (vii) Names and titles of principal officers and owners,
              (viii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (ix) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) Whether the subject will be automatically reinstated.
              (ii) The date of appeal, if any.
              (d) Sanctions for failure to report. The Secretary will provide for a publication of a public report that identifies those agencies that have failed to report information on adverse actions as required to be reported under this section.
            
            
              § 60.11
              Reporting negative actions or findings taken by peer review organizations or private accreditation entities.
              (a) What actions must be reported. Peer review organizations and private accreditation entities are required to report any negative actions or findings (as defined in § 60.3 of this part) which are taken against a health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier to the NPDB and provide a copy to the appropriate state licensing or certification agency. The health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier must be licensed or otherwise authorized by the state to provide health care services. The actions taken must be as a result of formal proceedings (as defined in § 60.3).
              (b) What information must be reported. Each peer review organization and private accreditation entity must report the information as required in § 60.9(b) of this part.
              (c) What information may be reported, if known. Each peer review organization and private accreditation entity should report, if known, the information as described in § 60.9(c).
              (d) Access to documents. Each peer review organization and private accreditation entity must provide the Secretary (or an entity designated by the Secretary) with access to the documents underlying the actions described in this section as may be necessary for the Secretary to determine the facts and circumstances concerning the actions and determinations for the purpose of carrying out section 1921.
            
            
              
              § 60.12
              Reporting adverse actions taken against clinical privileges.
              (a) Reporting by health care entities to the NPDB—(1) Actions that must be reported and to whom the report must be made. Each health care entity must report to the NPDB and provide a copy of the report to the Board of Medical Examiners in the state in which the health care entity is located the following actions:
              (i) Any professional review action that adversely affects the clinical privileges of a physician or dentist for a period longer than 30 days,
              (ii) Acceptance of the surrender of clinical privileges or any restriction of such privileges by a physician or dentist:
              (A) While the physician or dentist is under investigation by the health care entity relating to possible incompetence or improper professional conduct, or
              (B) In return for not conducting such an investigation or proceeding, or
              (iii) In the case of a health care entity which is a professional society, when it takes a professional review action concerning a physician or dentist.
              (2) Voluntary reporting on other health care practitioners. A health care entity may report to the NPDB information as described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section concerning actions described in paragraph (a)(1) in this section with respect to other health care practitioners.
              (3) What information must be reported. The health care entity must report the following information concerning actions described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section with respect to a physician or dentist:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Work address,
              (iii) Home address, if known,
              (iv) Social Security Number, if known, and if obtained in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974,
              (v) Date of birth,
              (vi) Name of each professional school attended and year of graduation,
              (vii) For each professional license: the license number, the field of licensure, and the name of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (viii) DEA registration number, if known,
              (ix) A description of the acts or omissions or other reasons for privilege loss, or, if known, for surrender,
              (x) Action taken, date the action was taken, and effective date of the action, and

              (xi) Other information as required by the Secretary from time to time after publication in the Federal Register and after an opportunity for public comment.
              (b) Reporting by the Board of Medical Examiners to the NPDB. Each Board must report any known instances of a health care entity's failure to report information as required under paragraph (a)(1) of this section. In addition, each Board of Medical Examiners must simultaneously report this information to the appropriate state licensing board in the state in which the health care entity is located, if the Board of Medical Examiners is not such licensing board.
              (c) Sanctions—(1) Health care entities. If the Secretary has reason to believe that a health care entity has substantially failed to report information in accordance with this section, the Secretary will conduct an investigation. If the investigation shows that the health care entity has not complied with this section, the Secretary will provide the entity with a written notice describing the noncompliance, giving the health care entity an opportunity to correct the noncompliance, and stating that the entity may request, within 30 days after receipt of such notice, a hearing with respect to the noncompliance. The request for a hearing must contain a statement of the material factual issues in dispute to demonstrate that there is cause for a hearing. These issues must be both substantive and relevant. The hearing will be held in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area. The Secretary will deny a hearing if:
              (i) The request for a hearing is untimely,
              (ii) The health care entity does not provide a statement of material factual issues in dispute, or

              (iii) The statement of factual issues in dispute is frivolous or inconsequential.
              

              In the event that the Secretary denies a hearing, the Secretary will send a written denial to the health care entity setting forth the reasons for denial. If a hearing is denied, or, if as a result of the hearing the entity is found to be in noncompliance, the Secretary will publish the name of the health care entity in the Federal Register. In such case, the immunity protections provided under section 411(a) of HCQIA will not apply to the health care entity for professional review activities that occur during the 3-year period beginning 30 days after the date of publication of the entity's name in the Federal Register.
              
              (2) Board of Medical Examiners. If, after notice of noncompliance and providing opportunity to correct noncompliance, the Secretary determines that a Board of Medical Examiners has failed to report information in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, the Secretary will designate another qualified entity for the reporting of this information.
            
            
              § 60.13
              Reporting Federal or state criminal convictions related to the delivery of a health care item or service.
              (a) Who must report. Federal and state prosecutors must report criminal convictions against health care practitioners, providers, and suppliers related to the delivery of a health care item or service (regardless of whether the conviction is the subject of a pending appeal).
              (b) What information must be reported. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section must report the following information:
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Social Security Number (or ITIN) (states must report this information, if known, and if obtained in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974),
              (iii) Home address or address of record,
              (iv) Sex, and
              (v) Date of birth.
              (2) If the subject is an individual, that individual's employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) Organization name and type,
              (ii) Occupation and specialty, if applicable, and
              (iii) National Provider Identifier (NPI).
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Business address,
              (iii) Federal Employer Number (FEIN), or Social Security Number (or ITIN) when used by the subject as a Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN),
              (iv) The NPI, and
              (v) Type of organization.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) A narrative description of the acts or omissions and injuries upon which the reported action was based,
              (ii) Classification of the acts or omissions in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary,
              (iii) Name and location of court or judicial venue in which the action was taken,
              (iv) Docket or court file number,
              (v) Type of action taken,
              (vi) Statutory offense(s) and count(s),
              (vii) Name of primary prosecuting agency (or the plaintiff in civil actions),
              (viii) Date of sentence or judgment,
              (ix) Length of incarceration, detention, probation, community service, or suspended sentence,
              (x) Amounts of any monetary judgment, penalty, fine, assessment, or restitution,
              (xi) Other sentence, judgment, or orders,
              (xii) If the action is on appeal,
              (xiii) Name and address of the reporting entity, and
              (xiv) The name, title, and telephone number of the responsible official submitting the report on behalf of the reporting entity.
              (c) What information may be reported, if known. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section and each state should report, if known, the following information:
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address(es), and

              (iii) FEIN, when used by the individual as a TIN.
              
              (2) If the subject is an individual, that individual's employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) State professional license (including professional certification and registration) number(s), field(s) of licensure, and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (ii) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Unique Physician Identification Number(s) (UPIN), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s);
              (iii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (iv) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address(es) used,
              (iii) Other FEIN(s) or Social Security Numbers(s) (or ITINs) used,
              (iv) Other NPI(s) used,
              (v) State license (including certification and registration) number(s) and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (vi) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA) number(s), Food and Drug Administration (FDA) number(s), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s),
              (vii) Names and titles of principal officers and owners,
              (viii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (ix) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) Prosecuting agency's case number,
              (ii) Investigative agencies involved,
              (iii) Investigative agencies case or file number(s), and
              (iv) The date of appeal, if any.
              (d) Access to documents. Each state must provide the Secretary (or an entity designated by the Secretary) with access to the documents underlying the actions described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (4) of this section, as may be necessary for the Secretary to determine the facts and circumstances concerning the actions and determinations for the purpose of carrying out section 1921.
              (e) Sanctions for failure to report. The Secretary will provide for publication of a public report that identifies those agencies that have failed to report information on criminal convictions as required to be reported under this section.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.14
              Reporting civil judgments related to the delivery of a health care item or service.
              (a) Who must report. Federal and state attorneys and health plans must report civil judgments against health care practitioners, providers, or suppliers related to the delivery of a health care item or service (regardless of whether the civil judgment is the subject of a pending appeal). If a government agency is party to a multi-claimant civil judgment, it must assume the responsibility for reporting the entire action, including all amounts awarded to all the claimants, both public and private. If there is no government agency as a party, but there are multiple health plans as claimants, the health plan which receives the largest award must be responsible for reporting the total action for all parties.
              (b) What information must be reported. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section must report the information as required in § 60.13(b) of this part.
              (c) What information may be reported, if known. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section should report, if known the information as described in § 60.13(c) of this part.
              (d) Access to documents. Each state must provide the Secretary (or an entity designated by the Secretary) with access to the documents underlying the actions described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (4) of this section, as may be necessary for the Secretary to determine the facts and circumstances concerning the actions and determinations for the purpose of carrying out section 1921.
              
              (e) Sanctions for failure to report. Any health plan that fails to report information on a civil judgment required to be reported under this section will be subject to a civil money penalty (CMP) of not more than $25,000 for each such adverse action not reported. Such penalty will be imposed and collected in the same manner as CMPs under subsection (a) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act. The Secretary will provide for publication of a public report that identifies those government agencies that have failed to report information on civil judgments as required to be reported under this section.
            
            
              § 60.15
              Reporting exclusions from participation in Federal or state health care programs.
              (a) Who must report. Federal Government agencies and state law and fraud enforcement agencies must report health care practitioners, providers, or suppliers excluded from participating in Federal or state health care programs, including exclusions that were made in a matter in which there was also a settlement that is not reported because no findings or admissions of liability have been made (regardless of whether the exclusion is the subject of a pending appeal).
              (b) What information must be reported. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section must report the following information:
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Social Security Number (or ITIN) (state law and fraud enforcement agencies must report this information if known, and if obtained in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974),
              (iii) Home address or address of record,
              (iv) Sex, and
              (v) Date of birth.
              (2) If the subject is an individual, that individual's employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) Organization name and type,
              (ii) Occupation and specialty, if applicable, and
              (iii) National Provider Identifier (NPI).
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Name,
              (ii) Business address,
              (iii) Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN) or Social Security Number (or ITIN) when used by the subject as a Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN),
              (iv) The NPI, and
              (v) Type of organization.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) A narrative description of the acts or omissions and injuries upon which the reported action was based,
              (ii) Classification of the acts or omissions in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary,
              (iii) Classification of the action taken in accordance with a reporting code adopted by the Secretary, and the amount of any monetary penalty resulting from the reported action,
              (iv) The date the action was taken, its effective date and duration,
              (v) If the action is on appeal,
              (vi) Name of the agency taking the action,
              (vii) Name and address of the reporting entity, and
              (viii) The name, title, and telephone number of the responsible official submitting the report on behalf of the reporting entity.
              (c) What information may be reported, if known. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section should report, if known, the following information:
              (1) If the subject is an individual, personal identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address(es),
              (iii) FEIN, when used by the individual as a TIN,
              (iv) Name of each professional school attended and year of graduation, and
              (v) If deceased, date of death.
              (2) If the subject is an individual, that individual's employment or professional identifiers, including:
              (i) State professional license (including professional registration and certification) number(s), field(s) of licensure, and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,

              (ii) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Unique Physician Identification Number(s) (UPIN), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s),
              (iii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (iv) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (3) If the subject is an organization, identifiers, including:
              (i) Other name(s) used,
              (ii) Other address(es) used,
              (iii) Other FEIN(s) or Social Security Numbers(s) (or ITINs) used,
              (iv) Other NPI(s) used,
              (v) State license (including registration and certification) number(s) and the name(s) of the state or territory in which the license is held,
              (vi) Other numbers assigned by Federal or state agencies, including, but not limited to DEA registration number(s), Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA) number(s), Food and Drug Administration (FDA) number(s), and Medicaid and Medicare provider number(s),
              (vii) Names and titles of principal officers and owners,
              (viii) Name(s) and address(es) of any health care entity with which the subject is affiliated or associated, and
              (ix) Nature of the subject's relationship to each associated or affiliated health care entity.
              (4) For all subjects:
              (i) If the subject will be automatically reinstated, and
              (ii) The date of appeal, if any.
              (d) Access to documents. Each state must provide the Secretary (or an entity designated by the Secretary) with access to the documents underlying the actions described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (4) of this section, as may be necessary for the Secretary to determine the facts and circumstances concerning the actions and determinations for the purpose of carrying out section 1921.
              (e) Sanctions for failure to report. The Secretary will provide for publication of a public report that identifies those government agencies that have failed to report information on exclusions or debarments as required to be reported under this section.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.16
              Reporting other adjudicated actions or decisions.
              (a) Who must report. Federal Government agencies, state law or fraud enforcement agencies, and health plans must report other adjudicated actions or decisions as defined in § 60.3 of this part related to the delivery, payment or provision of a health care item or service against health care practitioners, providers, and suppliers (regardless of whether the other adjudicated action or decision is subject to a pending appeal).
              (b) What information must be reported. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section must report the information as required in § 60.15(b) of this part.
              (c) What information may be reported, if known. Entities described in paragraph (a) of this section should report, if known, the information as described in § 60.15(c) of this part.
              (d) Access to documents. Each state must provide the Secretary (or an entity designated by the Secretary) with access to the documents underlying the actions described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (4) of this section, as may be necessary for the Secretary to determine the facts and circumstances concerning the actions and determinations for the purpose of carrying out section 1921.
              (e) Sanctions for failure to report. Any health plan that fails to report information on another adjudicated action or decision required to be reported under this section will be subject to a civil money penalty (CMP) of not more than $25,000 for each such action not reported. Such penalty will be imposed and collected in the same manner as CMPs under subsection (a) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act. The Secretary will provide for publication of a public report that identifies those government agencies that have failed to report information on other adjudicated actions as required to be reported under this section.
            
          
          
            
            Subpart C—Disclosure of Information by the National Practitioner Data Bank
            
              § 60.17
              Information which hospitals must request from the National Practitioner Data Bank.
              (a) When information must be requested. Each hospital, either directly or through an authorized agent, must request information from the NPDB concerning a health care practitioner, as follows:
              (1) At the time a health care practitioner applies for a position on its medical staff (courtesy or otherwise) or for clinical privileges at the hospital; and
              (2) Every 2 years for any health care practitioner who is on its medical staff (courtesy or otherwise) or has clinical privileges at the hospital.
              (b) Failure to request information. Any hospital which does not request the information as required in paragraph (a) of this section is presumed to have knowledge of any information reported to the NPDB concerning this health care practitioner.
              (c) Reliance on the obtained information. Each hospital may rely upon the information provided by the NPDB to the hospital. A hospital shall not be held liable for this reliance unless the hospital has knowledge that the information provided was false.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.18
              Requesting information from the National Practitioner Data Bank.
              (a) Who may request information and what information may be available. Information in the NPDB will be available, upon request, to the persons or entities, or their authorized agents, as described below:
              (1) Information reported under §§ 60.7, 60.8, and 60.12 of this part is available to:
              (i) A hospital that requests information concerning a health care practitioner who is on its medical staff (courtesy or otherwise) or has clinical privileges at the hospital,
              (ii) A health care practitioner who requests information concerning himself or herself,
              (iii) A State Medical Board of Examiners or other state authority that licenses health care practitioners,
              (iv) A health care entity which has entered or may be entering into an employment or affiliation relationship with a health care practitioner, or to which the health care practitioner has applied for clinical privileges or appointment to the medical staff,
              (v) An attorney, or individual representing himself or herself, who has filed a medical malpractice action or claim in a state or Federal court or other adjudicative body against a hospital, and who requests information regarding a specific health care practitioner who is also named in the action or claim. This information will be disclosed only upon the submission of evidence that the hospital failed to request information from the NPDB, as required by § 60.17(a) of this part, and may be used solely with respect to litigation resulting from the action or claim against the hospital,
              (vi) A health care entity with respect to professional review activity, and
              (vii) A person or entity requesting statistical information, in a form which does not permit the identification of any individual or entity.
              (2) Information reported under §§ 60.9, 60.10, 60.11, 60.13, 60.14, 60.15, and 60.16 of this part is available to the agencies, authorities, and officials listed below that request information on licensure or certification actions, any other negative actions or findings, or final adverse actions concerning an individual practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier. These agencies, authorities, and officials may obtain data for the purposes of determining the fitness of individuals to provide health care services, protecting the health and safety of individuals receiving health care through programs administered by the requesting agency, and protecting the fiscal integrity of these programs.
              (i) Agencies administering (including those providing payment for services) Federal health care programs, including private entities administering such programs under contract,

              (ii) State licensing or certification agencies and Federal agencies responsible for the licensing and certification of health care practitioners, providers, or suppliers,
              (iii) State agencies administering or supervising the administration of state health care programs (as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1128(h)),
              (iv) State law or fraud enforcement agencies,
              (v) Law enforcement officials and agencies such as:
              (A) United States Attorney General,
              (B) United States Chief Postal Inspector,
              (C) United States Inspectors General;
              (D) United States Attorneys,
              (E) United States Comptroller General,
              (F) United States Drug Enforcement Administration,
              (G) United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, or
              (H) Federal Bureau of Investigation,
              (vi) Utilization and quality control peer review organizations described in part B of title XI and to appropriate entities with contracts under section 1154(a)(4)(C) of the Social Security Act with respect to eligible organizations reviewed under the contracts, but only with respect to information provided pursuant to §§ 60.9, 60.10, and 60.11 of this part, as well as information provided pursuant to §§ 60.13, 60.14, 60.15, and 60.16 of this part by Federal agencies and health plans,
              (vii) Hospitals and other health care entities (as defined in section 431 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986), with respect to health care practitioners who have entered (or may be entering) into employment or affiliation relationships with, or have applied for clinical privileges or appointments to the medical staff of such hospitals or other health care entities, but only with respect to information provided pursuant to §§ 60.9, 60.10, and 60.11, as well as information provided pursuant to §§ 60.13, 60.14, 60.15, and 60.16 by Federal agencies and health plans,
              (viii) Health plans,
              (ix) A health care practitioner, health care entity, provider, or supplier who requests information concerning himself, herself, or itself, and
              (x) A person or entity requesting statistical information, in a form which does not permit the identification of any individual or entity. (For example, researchers may use statistical information to identify the total number of nurses with adverse licensure actions in a specific state. Similarly, researchers may use statistical information to identify the total number of health care entities denied accreditation.)
              (b) Procedures for obtaining NPDB information. Persons and entities may obtain information from the NPDB by submitting a request in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe. These requests are subject to fees as described in § 60.19 of this part.
              [78 FR 20484, Apr. 5, 2013, 78 FR 25860, May 6, 2013]
            
            
              § 60.19
              Fees applicable to requests for information.
              (a) Policy on fees. The fees described in this section apply to all requests for information from the NPDB. The amount of such fees will be sufficient to recover the full costs of operating the NPDB. The actual fees will be announced by the Secretary in periodic notices in the Federal Register. However, for purposes of verification and dispute resolution at the time the report is accepted, the NPDB will provide a copy—at the time a report has been submitted, automatically, without a request and free of charge, of the record to the health care practitioner, entity, provider, or supplier who is the subject of the report and to the reporter.
              (b) Criteria for determining the fee. The amount of each fee will be determined based on the following criteria:
              (1) Direct and indirect personnel costs, including salaries and fringe benefits such as medical insurance and retirement,
              (2) Physical overhead, consulting, and other indirect costs (including materials and supplies, utilities, insurance, travel, and rent and depreciation on land, buildings, and equipment),
              (3) Agency management and supervisory costs,

              (4) Costs of enforcement, research, and establishment of regulations and guidance,
              
              (5) Use of electronic data processing equipment to collect and maintain information—the actual cost of the service, including computer search time, runs and printouts, and
              (6) Any other direct or indirect costs related to the provision of services.
              (c) Assessing and collecting fees. The Secretary will announce through notice in the Federal Register from time to time the methods of payment of NPDB fees. In determining these methods, the Secretary will consider efficiency, effectiveness, and convenience for the NPDB users and the Department. Methods may include: credit card, electronic fund transfer, and other methods of electronic payment.
            
            
              § 60.20
              Confidentiality of National Practitioner Data Bank information.
              (a) Limitations on disclosure. Information reported to the NPDB is considered confidential and shall not be disclosed outside the Department of Health and Human Services, except as specified in §§ 60.17, 60.18, and 60.21 of this part. Persons and entities receiving information from the NPDB, either directly or from another party, must use it solely with respect to the purpose for which it was provided. The Data Bank report may not be disclosed, but nothing in this section will prevent the disclosure of information by a party from its own files used to create such reports where disclosure is otherwise authorized under applicable state or Federal law.
              (b) Penalty for violations. Any person who violates paragraph (a) of this section shall be subject to a civil money penalty of up to $11,000 for each violation. This penalty will be imposed pursuant to procedures at 42 CFR part 1003.
            
            
              § 60.21
              How to dispute the accuracy of National Practitioner Data Bank information.
              (a) Who may dispute the NPDB information. The NPDB will routinely mail or transmit electronically to the subject a copy of the report filed in the NPDB. In addition, as indicated in § 60.18, the subject may also request a copy of such report. The subject of the report or a designated representative may dispute the accuracy of a report concerning himself, herself, or itself as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section.
              (b) Procedures for disputing a report with the reporting entity. (1) If the subject disagrees with the reported information, the subject must request in the format as determined by the Secretary that the NPDB enter the report into “disputed status.”
              (2) The NPDB will send the report, with a notation that the report has been placed in “disputed status,” to queriers (where identifiable), the reporting entity and the subject of the report.
              (3) The subject must attempt to enter into discussion with the reporting entity to resolve the dispute. If the reporting entity revises the information originally submitted to the NPDB, the NPDB will notify the subject and all entities to whom reports have been sent that the original information has been revised. If the reporting entity does not revise the reported information, or does not respond to the subject within 60 days, the subject may request that the Secretary review the report for accuracy. The Secretary will decide whether to correct the report within 30 days of the request. This time frame may be extended for good cause. The subject also may provide a statement to the NPDB, either directly or through a designated representative that will permanently append the report.
              (c) Procedures for requesting a review of a disputed report. (1) The subject must request, in the format as determined by the Secretary, that the Secretary review the report for accuracy. The subject must return this request to the NPDB along with appropriate materials that support the subject's position. The Secretary will only review the accuracy of the reported information, and will not consider the merits or appropriateness of the action or the due process that the subject received.
              (2) After the review, if the Secretary:

              (i) Concludes that the information is accurate and reportable to the NPDB, the Secretary will inform the subject and the NPDB of the determination. The Secretary will include a brief statement (Secretarial Statement) in the report that describes the basis for the decision. The report will be removed from “disputed status.” The NPDB will distribute the corrected report and statement(s) to previous queriers (where identifiable), the reporting entity and the subject of the report.
              (ii) Concludes that the information contained in the report is inaccurate, the Secretary will inform the subject of the determination and direct the NPDB or the reporting entity to revise the report. The Secretary will include a brief statement (Secretarial Statement) in the report describing the findings. The NPDB will distribute the corrected report and statement(s) to previous queriers (where identifiable), the reporting entity and the subject of the report.
              (iii) Determines that the disputed issues are outside the scope of the Department's review, the Secretary will inform the subject and the NPDB of the determination. The Secretary will include a brief statement (Secretarial Statement) in the report describing the findings. The report will be removed from “disputed status.” The NPDB will distribute the report and the statement(s) to previous queriers (where identifiable), the reporting entity and the subject of the report.
              (iv) Determines that the adverse action was not reportable and therefore should be removed from the NPDB, the Secretary will inform the subject and direct the NPDB to void the report. The NPDB will distribute a notice to previous queriers (where identifiable), the reporting entity and the subject of the report that the report has been voided.
            
            
              § 60.22
              Immunity.
              Individuals, entities or their authorized agents, and the NPDB shall not be held liable in any civil action filed by the subject of a report unless the individual, entity, or authorized agent submitting the report has actual knowledge of the falsity of the information contained in the report.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 63
          PART 63—GRANT PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PLANNING AND EVALUATION
          
            
              Subpart A—General
              Sec.
              63.1
              Purpose and scope.
              63.2
              Eligibility for award.
              63.3
              Program announcements and solicitations.
              63.4
              Cooperative arrangements.
              63.5
              Effective date of approved grant.
              63.6
              Evaluation of applications.
              63.7
              Disposition of applications.
              63.8
              Supplemental regulations and grant conditions.
            
            
              Subpart B—Financial Provisions
              63.16
              Scope of subpart.
              63.17
              Amount of award.
              63.18
              Limitations on costs.
              63.19
              Budget revisions and minor deviations.
              63.20
              Period during which grant funds may be obligated.
              63.21
              Obligation and liquidation by grantee.
              63.22
              Cost sharing.
              63.23
              Telecommunications Demonstration Grants.
            
            
              Subpart C—Special Provisions
              63.30
              Scope of subpart.
              63.31
              Protection of human subjects.
              63.32
              Data collection instruments.
              63.33
              Treatment of animals.
              63.34
              Principal investigators.
              63.35
              Dual compensation.
              63.36
              Fees to Federal employees.
              63.37
              Leasing facilities.
              63.38
              Publications.
              63.39
              Religious worship or instruction.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 602, Community Services Act (42 U.S.C. 2942); sec. 1110, Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1310).
          
          
            Source:
            40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General
            
              § 63.1
              Purpose and scope.
              (a) Applicability. Except to the extent inconsistent with an applicable Federal statute the regulations in this part apply to all grant awards of Federal assistance made by the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation or his designee, hereinafter referred to in this part as the Assistant Secretary. Such grants include those under section 232 of the Community Services Act (42 U.S.C. 2835), section 1110 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1310), section 392A of the Communications Act of 1934, and such other authority as may be delegated to the Assistant Secretary for policy research activities.
              (b) Exceptions to applicability. The award and administration of contracts and cooperative agreements by the Assistant Secretary shall not be covered by this subchapter. Contracts entered into by the Assistant Secretary shall be subject to the regulations in 41 CFR Chapters 1 and 3. Generally, the Assistant Secretary will select between grant and contract procedures and instruments, both with regard to the solicitation process and with respect to unsolicited proposals, on the basis of criteria set forth in the proposed revision of 41 CFR 3-1.53 published at 39 FR 27469 at any subsequent revision thereof.
              (c) Objectives—(1) Policy research. The overall objective of policy research activities is to obtain information, as it relates to the mission of the Department of Health and Human Services, about the basic causes of and methods for preventing and eliminating poverty and dependency and about improved methods for delivering human resources services. Such information is obtained through the conduct of basic and applied research, statistical analyses, and demonstrations and evaluations which have demonstrated a high probability of impacting on the formulation or modification of major Departmental policies and programs.
              (2) Telecommunications demonstrations. The overall objective of the Telecommunications Demonstration Program is to promote the development of nonbroadcast telecommunications facilities and services for the transmission, distribution, and delivery of health, education, and social service information.
              [40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 36149, July 13, 1977]
            
            
              § 63.2
              Eligibility for award.
              (a) Groups and organizations eligible. Except where otherwise prohibited by law, any public or nonprofit private agency, institution, or organization which is found by the Assistant Secretary to be authorized and qualified by educational, scientific, or other relevant competence to carry out a proposed project in accordance with the regulations of this subchapter shall be eligible to receive a grant under this part.
              (b) Project eligible—(1) Policy research. Any project found by the Assistant Secretary to be a research, pilot, evaluation, or demonstration project within the meaning of this section and § 63.1 shall be eligible for an award. Eligible projects may include planning, policy modeling or research utilization studies; experiments; demonstrations; field investigations; statistical data collections or analyses; or other types of investigation or studies, or combinations thereof, and may either be limited to one aspect of a problem or subject, or may consist of two or more related problems or subjects for concurrent or consecutive investigation and may involve multiple disciplines, facilities, and resources.
              (2) Telecommunications demonstrations. Any projects which meet the special criteria in § 63.6(c) shall be eligible for a telecommunications demonstration grant.
              [40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 36149, July 13, 1977]
            
            
              § 63.3
              Program announcements and solicitations.

              (a) In each fiscal year the Assistant Secretary may from time to time solicit applications through one or more general or specialized program announcements. Such announcements will be published in the Federal Register as notices and will include:
              (1) A clear statement of the type(s) of applications requested;
              (2) A specified plan, time(s) of application, and criteria for reviewing and approving applications;
              (3) Any grant terms or conditions of general applicability (other than those set forth in this part) which are necessary (i) to meet the statutory requirements of applicable legislation, (ii) to assure or protect the advancement of the project, or (iii) to conserve grant funds.

              (b) Applications for grants: Any applicant eligible for grant assistance may submit on or before such cutoff date or dates as the Assistant Secretary may announce in program solicitations, an application containing such pertinent information and in accordance with the forms and instructions as prescribed herein and additional forms and instructions as may be specified by the Assistant Secretary. Such application shall be executed by the applicant or an official or representative of the applicant duly authorized to make such application. The Assistant Secretary may require any party eligible for assistance under this subchapter to submit a preliminary proposal for review and approval prior to the acceptance of an application submitted under these provisions.

              (c) All applications and preliminary proposals should be addressed to:
              
              
                Grants Officer, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services, 330 Independence Avenue, SW, Room 5027, Washington, DC 20201.
              
            
            
              § 63.4
              Cooperative arrangements.
              (a) Eligible parties may enter into cooperative arrangements with other eligible parties, including those in another State, to apply for assistance.
              (b) A joint application made by two or more applicants for assistance under this subchapter may have separate budgets corresponding to the programs, services and activities performed by each of the joint applicants or may have a combined budget. If joint applications present separate budgets, the Assistant Secretary may make separate awards, or may award a single grant authorizing separate amounts for each of the joint applicants.
              (c) In the case of each cooperative arrangement authorized under paragraph (a) of this section and receiving assistance, except where the Assistant Secretary makes separate awards under paragraph (b) of this section all such applicants (1) shall be deemed to be joint legal recipients of the grant award and (2) shall be jointly and severally responsible for administering the project assisted under such grant.
            
            
              § 63.5
              Effective date of approved grant.
              Federal financial participation is normally available only with respect to obligations incurred subsequent to the effective date of an approved project. The effective date of the project will be set forth in the notification of grant award. Grantees may be reimbursed for costs resulting from obligations incurred before the effective date of the grant award if such costs are authorized by the Assistant Secretary in the notification of grant award or subsequently in writing, and otherwise would be allowable as costs of the grant under the applicable regulations and grant terms and conditions.
            
            
              § 63.6
              Evaluation of applications.
              (a) Review procedures. All applications filed in accordance with § 63.3 shall be evaluated by the Assistant Secretary through officers, employees, and such experts or consultants engaged for this purpose as he/she determines are specially qualified in the areas of research pursued by this office. The evaluation criteria below will be supplemented each fiscal year by a program announcement outlining priorities and objectives for policy research, and by other general or specialized solicitations. Such supplements may modify the criteria in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section to provide greater specificity or otherwise improve their applicability to a given announcement or solicitation.
              (b) Criteria for evaluation of Policy Research Projects. Review of applications under paragraph (a) of this section will take into account such factors as:
              (1) Scientific merit and the significance of the project in relation to policy objectives;
              (2) Feasibility of the project;
              (3) Soundness of research design, statistical technique, and procedures and methodology;
              (4) Theoretical and technical soundness of the proposed plan of operation including consideration of the extent to which:
              (i) The objectives of the proposed project are sharply defined, clearly stated, and capable of being attained by the proposed procedures;

              (ii) The objectives of the proposed project show evidence of contributing to the achievement of policy objectives;
              
              (iii) Provisions are made for adequate evaluation of the effectiveness of the project and for determining the extent to which the objectives are accomplished; and
              (iv) Appropriate provisions are made for satisfactory inservice training connected with project services.
              (5) Expected potential for utilizing the results of the proposed project in other projects or programs for similar purposes;
              (6) Sufficiency of size, scope, and duration of the project so as to secure productive results;
              (7) Adequacy of qualifications and experience, including managerial, of personnel;
              (8) Adequacy of facilities and other resources; and
              (9) Reasonableness of estimated cost in relation to anticipated results.
              (c) Criteria for evaluation of Telecommunications Demonstrations Projects. Review of applications for Telecommunications Demonstrations grants will take into account such factors as are listed in paragraphs (c) (1) through (10) of this section. Each applicant must include in the application, prior to final evaluation by the Assistant Secretary, documentation indicating specifically and separately how and to what extent each of these criteria have been or will be met:
              (1) That the project for which application is made demonstrates innovative methods or techniques of utilizing nonbroadcast telecommunications equipment or facilities to satisfy the purpose of this authority;
              (2) That the project will have original research value which will demonstrate to other potential users that such methods or techniques are feasible and cost-effective;
              (3) That the services to be provided are responsive to local needs as identified and assessed by the applicant;
              (4) That the applicant has assessed existing telecommunications facilities (if any) in the proposed service area and explored their use of interconnection in conjunction with the project;
              (5) That there is significant local commitment (e.g., evidence of support, participation, and contribution by local institutions and agencies) to the proposed project, indicating that it fulfills local needs, and gives some promise that operational systems will result from successful demonstrations and will be supported by service recipients or providers;
              (6) That demonstrations and related activities assisted under this section will remain under the administration and control of the applicant;
              (7) That the applicant has the managerial and technical capability to carry out the project for which the application is made;
              (8) That the facilities and equipment acquired or developed pursuant to the applications will be used substantially for the transmission, distribution, and delivery of health, education, or social service information, and that use of such facilities and equipment may be shared among these and additional public or other services;
              (9) That the provision has been made to submit a summary and factual evaluation of the results of the demonstration at least annually for each year in which funds are received, in the form of a report suitable for dissemination to groups representative of national health, education, and social service telecommunications interests; and,
              (10) That the project has potential for stimulating cooperation and sharing among institutions and agencies, both within and across disciplines.
              (d) Applicant's performance on prior award. Where the applicant has previously received an award from the Department of Health and Human Services, the applicant's compliance or noncompliance with requirements applicable to such prior award as reflected in past written evaluation reports, memoranda on performance, and completeness of required submissions: Provided, That in any case where the Assistant Secretary proposes to deny assistance based upon the applicant's noncompliance with requirements applicable to a prior award, he shall do so only after affording the applicant reasonable notice and an opportunity to rebut the proposed basis for denial of assistance.
              [40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 36149, July 13, 1977]
            
            
              
              § 63.7
              Disposition of applications.
              (a) Approval, disapproval, or deferral. On the basis of the review of an application pursuant to § 63.6 the Assistant Secretary will either (1) approve the application in whole or in part, for such amount of funds and subject to such conditions as he/she deems necessary or desirable for the completion of the approved project, (2) disapprove the application, or (3) defer action on the application for such reasons as lack of funds or a need for further review.
              (b) Notification of disposition. The Assistant Secretary will notify the applicant in writing of the disposition of its application. A signed notification of grant award will be issued to notify the applicant of an approved project application.
            
            
              § 63.8
              Supplemental regulations and grant conditions.
              (a) Grants under section 232 of the Community Services Act. (1) Any grants awarded with funds appropriated under section 232 of the Community Services Act shall be subject to the following regulations issued by the Director of the Community Services Administration (formerly the Office of Economic Opportunity):
              
                
                  45 CFR 1060.2
                  (Income Poverty Guidelines.)
                
                
                  45 CFR 1060.3
                  (Limitation on Benefits to Those Voluntarily Poor.)
                
                
                  45 CFR 1067.1
                  (Suspension and Termination of Assistance.)
                
                
                  45 CFR 1068.6
                  (Grantee Compliance with IRS Requirements for Withheld Federal Income and Social Security Taxes.)
                
                
                  45 CFR 1069.1
                  (Employee Participation in Direct Action.)
                
                
                  45 CFR 1069.2
                  (Limitations with Respect to Unlawful Demonstrations, Rioting, and Civil Disturbances.)
                
                
                  45 CFR 1070.1
                  (Public Access to Grantee Information.)
                
              
              No other portions of Chapter X of this title are applicable to such grants.
              (2) Grants awarded with funds appropriated under section 232 of the Community Services Act shall also be subject to the applicable statutory requirements in sections 242, 243, and 244, and title VI of the Community Services Act. The Assistant Secretary will advise grantees of the nature of these requirements at or prior to the time of award.
              (3) In the event that any provision of this part is inconsistent with a provision of law or a regulation referenced in paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section with respect to any grant funded under section 232 of the Community Services Act, the provision of this part shall, to the extent of any such inconsistency, not be effective.
              (b) Grants under other statutory authority. Grants awarded by the Assistant Secretary may be subject to regulations, other than those set forth in this part, which have been issued under the authority of statutes authorizing particular awards. In such a case, that fact will be set forth in the program announcement soliciting applications for such grants published in the Federal Register pursuant to § 63.3.
              (c) Other regulations applicable to grants under this part. Federal financial assistance provided under this part shall be subject to the following additional regulations except as otherwise provided in this part:
              (1) Part 75 of this title, establishing uniform administrative requirements, cost principles and audit requirements for grants by the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (2) Part 80 of this title, effectuating the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; and
              (3) Part 16 of this title, establishing a Departmental Grant Appeals Board for the resolution of specified post-award grant disputes.
              [40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Financial Provisions
            
              § 63.16
              Scope of subpart.
              This subpart sets forth supplemental financial provisions which apply to all grants awarded by the Assistant Secretary, except as specified in § 63.23 of this subpart.
              [40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 36149, July 13, 1977]
            
            
              § 63.17
              Amount of award.
              Federal assistance shall be provided only to meet allowable costs incurred by the award recipient in carrying out an approved project in accordance with the authorizing legislation and the regulations of this part.
            
            
              
              § 63.18
              Limitations on costs.
              The amount of the award shall be set forth in the grant award document. The total cost to the Government will not exceed the amount set forth in the grant award document or any modification thereof approved by the Assistant Secretary which meets the requirements of applicable statutes and regulations. The Government shall not be obligated to reimburse the grantee for costs incurred in excess of such amount unless and until the Assistant Secretary has notified the grantee in writing that such amount has been increased and has specified such increased amount in a revised grant award document. Such revised amount shall thereupon constitute the maximum cost to the Government for the performance of the grant.
            
            
              § 63.19
              Budget revisions and minor deviations.
              Pursuant to § 74.102(d) of this title, paragraphs (b)(3) and (b)(4) of that section are waived.
            
            
              § 63.20
              Period during which grant funds may be obligated.
              (a) The amount of the grant award shall remain available for obligation by the grantee during the period specified in the grant award or until otherwise terminated. Such period may be extended by revision of the grant with or without additional funds pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section where otherwise permitted by law.
              (b) When it is determined that special or unusual circumstances will delay the completion of the project beyond the period for obligation, the grantee must in writing request the Assistant Secretary to extend such period and must indicate the reasons therefor.
            
            
              § 63.21
              Obligation and liquidation by grantee.
              Obligations will be considered to have been incurred by a grantee on the basis of documentary evidence of binding commitments for the acquisition of goods or property or for the performance of work, except that funds for personal services, for services performed by public utilities, for travel, and for the rental of facilities, shall be considered to have been obligated as of the time such services were rendered, such travel was performed, and such rented facilities were used, respectively.
            
            
              § 63.22
              Cost sharing.
              Policy Research funds shall not be used to pay any recipient of a grant for the conduct of a research project an amount equal to as much as the entire cost of the project.
            
            
              § 63.23
              Telecommunications Demonstration Grants.
              The provisions of this section apply only to grants awarded under authority of 392A of the Communications Act of 1934.
              (a) Funds provided under the Telecommunications Demonstrations Program shall be available to support the planning, development, and acquisition or leasing of facilities and equipment necessary to the demonstration. However, funds shall not be available for the construction, remodeling, or repair of structures to house facilities or equipment acquired or developed with such funds, except that such funds may be used for minor remodeling which is necessary for and incident to the installation of such facilities or equipment.
              (b) Funds shall not be available for the development of programming materials or content.
              (c) The funding of any demonstration under this authority shall continue for not more than three years from the date of the original grant or contract.
              (1) Applications for assistance under the Act may project goals and activities over a period of up to three years. Approval of a multi-year project is intended to offer the project a reasonable degree of stability over time and to facilitiate additional long range planning.
              (2) Applications proposing a multi-year project must be accompanied by an explanation of the need for multi-year support, an overview of the objectives and activities proposed, and budget estimates to attain these objectives in any proposed subsequent year.

              (3) Subject to the availability of funds, an application for assistance to continue a project during the project period will be reviewed on a non-competitive basis to determine—
              
              (i) If the award recipient has complied with the award terms and conditions, the Act, and applicable regulations;
              (ii) The effectiveness of the project to date in terms of progress toward its goals, or the constructive changes proposed as a result of the ongoing evaluation of the project; and,
              (iii) If continuation of the project would be in the best interests of the Government.
              (d) The use of equipment in demonstration projects shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and grant funds may not be expended or obligated for purchase, lease, or use of such equipment prior to appropriate and necessary coordination by the grantee with the Commission. In particular:
              (1) For any project requiring a new or modification of an existing authorization(s) from the FCC, application(s) to the FCC for such authorization(s) must have been tendered for filing prior to the closing date established by any solicitation for grant applications offered under the Telecommunications Demonstration Program.
              (2) If the project is to be associated with an existing telecommunications activity requiring an FCC authorization, such operating authority for that activity must be current and valid.
              (3) For any project requiring a new or modification of an existing authorization(s) from the FCC, the applicant must file with the Secretary of Health and Human Services a copy of each FCC application and any amendments thereto.
              (4) For any project requiring a new or modification of an existing authorization(s) from the FCC, the applicant must tender for filing with the FCC a copy of the application to the Secretary for a telecommunications demonstration grant.
              (5) If the applicant fails to file required applications by the closing date established by the solicitation for grant applications, or if the FCC returns as substantially incomplete or deficient, dismisses, or denies an application required for the project, or any part thereof, or for the operation of any facility with which the project is associated, the Secretary may return the application for Federal assistance.
              (e) For the purposes of this program, the term “non-broadcast telecommunications facilities” includes but is not limited to, cable television systems, communications satellite systems and related terminal equipment, and other methods of transmitting, emitting, or receiving images and sounds or intelligence by means of wire, radio, optical, electromagnetic, and other means (including non-broadcast utilization of telecommunications equipment normally associated with broadcasting use).
              (f) Each applicant shall provide such information as the Assistant Secretary deems necessary to make a Federal assessment of the impact of the project on the quality of the human environment in accordance with section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (including the National Historical Preservation Act and other environmental acts). (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)).
              [42 FR 36149, July 13, 1977]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Special Provisions
            
              § 63.30
              Scope of subpart.
              This subpart sets forth supplemental special provisions which apply to all grants awarded by the Assistant Secretary.
            
            
              § 63.31
              Protection of human subjects.
              All grants made pursuant to this part are subject to the specific provisions of part 46 of this subtitle relating to the protection of human subjects.
            
            
              § 63.32
              Data collection instruments.
              (a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section “Child” means an individual who has not attained the legal age of consent to participate in research as determined under the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which such research is to be conducted.

              “Data-collection instruments” means tests, questionnaires, inventories, interview schedules or guides, rating scales, and survey plans or any other forms which are used to collect information on substantially identical items from 10 or more respondents.
              
              “Respondents” means individuals or organizations from whom information is collected.
              (b) Applicability. This section does not apply to instruments which deal solely with (1) functions of technical proficiency, such as scholastic aptitude or school achievement, or (2) routine demographic information.
              (c) Protection of privacy. (1) No project supported under this part may involve the use of data collection instruments which constitute invasion of personal privacy through inquiries regarding such matters as religion, sex, race, or politics.
              (2) A grantee which proposes to use a data collection instrument shall set forth in the grant application an explanation of the safeguards which will be used to restrict the use and disclosure of information so obtained to purposes directly connected with the project, including provisions for the destruction of such instruments where no longer needed for the purposes of the project.
              (d) Clearance of instruments. (1) Grantees will not be required to submit data-collection instruments to the Assistant Secretary or obtain the Assistant Secretary's approval for the use of these instruments, except where the notification of grant award specifically so provides.
              (2) If a grantee is required under paragraph (d)(1) of this section to submit data-collection instruments for the approval of the Assistant Secretary or if a grantee wishes the Assistant Secretary to review a data-collection instrument, the grantee shall submit seven copies of the document to the Assistant Secretary along with seven copies of the Office of Management and Budget's standard form No. 83 and seven copies of the Supporting Statement as required in the “Instructions for Requesting OMB Approval under the Federal Reports Act” (Standard form No. 83A).
              (e) Responsibility for collection of information. A grantee shall not in any way represent or imply (either in a letter of transmittal, in the data-gathering instruments themselves, or in any other manner) that the information is being collected by or for the Federal Government or any department, agency or instrumentality thereof. Basic responsibility for the study and the data-gathering instruments rests with the grantee.
              (f) Parental consent. In the case of any survey using data-collection instruments in which children are involved as respondents, the grantee, in addition to observing the other requirements contained in this section, and in part 46 of this subtitle as appropriate, shall provide assurances satisfactory to the Assistant Secretary that informed consent will be obtained from the parents of each such respondent prior to the use of such instruments, except that a waiver from the requirements of this paragraph for specific data-collection activities may be granted upon the written request by the grantee and a determination by the Assistant Secretary that a waiver is necessary in order to fully carry out the purposes of the grant.
            
            
              § 63.33
              Treatment of animals.

              If animals are utilized in any project receiving assistance, the applicant for such assistance shall provide assurances satisfactory to the Assistant Secretary that such animals will be provided with proper care and humane treatment; in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq.) and regulations set forth in (9 CFR parts 1, 2, 3, 4).
            
            
              § 63.34
              Principal investigators.
              The principal investigator(s) designated in successful grant applications as responsible for the conduct of the approved project, shall not be replaced without the prior approval of the Assistant Secretary or his designee. Failure to seek and acquire such approval may result in the grant award being terminated in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 75.372 of this subtitle or such other regulations as may be indicated in the grant terms and conditions.
              [40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 63.35
              Dual compensation.

              If a project staff member or consultant of one grantee is involved simultaneously in two or more projects supported by any funds either under this part or otherwise, he/she may not be compensated for more than 100 percent of his/her time from any funds during any part of the period of dual involvement.
            
            
              § 63.36
              Fees to Federal employees.
              The grantee shall not use funds from any sources to pay a fee to, or travel expenses of, employees of the Federal Government for lectures, attending program functions, or any other activities in connection with the grant.
            
            
              § 63.37
              Leasing facilities.
              In the case of a project involving the leasing of a facility, the grantee shall demonstrate that it will have the right to occupy, to operate, and, if necessary, to maintain and improve the leased facility during the proposed period of the project.
            
            
              § 63.38
              Publications.

              Any publication or presentation resulting from or primarily related to Federal financial assistance under this part shall contain an acknowledgement essentially as follows:
              
              
                The activity which is the subject of this report was supported in whole or part by a grant from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services. However, the opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of that Office and no official endorsement by that Office should be inferred.
              
            
            
              § 63.39
              Religious worship or instruction.
              Federal funds shall not be used for the making of any payment for religious worship or instruction, or for the construction, operation, or maintenance of so much of any facility as is used or to be used for sectarian instruction or as a place for religious instruction.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 73
          PART 73—STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
          
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              Sec.
              73.735-101
              Purpose.
              73.735-102
              Definitions.
              73.735-103
              Applicability.
            
            
              Subpart B—Responsibilities
              73.735-201
              Employees and supervisors.
              73.735-202
              Management officials.
            
            
              Subpart C—Conduct on the Job
              73.735-301
              Courtesy and consideration for others.
              73.735-302
              Support of department programs.
              73.735-303
              Use of government funds.
              73.735-304
              Use of government property.
              73.735-305
              Conduct in Federal buildings.
              73.735-306
              Sexual harassment.
              73.735-307
              Use of official information.
            
            
              Subpart D—Financial Obligations
              73.735-401
              General provisions.
            
            
              Subpart E—Gifts, Entertainment, and Favors
              73.735-501
              Prohibited acceptance of gifts, entertainment, and favors.
              73.735-502
              Permissible acceptance of gifts, entertainment, and favors.
              73.735-503
              Criminal provisions relating to gifts, entertainment, and favors.
              73.735-504
              Gifts to official superiors.
              73.735-505
              Acceptance of awards and prizes.
              73.735-506
              Gifts and decorations from foreign governments.
              73.735-507
              Acceptance of travel and subsistence.
              73.735-508
              Other prohibitions.
            
            
              Subpart F—Political Activity
              73.735-601
              Applicability.
              73.735-602
              Permissible activities.
              73.735-603
              Prohibited activities.
            
            
              Subpart G—Outside Activities
              73.735-701
              General provisions.
              73.735-702
              Criminal prohibitions on outside activities.
              73.735-703
              Statutory prohibitions related to employment by a foreign government.
              73.735-704
              Professional and consultative services.
              73.735-705
              Writing and editing.
              73.735-706
              Teaching, lecturing, and speechmaking.
              73.735-707
              Holding office in professional societies.
              73.735-708
              Administrative approval of certain outside activities.
              73.735-709
              Annual reporting of outside activities.
              73.735-710
              Maintenance of records.
            
            
              Subpart H—Financial Interest
              73.735-801
              Participation in matters affecting a personal financial interest.
              73.735-802
              Executive order prohibitions.
              
              73.735-803
              Prohibition against involvement in financial transactions based on information obtained through Federal employment.
              73.735-804
              Waiver of the prohibitions in this subpart.
              73.735-805
              Advice and guidance on conflicts matters.
              73.735-806
              Documentation and publication of opinions.
            
            
              Subpart I—Reporting Financial Interests
              73.735-901
              Reporting requirement of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978.
              73.735-902
              Reporting requirements for certain employees not covered by the Ethics in Government Act of 1978.
              73.735-903
              Action if conflicts of interest or possible conflicts are noted.
              73.735-904
              Resolution of apparent or actual conflicts of interest.
            
            
              Subpart J—Provisions Relating to Experts, Consultants and Advisory Committee Members
              73.735-1001
              Coverage.
              73.735-1002
              Ethical standards of conduct.
              73.735-1003
              Conflicts of interest statutes.
              73.735-1004
              Requesting waivers or exemptions.
              73.735-1005
              Salary from two sources.
              73.735-1006
              Reporting financial interests.
              73.735-1007
              Political activity.
            
            
              Subpart K—Special Government Employees Other Than Consultants
              73.735-1101
              General provision.
            
            
              Subpart L—Disciplinary Action
              73.735-1201
              General provisions.
            
            
              Subpart M—Reporting Violations
              73.735-1301
              Responsibility for reporting possible criminal violations.
              73.735-1302
              Responsibility for reporting allegations of misconduct.
              73.735-1303
              Prohibition of reprisals.
              73.735-1304
              Referral of matters arising under the standards of this part.
            
            
              Subpart N—Conduct and Responsibilities of Former Employees
              73.735-1401
              Prohibitions against post-employment conflicts of interest.
              Appendix A to Part 73—List of Some Offenses for Which Disciplinary Action May Be Taken
              Appendix B to Part 73—Code of Ethics for Government Service
            
          
          
            Authority:

            5 U.S.C. 7301, 42 U.S.C. 216; E.O. 11222, 30 FR 6469; 5 CFR 735.101 et seq.
            
          
          
            Source:
            46 FR 7369, Jan. 23, 1981, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            
              § 73.735-101
              Purpose.
              To assure that the business of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is conducted effectively, objectively, and without improper influence or the appearance of improper influence, employees and special Government employees must be persons of integrity and must observe high standards of honesty, impartiality, and behavior. They must not engage in any conduct prejudicial to the Government and must avoid conflicts of private interests with public duties and responsibilities. In accord with these principles, the regulations in this part are issued to inform HHS employees and special Government employees what standards of conduct are expected of them in performing their duties and what activities are permitted or prohibited both while they are employed and after their employment with the Department is ended.
            
            
              § 73.735-102
              Definitions.
              In this part:
              (a) Employee means an officer or employee of HHS other than a special Government employee and includes Commissioned Officers of the Public Health Service who are on active duty, and individuals on assignment or detail to HHS pursuant to the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (5 U.S.C. 3371-3376). The term also includes HHS employees who are detailed to non-Federal or other Federal organizations. At times the term “regular employee” is used in place of “employee” to make a clear distinction between special Government employees and others employed by the Federal government.
              (b) Special Government employee means an individual who is retained, designated, appointed, or employed to perform temporary duties either on a full-time or intermittent basis, with or without compensation, for not to exceed 130 days during any period of 365 consecutive days.
              (c) Person means an individual, a corporation, a company, an association, a firm, a partnership or any other organization.
              (d) Former employee means a former employee of HHS or former special Government employee as defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
              (e) Principal Operating Component has the meaning given to that term in the Department's General Administration Manual. In addition, when used in these regulations, it includes the Office of the Secretary.
              (f) Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
            
              § 73.735-103
              Applicability.
              (a) The regulations in this part apply to all employees of the Department and to special Government employees to the extent indicated in Subparts J and K. They apply whether an employee is on leave, including leave without pay, or on duty.
              (b) These regulations may be supplemented by regulations governing principal operating components, or sub-units of principal operating components, provided the clearance and publication requirements for standards of conduct regulations are met and approval is obtained from the Department Ethics Counselor and the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Responsibilities
            
              § 73.735-201
              Employees and supervisors.
              (a) Employees and special Government employees shall be responsible for observing all generally accepted rules of conduct and the specific provisions of law and the regulations of this part that apply to them. They are required to become familiar with these regulations and to exercise informed judgments to avoid misconduct or conflicts of interest. They shall secure approvals when required and file financial disclosure reports or statements in accordance with the provisions of this part. Failure to observe any of these regulations may be cause for disciplinary action. Some of the provisions are required by law and carry criminal penalties which are in addition to any disciplinary action which could be taken. When employees have doubts about any provision, they should consult their supervisor, personnel office, or the Department Ethics Counselor or a deputy counselor.
              (b) Supervisors, because of their day-to-day relationships with employees, are responsible to a large degree for making sure high standards of conduct are maintained. They must become familiar with the Department's standards of conduct regulations and apply the standards to the work they do and supervise. Supervisors shall take suitable action, including disciplinary action in accordance with subpart L of these regulations, when violations occur.
            
            
              § 73.735-202
              Management officials.
              (a) The Department has an obligation to enforce the requirements of this part in all respects and to help employees, special Government employees, and supervisors carry out their responsibilities to maintain high standards of ethical conduct. This includes an obligation for managers to provide information and training concerning the HHS conduct regulations, to provide advice and guidance with respect to them, and to review for possible conflicts of interest certain outside activities and financial interests of employees. The officials responsible for discharging the Department's obligations in this regard are identified in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section.
              (b) Department Ethics Counselor. The Assistant General Counsel, Business and Administrative Law Division, shall be the Department Ethics Counselor and shall serve as the Designated Agency Official for matters arising under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, (Pub. L. 95-521). The responsibilities of the Department Ethics Counselor shall include:
              (1) Rendering authoritative advice and guidance on matters of general applicability under the standards of this part and all other laws and regulations governing employee conduct, with particular reference to conflicts of interest matters.

              (2) Coordinating the Department's counselling and training services regarding conflicts of interest and assuring that employees of the Department are kept informed of developments in conflict of interest laws and other related matters of ethics.
              (3) Receiving information on conflicts of interest and appearances of conflicts of interest involving employees of the Department and forwarding this information to the appropriate management official, or the Inspector General, as necessary, with his or her legal evaluation of the matters addressed.
              (4) Reviewing the financial disclosure reports, requests for approval of outside activities, and similar reports filed by Executive level officers, non-career executives, deputy ethics counselors, and Schedule C employees in the Office of the Secretary for the purpose of identifying and resolving possible and actual conflicts of interest.
              (5) Maintaining liaison with the Office of Government Ethics.
              (6) Advising management officials on the resolution of conflicts of interest by any of the remedies set forth in § 73.735-904 of this part.
              (7) Maintaining accurate and complete documentation of all formal guidance and advice regarding conflict of interest matters subject to the provisions of this part, except for routine or repetitious cases where the guidance given is not precedential.
              (8) Maintaining and publishing from time to time a list of those circumstances or situations which have resulted or may result in noncompliance with conflict of interest laws or regulations. [Section 206(b)(7), Pub. L. 95-521].
              (9) Designating and training an appropriate number of reviewing officials to assist him or her in carrying out the duties of the Designated Agency Offical under the Ethics in Government Act.
              (10) Maintaining effective lines of communication with deputy ethics counselors on all matters regarding employee conduct and ethics.
              (c) Deputy Ethics Counselors. Assistant General Counsels and Regional Attorneys are designated deputy ethics counselors to assist the Department's Counselor in carrying out his or her responsibilities, particularly with respect to employees in the organization in which the deputy counselor serves. Regional Attorneys shall provide such assistance for all employees of the Department in organizations for which the Principal Regional Official provides personnel services.
              (d) The Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration shall be responsible for developing and issuing procedures and requirements for the implementation of these regulations and for monitoring the application of such procedures and requirements throughout the Department.
              (e) Heads of Principal Operating Components and the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget for the Office of the Secretary shall be ultimately responsible for assuring that persons who work for their respective organizations comply with the standards of this part. Their responsibilities shall include:
              (1) Designating officials to review and approve outside activity requests in accordance with § 73.735-708 of this part or statements of employment or financial interests under § 73.735-902. A list of the officials designated for these purposes shall be provided to the Department Ethics Counselor and to the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration and shall be updated in January and July of each year.

              (2) Designating for the components of his or her organization, other than those for which a principal regional official provides personnel services, one or more individuals to oversee and coordinate the administrative aspects of these regulations. Responsibilities of such a person include making sure each employee or special government employee is provided a copy of these regulations, or an appropriate summary thereof; ensuring that training in the requirements of the regulations is provided to supervisors and to new employees; providing for the distribution, receipt, review and retention of financial interest reports and statements as directed by the Department Ethics Counselor and the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration; sending annual reminders as required; providing for a file of outside work requests; giving information and assistance to employees on a day-to-day basis; and making available to employees the names and addresses of the Department's Ethics Counselor and deputy ethics counselors.
              
              (f) Principal Regional Officials (PROs) shall designate one or more regional employees to perform, for components for which personnel services are provided by the PROs, the responsibilities in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Conduct on the Job
            
              § 73.735-301
              Courtesy and consideration for others.
              (a) An employee's conduct on the job is, in all respects, of concern to the Federal government. Courtesy, consideration, and promptness in dealing with the public must be shown in carrying out official responsibilities, and actions which deny the dignity of individuals or conduct which is disrespectful to others must be avoided. Employees must recognize that inattention to matters of common courtesy can adversely affect the quality of service the Department is responsible for providing. Where appropriate, courtesy to the public should be included in the standards for employee performance.
              (b) Of equal importance is the requirement that courtesy be shown in day-by-day interaction with co-workers. Employees shall be polite to and considerate of other employees, and shall respect their needs and concerns in the work environment.
            
            
              § 73.735-302
              Support of department programs.
              (a) When a Department program is based on law, Executive Order or regulation, every employee has a positive obligation to make it function as efficiently and economically as possible and to support it as long as it is a part of recognized public policy. An employee may, therefore, properly make an address explaining and interpreting such a program, citing its achievements, defending it against uninformed or unjust criticism, or soliciting views for improving it.
              (b) An employee shall not, either directly or indirectly, use appropriated funds to influence, or attempt to influence, a Member of Congress to favor or oppose legislation. However, when authorized by his or her supervisor, an employee is not prohibited from:
              (1) Testifying, on request, as a representative of the Department on pending legislation or proposals before Congressional Committees; or
              (2) Assisting Congressional Committees in drafting bills or reports on request, when it is clear that the employee is serving solely as a technical expert under the direction of committee leadership.
              (c) All employees shall be familiar with regulations and published instructions that relate to their official duties and responsibilities and shall comply with those directives. This includes carrying out proper orders from officials authorized to give them.
              (d) Employees are required to assist the Inspector General and other investigative officials in the performance of their duties or functions. This requirement includes the giving of statements or evidence to investigators of the Inspector General's office or other HHS investigators authorized to conduct investigations into potential violations.
            
            
              § 73.735-303
              Use of government funds.
              (a) An employee shall not:
              (1) Improperly use official travel;
              (2) Improperly use payroll and other vouchers and documents on which Government payments are based;
              (3) Take or fail to account for funds with which the employee is entrusted in his or her official position; or
              (4) Take other Government funds for personal use. Violation of these prohibitions carry criminal penalties.
              (b) In addition, employees shall avoid wasteful actions or behavior in the performance of their assigned duties.
            
            
              § 73.735-304
              Use of government property.
              (a) An employee shall not directly or indirectly use, or allow the use of, Government property of any kind, including property leased to the Government, for other than officially approved activities. An Employee has a positive duty to protect and conserve Government property, including equipment, supplies, and other property entrusted or issued to him or her. For example:

              (1) Only official documents and materials may be processed on Government reproduction facilities. Both supervisors and employees must assure that this rule is strictly followed. (Exception for employee welfare and recreation associations is stated in Chapter 25-10, General Administration Manual. Exception for labor organizations is stated in Personnel Instruction 711-1.)

              (2) Employees may drive or use Government automobiles or aircraft only on official business. Use of a Government owned, leased, or rented vehicle or aircraft for non-official purposes may result in suspension for at least 30 days or removal from the Federal service. 31 U.S.C. 638a.
              
              
                Example:
                Normally, use of a Government automobile by travel between home and place of duty would not be considered official business and could not be authorized. An exception to this rule might be appropriate in a situation where an employee is required to leave early in the morning to attend a meeting in a distant city, or to return late in the day from such a meeting. Allowing the employee to drive a government car to his or her home the night before in order to leave from home, or to return to his or her home in the evening upon completion of the trip is permissible, provided the employee does not use the car for any personal reason.
              
            
            
              § 73.735-305
              Conduct in Federal buildings.
              (a) An employee shall not participate while on Government-owned or leased property or while on duty for the Government, in any gambling activity including the operation of a gambling device, in conducting a lottery or pool, in a game for money or property, or in selling or purchasing a numbers slip or ticket.
              (b) An employee shall not while in or on Government-owned or leased property or while on duty for the Government solicit alms and contributions, engage in commercial soliciting and vending, display or distribute commercial advertisements, or collect private debts.
              (c) The prohibitions in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section do not preclude:
              (1) Activities necessitated by an employee's law enforcement duties;
              (2) Participation in Federally sponsored fund-raising activities conducted pursuant to Executive Order 10927, or similar HHS-approved activities; or
              (3) Buying a lottery ticket at an authorized State lottery outlet for a lottery authorized by State law and conducted by an agency of a State within that State.
              (d) General Services Administration regulations on “Conduct on Federal Property” apply to all property under the control of the General Services Administration, and they are also applicable to all buildings and space under the control of this Department. These regulations prohibit, among other things, gambling, being intoxicated, and possession, distribution, or use of narcotic or dangerous drugs on the premises. The GSA regulations are found in Subpart 101-20.3 of the GSA Regulations, 41 CFR 101-20.3.
            
            
              § 73.735-306
              Sexual harassment.
              Sexual harassment is deliberate unsolicited verbal comments, gestures, or physical contact of a sexual nature which are unwelcome. Sexual harassment is unacceptable conduct and is expressly prohibited. In addition, supervisors and managers are prohibited from taking or promising personnel actions in exchange for sexual favors, or failing to take an action because an employee or applicant for employment, refuses to engage in sexual conduct. This same prohibition applies to relationships between Department personnel who take or recommend action on a grant or contract and the grantee or contractor. Those employees who wish to file a complaint of sexual harassment should contact the Office of Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) within their respective agencies for guidance. (Time frames for pursuing a charge alleging sexual harassment are the same as for any other complaint based on allegations of sex discrimination.)
            
            
              § 73.735-307
              Use of official information.

              (a) The public interest requires that certain information in the possession of the Government be kept confidential, and released only with general or specific authority under Department or operating component regulations. Such information may involve the national security or be private, personal, or business information which has been furnished to the Government in confidence. In addition, information in the possession of the Government and not generally available may not be used for private gain. The following paragraphs set forth the rules to be followed by Department employees in handling information in official files or documents:
              (1) Classified information. Employees who have access to information which is classified for security reasons in accordance with Executive Order 12065 are responsible for its custody and safekeeping, and for assuring that it is not disclosed to unauthorized persons. See the Department's Security Manual, Part 3 for details.
              (2) Security and investigative information. Security and investigative data received from Government agencies or other sources for official use only within the Department or developed under a pledge of confidence is not to be divulged to unauthorized persons or agencies.
              (3) Information obtained in confidence. Certain Department units (e.g., Food and Drug Administration, and the Social Security Administration) obtain in the course of their program activities certain information from businesses or individuals which they are forbidden by law from disclosing. These statutory prohibitions are found in 21 U.S.C. 331j, and 18 U.S.C. 1905. Each employee is responsible for observing these laws.
              (4) Use of information for private gain. Government employees are sometimes able to obtain information about some action the Government is about to take or some other matter which is not generally known. Information of this kind shall not be used by the employee to further his or her or someone else's private financial or other interests. Such a use of official information is clearly a violation of a public trust. Employees shall not, directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering any private interest, official information not made available to the general public.
              (b) The Privacy Act provides criminal penalties for an employee who willfully discloses individually identifiable information from records, disclosure of which is prohibited by that Act. 5 U.S.C. 552a(i).
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Financial Obligations
            
              § 73.735-401
              General provisions.
              (a) The Department considers the indebtedness of its employees to be a matter of their own concern. However, employees shall not by failure to meet their just financial obligations reflect adversely on the Government as their employer. Employees are expected to pay each just financial obligation in a proper and timely manner. A “just financial obligation” is one acknowledged by the employee or reduced to judgment by a court, or one imposed by law such as Federal, State, or local taxes. “In a proper and timely manner” is a manner which the Department determines does not, under the circumstances, reflect adversely on the part of an employee in meeting his or her financial obligations, particularly those that relate to support of the employee's family, to payment of Federal, State, or local taxes, or to payments to tax-supported institutions such as a city or State hospital, or educational institution. If for some reason an employee is unable to pay these obligations promptly, he or she is expected to make satisfactory arrangements for payment and abide by these arrangements.
              (b) Disciplinary action may be considered when an employee has handled his or her financial affairs in such a way that:
              (1) Action on complaints received from creditors requires the use of a considerable amount of official time, or
              (2) It appears that financial difficulties are impairing the employee's efficiency on the job, or
              (3) Because of the employee's financial irresponsibility, the attitude of the general public toward the Department may be adversely affected; and the employee after counseling does not make arrangements to meet his or her financial obligations.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Gifts, Entertainment, and Favors
            
              § 73.735-501
              Prohibited acceptance of gifts, entertainment, and favors.

              (a) Except as provided in §§ 73.735-502 and 73.735-506, an employee shall not directly or indirectly solicit or accept anything of monetary value, including gifts, gratuities, favors, entertainment or loans from a person who the employee knows, or should know because of the nature of the employee's work:
              (1) Has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relations with the employee's principal operating component, or sub-unit thereof; or with a component of the Department with respect to which the employee has official duties;
              (2) Conducts operations or activities that are regulated by the employee's principal operating component, or sub-unit thereof or by a component of the Department with respect to which the employee has official duties; or
              (3) Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the employee's official duties.
              (b) Employees may not designate a person or an organization, including charitable or non-profit organizations, to accept any gift which an employee is prohibited from accepting directly.
            
            
              § 73.735-502
              Permissible acceptance of gifts, entertainment, and favors.
              (a) An employee may accept a gift, gratuity, favor, entertainment, loan or similar favor of monetary value which stems from a family relationship such as that between the employee and his or her parents, spouse or children, if it is clear that the relationship is the motivating factor.
              (b) Loans from banks or other financial institutions may be accepted on customary terms.
              (c) Unsolicited advertising or promotional material such as pens, note pads, calendars and similar items of nominal intrinsic value may be accepted.

              (d) An employee may accept food or refreshment of nominal value on infrequent occasions in the ordinary course of a luncheon or dinner meeting or on an inspection tour only if the employee is properly in attendance and there is not a reasonable opportunity to pay.
              
              
                Example 1:
                Employee is on the premises of Company participating in a meeting at a normal mealtime. A representative of Company provides a meal for all meeting participants from a Company facility and there is no established method for payment. Employee may accept.
              
              
                Example 2:
                Employee is on the premises of Company and he or she goes outside for lunch with a representative of the Company. The representative offers to pay the bill. Since it is practical for the employee to pay for his or her own meal, the employee may not accept.
              
              

              (e) An employee may also accept food or refreshment of nominal value on infrequent occasions if the food and/or refreshment is offered to all participants or attendees of a meeting or convention.
              
              
                Example 1:
                During the course of a convention of a professional organization a luncheon open to all attendees is sponsored by a corporation which conducts business with the Department and the employee has official dealings with representatives of the corporation. The employee may attend the luncheon.
              
            
            
              § 73.735-503
              Criminal provisions relating to gifts, entertainment, and favors.
              (a) The law provides criminal penalties for whoever, directly or indirectly:
              (1) Receives or accepts anything of value for or because of any official act the employee has performed or will perform; or
              (2) Gives, offers or promises anything of value for the performance of an official act or to influence the performance of an official act. 18 USC 201.

              (b) The law prohibits an employee from receiving any salary or any contribution to, or supplementation of, his or her salary as compensation for services as an officer or employee of the Government from any source other than the United States or any State, county or municipality. This law does not prohibit an employee from continuing to participate in a bona fide pension, retirement, group life, health or accident insurance, profit-sharing, stock bonus or other employee welfare or benefit plan maintained by a former employer. 18 U.S.C. 209.
              
              
                Example 1:

                A corporate executive is asked to accept a position in the Department. The corporation offers to continue to pay the executive the difference between his or her salary as a Government employee and that received by an employee of the corporation. Such payment would be considered to be “compensation for” the employee's Government service and is prohibited.
              
              
                Example 2:
                A corporate executive is asked to accept a position in the Department. The corporation proposes to pay him or her a special severance payment in anticipation of this or her serving in the Government. This proposal would be prohibited because there is no distinction between the proposed lump-sum payment and the prohibited continuation of salary payments described in the example above.
              
              
                Example 3:
                A corporate executive is asked to accept a position in the Department. The corporation has an established policy which provides for an amount of severance pay to be paid any departing executive and proposes to make payment based on that policy when the executive leaves. The executive may accept the payment. Under these circumstances it is clear that the severance pay is in payment for past services not in anticipation of the future services for the Government.
              
            
            
              § 73.735-504
              Gifts to official superiors.
              An employee shall not solicit a contribution from another employee for a gift to an official superior, make a donation as a gift to an official superior, or accept a gift from an employee receiving less pay than himself or herself. 5 U.S.C. 7351. This section does not prohibit a voluntary gift of nominal value or donation in nominal amount made on a special occasion such as marriage, illness or retirement.
            
            
              § 73.735-505
              Acceptance of awards and prizes.
              (a) Employees may accept awards, including cash awards, given in recognition of a meritorious public contribution or achievement. However, if there is any indication that the award may improperly influence the employee in the performance of his or her offical duties, advice about the acceptance of it should be sought from a deputy ethics counselor. Also, an employee may not accept an award from an organization which the employee knows, or should know, has a contractual or other business arrangement with, or is regulated by, the principal operating component, or a sub-unit, in which he or she is employed or with respect to which the employee has official duties, unless acceptance is approved by the head of the employee's principal operating component. The head of the component may not approve acceptance unless he or she is satisfied that no actual conflict of interest would result.
              (b) Employees may generally accept trophies, entertainment, rewards, and prizes given to competitors in contests or events which are open to the public.
              (c) Employees may not accept gifts, awards, decorations or other things of value from a foreign government except as provided in § 73.735-506.
            
            
              § 73.735-506
              Gifts and decorations from foreign governments.
              (a) An employee may not request or otherwise encourage the tender of a gift or decorations from a foreign government or official thereof.
              (b) An employee may accept from a foreign government:
              (1) A gift which is in the nature of medical treatment or an educational scholarship;
              (2) A tangible gift of minimal value tendered or received as a mark of courtesy; (“Minimal value” means a retail value in the United States at the time of acceptance of not more than one hundred dollars, unless the Administrator of the General Services Administration adjusts the value by regulation.) or
              (3) A tangible gift of more than minimal value when it appears that to refuse the gift would be likely to cause offense or embarrassment or otherwise adversely affect the foreign relations of the United States. However, the acceptance of such a gift would be on behalf of the United States and the gift would become the property of the United States. See the Department's General Administration Manual, Chapter 20-25 for information regarding the disposition of a gift accepted under these circumstances.

              (c) An employee may also accept from a foreign government gifts of travel or expenses for travel (such as transportation, food and lodging) that take place entirely outside the United States and are of more than minimal value, if such acceptance is consistent with the interests of the United States and is approved by the travel approving authority in accordance with the Department's Travel Manual. See General Administration Manual, Chapter 20-25 for a requirement to report such travel.
              
              (d) An employee may accept, retain, and wear a decoration tendered in recognition of active field service in time of combat operations or awarded for other outstanding or unusually meritorious performance, subject to the approval of the Secretary or his or her designee.
              (e) Members of an employee's family and household are also subject to the regulations in this section. A member of an employee's family and household is a relative by blood, marriage or adoption who is a resident of the household. However, if a member of an employee's family and household is employed by another agency of the Government, the offer or acceptance of a gift shall be treated under the regulations of that agency.
              (f) For purposes of this section “foreign government” means:
              (1) Any unit of foreign government authority including any foreign national, state, local and municipal government;
              (2) Any international or multinational organization whose membership is composed of any unit of foreign government described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section; or
              (3) Any agent or representative of any such unit or organization when acting as such agent or representative. (5 U.S.C. 7342)
            
            
              § 73.735-507
              Acceptance of travel and subsistence.
              (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, employees may accept accommodations, subsistence, and travel in cash or in kind in connection with official travel for attendance at meetings, conferences, training in non-Governmental facilities or for performing advisory services, if approved in accordance with the provisions of the HHS Travel Manual. (5 U.S.C. 4111; 42 U.S.C. 3506)
              (b) Employees may not accept accommodations, subsistence, or travel in cash or in kind in connection with official travel from a non-Governmental source with which they have official dealings unless Government or commercial travel and/or accommodations are not available. If travel and/or subsistence is accepted for official travel under these circumstances, such acceptance and the basis for it must be reported in writing to the Head of the Principal Operating Component or Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget for the Office of the Secretary.
            
            
              § 73.735-508
              Other prohibitions.
              Employees shall avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited by this part, which might result in or create the appearance of:
              (a) Using public office for private gain;
              (b) Giving preferential treatment to any person;
              (c) Impeding Government efficiency or economy;
              (d) Losing complete independence or impartiality in the performance of their Government duties;
              (e) Making a Government decision outside official channels; or
              (f) Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the Government.
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Political Activity
            
              § 73.735-601
              Applicability.
              (a) All employees in the Executive Branch of the Federal Government, including non-career employees, are subject to basic political activity restrictions in subchapter III of chapter 73 of title 5, United States Code (the former Hatch Act) and Civil Service Rule IV. Employees are individually responsible for refraining from prohibited political activity. Ignorance of a prohibition does not excuse a violation. This subpart summarizes provisions of law and regulation concerning political activity of employees. The Federal Personnel Manual and other publications of the Office of Personnel Management contain more detailed information on this subject. These may be reviewed in Department personnel offices, or will be made available by the Ethics Counselor, or the deputy counselor for the employee's organizational component.

              (b) The Secretary and Under Secretary are exempt from the prohibitions concerning active participation in political management and political campaigns. Also exempt are other officials of the Department, except the Inspector General and Deputy Inspector General, who are appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and who determine policies to be pursued by the United States in the nationwide administration of Federal laws.
              (c) Intermittent employees are subject to the restrictions when in active duty status only and for the entire 24 hours of any day of actual employment.
              (d) Employees on leave, on leave without pay, or on furlough even though an employee's resignation has been accepted, are subject to the restrictions. Separated employees who have received a lump-sum payment for annual leave are not subject to the restriction during the period covered by the lump-sum payment or thereafter, provided they do not return to Federal employment during that period. Employees are not permitted to take a leave of absence to work with a political candidate, committee, or organization or to become a candidate for office with the understanding that they will resign their position if nominated or elected.
              (e) Employees are accountable for political activity by another person acting as their agent or under the employee's direction or control, if they are thus accomplishing indirectly what they may not lawfully do directly and openly.
              (f) Though officers in the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps are not subject to the restrictions in Subchapter III of Chapter 73 of Title 5, United States Code, the provisions of this subpart apply to them.
            
            
              § 73.735-602
              Permissible activities.
              (a) Section 7324 of Title 5, United States Code, provides that employees have the right to vote as they please and to express their opinions on political subjects and candidates. Generally, however, employees are prohibited from taking an active part in political management or political campaigns or using official authority or influence to interfere with an election or affect its results. There are some exemptions from the restrictions of the statute:
              (1) Employees may engage in political activity in connection with any question not specifically identified with a national or State political party. They also may engage in political activity in connection with an election, if none of the candidates represents a party any of whose candidates for presidential elector received votes at the last preceding election at which presidential electors were selected.
              (2) An exception relates to political campaigns within, or in communities adjacent to, the District of Columbia, or in communities the majority of whose voters are employees of the Federal government. Communities to which the exception applies are specifically designated by the Office of Personnel Management. Information regarding the localities and the conditions under which the exceptions are granted may be obtained from personnel offices or the Department Counselor or deputy counselors.
              (b) A covered employee is permitted to:
              (1) Register and vote in any election;
              (2) Express his or her opinion as an individual citizen privately and publicly on political subjects and candidates;
              (3) Display a political picture, sticker, badge or button;
              (4) Participate in the nonpartisan activities of a civic, community, social, labor, or professional organization, or of a similar organization;
              (5) Be a member of a political party or other political organization and participate in its activities to the extent consistent with law;
              (6) Attend a political convention, rally, fund raising function; or other political gathering;
              (7) Sign a political petition as an individual citizen;
              (8) Make a financial contribution to a political party organization;
              (9) Take an active part, as an independent candidate, or support of an independent candidate, in a partisan election in localities identified as permissible for such activities by the Office of Personnel Management;
              (10) Take an active part, as a candidate or in support of a candidate, in a nonpartisan election;

              (11) Be politically active in connection with a question which is not specifically identified with a political party, such as a constitutional amendment, referendum, approval of a municipal ordinance or any other question or issue of a similar character;
              (12) Serve as an election judge or clerk, or in a similar position to perform nonpartisan duties as prescribed by State or local law; and
              (13) Otherwise participate fully in public affairs, except as prohibited by law, in a manner which does not materially compromise his or her efficiency or integrity as an employee or the neutrality, efficiency, or integrity of his or her agency.
              (c) The head of a principal operating component may prohibit or limit the participation of an employee or class of employees of his or her component in an activity permitted by paragraph (b) of this section, if participation in the activity would interfere with the efficient performance of official duties, or create a conflict or apparent conflict of interest.
            
            
              § 73.735-603
              Prohibited activities.
              (a) The following are prohibited activities:
              (1) Serving as an officer of a political party, a member of a national, State or local committee of a political party, an officer or member of a committee of a partisan political club, or being a candidate for any of these positions;
              (2) Organizing or reorganizing a political party organization or political club;
              (3) Directly or indirectly soliciting, receiving, collecting, handling, disbursing, or accounting for assessments, contributions, or other funds for a partisan political purpose or in connection with a partisan election;
              (4) Organizing, selling tickets to, seeking support for, or actively participating in a fund-raising activity of, a political party or political club;
              (5) Taking an active part in managing the political party campaign of a candidate for public office or political office;
              (6) Being a candidate for, or campaigning for, an elective public office, except as permitted in § 73.735-602(b)(9);
              (7) Taking an active part in an organized solicitation of votes in support of or in opposition to a candidate for public office or political party office;
              (8) Acting as recorder, watcher, challenger, or similar officer at the polls on behalf of a political party or candidate in a partisan election;
              (9) Driving voters to the polls on behalf of a political paty or a candidate in a partisan election;
              (10) Endorsing or opposing a candidate in a partisan election in a political advertisement, a broadcast, campaign literature, or similar material;
              (11) Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention;
              (12) Addressing a State or national convention or caucus, or a rally or similar gathering of a political party, in support of or in opposition to a candidate for public or political party office, or on a partisan political question; and
              (13) Initiating or circulating a nominating petition for a candidate in a partisan election.
              (b) In addition, certain political activities are prohibited by Federal criminal law:
              (1) Officers and employees may not directly or indirectly solicit or receive, or be in any way involved in soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political purpose whatever from another officer or employee. This prohibition extends to one who acts as a mere agent or messenger for the purpose of turning the contribution over to a political organization. 18 U.S.C. 602.
              (2) All persons, whether employees or not, are prohibited from soliciting in any manner, or receiving a contribution of, money or a thing of value, in any room or building occupied in the discharge of official duties by any officer or employee of the United States. 18 U.S.C. 603. This prohibition extends to the sending of a letter soliciting political contributions for delivery in a Government building.
              (3) No officer or employee may directly or indirectly give to any other officer, employee or person in the service of the United States, any money or other thing of value to be applied to the promotion of any political objective. 18 U.S.C. 607.

              (4) Discrimination for giving or withholding any contribution for any political purpose and discrimination based on political influence or recommendations is prohibited.
              (c) Various other laws prohibit certain activities in connection with political campaigns and elections. They include:
              (1) Intimidating, threatening, or coercing voters in Federal elections (18 U.S.C. 594).
              (2) Using official authority in interfering with a Federal election by a person employed in any administrative position by the United States or by any department, independent establishment, or agency of the United States or by any State, agency, or political subdivision thereof in connection with any activity financed in whole or in part by Federal funds (18 U.S.C. 595).
              (3) Promising Federal employment, compensation, or any benefit from Federal funds, in return for political activity or support (18 U.S.C. 600).
              (4) Depriving anyone of employment, compensation, or any benefit derived from Federal relief or work relief funds on account of race, creed, color, or political activity (18 U.S.C. 601).
              (5) Soliciting, assessing, or receiving subscriptions or contributions for political purpose from anyone on Federal relief or work relief (18 U.S.C. 604).
            
          
          
            Subpart G—Outside Activities
            
              § 73.735-701
              General provisions.
              (a) Outside employment may be appropriate when it will not adversely affect performance of an employee's official duties and will not reflect discredit on the Government or the Department. Such work may include civic, charitable, religious, and community undertakings. There are certain types of outside work, however, which give rise to a real or apparent conflict of interest. Some of these are prohibited by law. Others are prohibited by regulation, as discussed in paragraph (b) of this section, or by criteria developed by heads of operating components for application within a particular component. All of these provisions are binding, but they do not necessarily include all possible conflicts of interest. In all instances, good judgment must be used to avoid a conflict between an employee's Federal responsibilities and outside activities.
              (b) An employee shall not engage in outside employment or other outside activity not compatible with the full and proper discharge of the duties and responsibilities of his or her Government employment whether or not in violation of any specific provision of law. Incompatible activities include, but are not limited to:
              (1) Acceptance of a fee, compensation, gift, payment of expense, or any other thing of monetary value in any circumstances in which acceptance may result in, or create the appearance of, conflicts of interest;
              (2) Outside employment which tends to impair the employee's mental or physical capacity to perform Government duties and responsibilities in an acceptable manner;
              (3) Work which identifies the Department or any employee in his or her official capacity with any organization commercializing products relating to work conducted by the Department, or with any commercial advertising matter, or work performed under such circumstances as to give the impression that it is an official act of the Department or represents an official point of view;
              (4) Outside work or activity that takes the employee's time and attention during his official work hours.

              (c) An employee shall not receive any salary or anything of monetary value from a private source as compensation for services to the Government. For example, a Department employee may be called upon, as a part of his or her official duties, to participate in a professional meeting sponsored by a non-Government organization, or to contribute a paper or other writing prepared on official time for publication under non-Government auspices. The employee must not accept an honorarium or fee for such services, even though the organization accepting the service customarily makes such a payment to those who participate. Nor may the employee accept a contribution to some charity, educational institution, or the like, in appreciation of the services furnished by the Department employee who cannot accept the usual payment. All offers to make such a contribution must be refused. Any employee with whom such a question is raised shall explain that the service involved was provided as an official action of the Department and is authorized by law. Under these circumstances, it is inappropriate for any payment to be made, even indirectly and to a third party, for services which are furnished without charge by the Government.
              (d) Other than as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, employees may receive compensation or other things of monetary value for any lecture, discussion, writing or appearance the subject matter of which is in part devoted to the responsibility, programs or operations of the Department so long as the activity is undertaken in a personal capacity, is not performed as official duty, is not done while on official time, and does not create a conflict of interest or appearance of conflict of interest. However, such activities are considered outside employment and may be undertaken only as provided in this subpart.
              (e) This section does not restrict the acceptance of compensation or other things of monetary value for any lecture, discussion, writing or appearance, the subject matter of which is not devoted to the responsibilities, programs, or operations of the Department and which are undertaken in a private capacity and in accordance with § 73.735-704, § 73.735-705, or § 73.735-706.
              (f) Federal law limits the amount of honorarium that may be paid any employee for any one speech, writing or appearance to $2,000.00 (not to include amounts for actual travel and subsistence expenses for the employee and his or her spouse) and an aggregate of $25,000.00 in any calendar year. This limitation applies to such activities whether or not the subject matter is related to the responsibilities, programs or operations of the Department. (2 U.S.C. 441i) The term “honorarium” means payment of money or other thing of value whether made gratuitously or as a fee for an appearance, speech or article but does not include salary or compensation made for services rendered on a continuing basis, such as for teaching, or as proceeds from the sale of a book or similar undertaking.
              (g) An employee who is a Presidential appointee covered by section 401(a) of Executive Order 11222 shall not receive compensation or anything of monetary value for any consultation, lecture, discussion, writing or appearance, the subject matter of which is devoted substantially to the responsibilities, programs, or operations of his or her component, or which draws substantially on official data or ideas which have not or will not on request become public information.
              (h) Application of these general provisions to some specific activities is discussed below.
            
            
              § 73.735-702
              Criminal prohibitions on outside activities.
              (a) An employee may not, with or without compensation, represent another before any Government agency, court or commission in connection with any proceeding, application, request for a ruling, contract, claim or other particular matter in which the United States is a party or has a direct and substantial interest. (18 U.S.C. 203 and 205)
              (b) An employee may not act as agent or attorney for anyone else in prosecuting any claim against the United States (18 U.S.C. 205).
              (c) As an exception to the above, if it is not inconsistent with the performance of his or her duties, an employee may act without compensation as an agent or attorney for another employee, or a person under active consideration for Federal employment, who is the subject of disciplinary, loyalty, or other personnel administration proceedings in connection with those proceedings at the administrative level. For example, an employee may represent another employee who is the subject of disciplinary action, or the complainant in a discrimination proceeding, at all stages within the Department and before the Merit Systems Protection Board or Equal Employment Opportunity Commission but not in Federal Court. It would be inconsistent with the performance of official duties for a supervisor to represent subordinate employees.

              (d) The law and these regulations do not prohibit an employee from acting, with or without compensation, as agent or attorney for his or her parents, spouse, child or any person for whom, or estate for which, he or she is acting as fiduciary provided that the head of the principal operating component or his or her designee approve. Such approval, if granted, must be granted in accordance with the procedures for approval of outside activity. However, the employee may not do so if the particular matter is one in which he or she has participated personally and substantially or which is his or her official responsibility. (18 U.S.C. 205).
            
            
              § 73.735-703
              Statutory prohibitions related to employment by a foreign government.
              Employees, including officers in the Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps and retired officers of the Regular Commissioned Corps of the PHS, may not, without the consent of Congress, be employed by a foreign government or agency of a foreign government (Art. I, Sec. 9, U.S. Const.). Congress has consented to such employment by Reserve Commissioned Officers of the PHS not on active duty and by Retired Regular Commissioned Officers (37 U.S.C. 801, note) if approved under regulations of the Department of State. 22 CFR part 3a.
            
            
              § 73.735-704
              Professional and consultative services.
              (a) Employees may engage in outside professional or consultative work only after meeting certain conditions. Except as provided in §§ 73.735-705 and 73.735-706 for activities discussed in those sections, the conditions which must be met are:
              (1) The work is not to be rendered, with or without compensation, to organizations, institutions, or state or local governments with which the official duties of the employee are directly related, or indirectly related if the indirect relationship is significant enough to cause the existence of conflict or apparent conflict of interest; or
              (2) The work is not to be rendered for compensation to help a person, institution, or government unit prepare or aid in the preparation of grant applications, contract proposals, program reports, and other material which are designed to become the subject of dealings between the institutions or government units and the Federal Government. All requests to perform consultative services, either compensated or uncompensated, for institutions or government units which have recently negotiated or may in the near future seek a contract or grant from this Department must be carefully appraised to avoid any conflict or apparent conflict of interest.
              (b) Advance administrative approval in accordance with § 73.735-708 of this subpart must be obtained. Such approval is required whether or not the services are for compensation, and whether or not related to the employee's official duties.
              (c) For the purpose of this section, “professional and consultative work” is performance of work requiring knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a course of specialized instruction and study in an institution of higher education, or hospital which requires the exercise of judgment and discretion in its performance and is primarily intellectual in nature as opposed to manual, mechanical or physical work.
              (d) Membership on a Board of Directors, Board of Regents, Board of Trustees, Planning Commission, Advisory Council or Committee, or on any similar body which provides advice, counsel, or consultation, shall be considered outside consultative services for which advance administrative approval is required.
            
            
              § 73.735-705
              Writing and editing.
              (a) Employees are encouraged to engage in outside writing and editing whether or not done for compensation, when such activity is not otherwise prohibited. Such writing and editing, though not a part of official duties, may be on a directly related subject or entirely unrelated. Certain conditions must be met in either case, however, and certain clearances or approvals are prescribed according to the content of the material as set forth in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section.

              (b) Conditions applying to writing and editing done not as a part of official duties.
              
              (1) The following conditions shall apply to all writing and editing whether related or unrelated to the employee's official duties:
              (i) Government-financed time or supplies shall not be used by the author or by other Government employees in connection with the activity; and
              (ii) Official support must not be expressed or implied in the material itself or advertising or promotional material, including book jackets and covers, relating to the employee and his or her contribution to the publication.
              (2) If the writing or editing activity is unrelated to the employee's official duties or other responsibilities and programs of the Federal government, the employee must:
              (i) Make no mention of his or her official title or affiliation with the Department, or
              (ii) Use his or her official title or affiliation with the Department in a way that will not suggest or convey official endorsement of the work.
              (3) If the writing or editing activity is related to the employee's official duties or other responsibilities and programs of the Federal government, the employee must:
              (i) Make no mention of his or her official title or affiliation with the Department, or
              (ii) Use his or her official title or affiliation with the Department and a disclaimer as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, or
              (iii) Submit the material for clearance within the operating component, under procedures established by the component. When clearance is denied at any lower level, the employee shall have recourse for review up to the head of the principal operating component. This clearance will show there are no official objections to the activity and the employee may then use his or her official title or affiliation with the Department usually without a disclaimer.
              (c) Disclaimers. (1) Except where the requirement for disclaimer is waived as a result of official clearance, disclaimers shall be used in all writing and editing related to the employee's official duties or other responsibilities and programs of the Federal government:
              (i) In which the employee identifies himself or herself by official title or affiliation with the Department, or
              (ii) When the prominence of the employee or the employee's position might lead the public to associate him or her with the Department, even without identification other than name.
              (2) Disclaimers shall read as follows unless a different wording is approved by the Assistant General Counsel, Business and Administrative Law Division, Office of the General Counsel: “This (article, book, etc.) was (written, edited) by (employee's name) in (his or her) private capacity. No official suport or endorsement by (name of operating component or of Department) is intended or should be inferred.”
              (d) Advance approval. Advance approval is required in accordance with § 73.735-708 of this subpart when one or more of the following conditions apply:
              (1) Any Government information is used which is not available on request to persons outside the Government;
              (2) Material is written or edited which pertains to subject matter directly related to an employee's official duties; (This includes editing for scientific or professional journals which is related to his or her official duties.)
              (3) Material is written or edited which pertains to any Government-sponsored research or other studies for which clinical case records or other material of a confidential nature are used or to which access is limited for persons outside the Government. Such use will not be permitted unless made under safeguards established by the operating component to retain the confidentiality of the material, and such use is determined to be in the public interest.
            
            
              § 73.735-706
              Teaching, lecturing, and speechmaking.

              (a) Employees are encouraged to engage in teaching and lecturing activities which are not part of their official duties when certain conditions are met. These conditions, which apply to outside teaching and lecturing (including giving single addresses such as commencement and Memorial Day speeches) whether or not done for compensation, are:
              
              (1) No Government-financed time, or Government supplies not otherwise available to the public, are used in connection with such activity;
              (2) Government travel or per diem funds are not used for the sole purpose of obtaining or performing such teaching or lecturing;
              (3) Such teaching or lecturing is not dependent on specific information which would not otherwise be available to the public;
              (4) Teaching, lecturing, or writing may not be for the purpose of the special preparation of a person or class of persons for an examination of the Office of Personnel Management or Board of Examiners for the Foreign Service, that depends on information obtained as a result of the employee's Government employment, except when that information has been made available to the general public or will be made available on request;
              (5) Such activities do not involve knowingly instructing persons on dealing with particular matters pending before Government organizations with which the employee is associated in an official capacity;
              (6) Advance approval is obtained when required by paragraph (b) of this section.
              (b) Advance approval. Advance approval must be obtained in accordance with § 73.735-708 of this subpart before an employee may:
              (1) Teach or lecture for an institution which has or is likely to have official dealings with the bureau or comparable organizational unit in which he or she is employed;
              (2) Use, for teaching or lecturing purposes, clinical case records or other material of a confidential nature or to which access is limited for persons outside the Government. Such use will not be permitted unless made under safeguards established by the operating component to retain the confidentiality of the material, and such use is determined to be in the public interest.
            
            
              § 73.735-707
              Holding office in professional societies.
              (a) Employees may be members of professional societies and be elected or appointed to office in such a society. Activity in professional associations is generally desirable from the point of view of both the Department and the employee. Employees shall avoid, however, any real or apparent conflict of interest in connection with such membership. For example, they must not:
              (1) Directly or indirectly commit the Department or any portion of it on any matter unless such action is taken in an official capacity;
              (2) Permit their names to be attached to documents the distribution of which would be likely to embarrass the Department; or
              (3) Serve in capacities involving them as representatives of non-Government organizations in dealing with the Government.
              (b) In undertaking any office or function beyond ordinary membership in a professional association, a Department employee must obtain advance approval in accordance with § 73.735-708 of this subpart in any situation in which his or her responsibilities as an officer would relate to his or her official duties or would create a real or apparent conflict of interest with responsibilities as a Department employee. For example, advance administrative approval must be obtained:
              (1) Before an employee who is responsible for review and approval of grants or contracts, or is in a supervisory position over those who conduct review and approval, may hold office, or be a trustee or member of the governing board, or the chairman or member of a committee, in any organization which has or is seeking a grant or contract with the bureau or comparable organizational unit in which he or she is employed;
              (2) Before an employee may hold office in an organization which customarily expresses publicly views on matters of legislative or administrative policy within the specific areas of concern to the Department.
            
            
              § 73.735-708
              Administrative approval of certain outside activities.
              (a) Scope. As specified in § 73.735-704 through 707, an employee is required to obtain advance administrative approval to engage in the following outside activities:
              (1) Certain writing or editing activities;
              
              (2) Certain types of teaching and lecturing;
              (3) All professional and consultative services;
              (4) Any other outside activity for which the head of a principal operating component or the head of a sub-unit of a principal operating component imposes internal requirements for administrative approval; and
              (5) Certain office-holding activities in professional societies.
              (b) Requests for Administrative Approval. An employee seeking to engage in any of the activities for which advance approval is required shall make a written request for administrative approval a reasonable time before beginning the activity. (See § 73.735-202(e)(1)). This request should be directed to the employee's supervisor who will forward it to the official authorized to approve outside work requests for the employee's component. The request should include the following information:
              (1) Employee's name, position title, grade or rank;
              (2) Nature of the activity, fully describing the specific duties or services for which approval is requested;
              (3) Name and business of person or organization for which work will be done, or statement that work will be self-employment. If self-employment, employee must state whether activity will be conducted alone or with partners;
              (4) Place where work will be performed;
              (5) Estimated total time to be devoted to activity. If on a continuing basis, indicate estimated time per year and the anticipated termination date;
              (6) Whether services can be performed entirely outside of usual duty hours. If not, the estimated number of hours absent from work should be indicated;
              (7) Method or basis of compensation if any (e.g., fee, per diem, per annum, or other).
              (8) Where an employee seeks approval to provide consultative or professional services to organizations including governments which have been awarded or may apply for a Federal grant or contract, the request shall also include full details on any aspect of the professional and consultative services which could relate in any way, either directly or indirectly, to grant applications, contract proposals, program reports, and other material which are designed to become the subject of dealings between the grantee or contractor and the Government. (See § 73.735-704(a)(2))
              (c) The Department Ethics Counselor will review and approve outside work requests for Executive level officers, non-career executives, deputy ethics counselors, and Schedule C employees in the Office of the Secretary.
              (d) Granting Approval of Certain Activities. The approving official shall review each request submitted under paragraph (b) of this section, and appraise each request on the basis of the standards of this part and all other applicable laws, regulations or internal rules of the principal operating component or sub-unit thereof. He or she should consult with a deputy ethics counselor or the Department Ethics Counselor in all cases that raise a difficult or novel question of law or fact. The approving official shall approve or disapprove each request and communicate his or her decision in writing to the employee.
            
            
              § 73.735-709
              Annual reporting of outside activities.
              By September 10 of each year the approving official shall require a report from each person for whom outside work has been approved during the past year. The report shall show:
              (a) For the 12 months just past (ending August 31):
              (1) Whether the anticipated work was actually performed for the person or organization named in the request for approval;
              (2) Actual amount of time spent on the activity.
              (b) For the forthcoming 12 months (ending August 31):
              (1) Whether it is anticipated that the outside work will continue;
              (2) Whether any change is anticipated with respect to information supplied in accordance with the original request on which approval was based.
            
            
              
              § 73.735-710
              Maintenance of records.
              The official responsible for the administrative aspects of these regulations (§ 73.735-202) shall make provisions for the retention and filing of requests for approval of outside work (or copies of such requests), a copy of the notification of approval or disapproval, and the annual report.
            
          
          
            Subpart H—Financial Interest
            
              § 73.735-801
              Participation in matters affecting a personal financial interest.
              (a) An employee shall not participate personally and substantially as a Government employee in a matter in which any of the following individuals or organizations has a financial interest:
              (1) The employee;
              (2) The employee's spouse;
              (3) The employee's minor child;
              (4) An organization in which the employee serves as an officer, director, trustee, partner, or employee; or
              (5) A person or organization with which the employee is negotiating for prospective employment or has an arrangement for prospective employment. Criminal penalties may be imposed under 18 U.S.C. 208 for violations of the prohibition.
              (b) Applying the provision of 18 U.S.C. 208:

              (1) A “financial interest” is any interest of monetary value which may be directly and predictably affected by the official action of an employee. There is no minimum amount of value or control that constitutes a financial interest.
              
              
                Example 1:
                An employee owns a single share of stock in a widely-held corporation. If the corporation is likely to be affected by a matter in which the employee participates as a Government official, the employee may violate 18 U.S.C. 208.
              
              
                Example 2:
                An employee has a paid part-time position with a non-federal organization. If the organization is likely to be affected by a matter in which the employee participates as a Government official, the employee would violate 18 U.S.C. 208.
              
              

              (2) The prohibition of 18 U.S.C. 208 applies to personal and substantial involvement by an employee in a matter, exercised through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, investigation, giving advice, or other significant effort regarding the matter.
              
              
                Example 1:
                An employee is a member of a panel that evaluates proposals for contracts and makes recommendations as to their award. If the employee's spouse owns stock in a company which submits a proposal that is reviewed by the panel, the employee would violate 18 U.S.C. 208 even though the panel recommendation may be rejected by the contracting officer.
              
              
                Example 2:
                An employee is on a leave of absence from a university. He or she would violate 18 U.S.C. 208 by participating in the drafting of regulations which would have a “direct and predictable effect” upon universities in general and, therefore, upon the employee's university.
              
              

              (3) An employee must know that the financial interest exists in order to violate 18 U.S.C. 208.
              
              
                Example:
                An employee inherited a beneficial interest in a trust. He or she does not, however, have actual knowledge of the specific property held by the trustee. If the trust contains stock in a corporation which may be affected by the employee's official actions, he or she would not violate 18 U.S.C. 208 in taking official action affecting the corporation.
              
              

              (4) Negotiation for prospective employment includes both an indication of interest on the part of the employee in working for an organization and an affirmative action on the part of the organization to show consideration of the employee.
              
              
                Example 1:
                An employee of the Department sends resumes and cover letters to fifty prospective employers, all of whom regularly have dealings with HHS. Forty employers do not respond; however, ten respond with cordial form letters stating that the employee's resume will be retained for future reference. For purposes of the 18 U.S.C. 208 prohibition, the employee is negotiating for prospective employment at the time he or she sends resumes.
              
              
                Example 2:
                At a site visit to a grantee institution, an employee who is officially responsible for a grant to that institution informs an officer of the institution that he or she is seeking a new position outside HHS. The grantee subsequently makes a conditional offer of employment to the employee who promptly responds by asking for an opportunity to discuss salary and related matters. Under these circumstances, a negotiation for prospective employment is underway.
              
              
              
              (c) An employee may obtain approval to participate in his or her official capacity in a matter in which he or she has a direct or indirect financial interest, if the interest is not so substantial as to affect the integrity of his or her official duties. An employee who believes that such participation is warranted should follow the procedures in § 73.735-804.
              (d) An employee convicted of violating 18 U.S.C. 208 may be fined up to $10,000, or imprisoned up to two years, or both.
            
            
              § 73.735-802
              Executive order prohibitions.
              (a) Basic prohibition of Executive Order 11222. (1) An employee shall not have a direct or indirect financial interest that conflicts substantially, or appears to conflict substantially, with his or her duties as a Federal employee.
              (2) An employee need not have a financial interest that actually conflicts with his or her duties to violate the prohibition of E.O. 11222. Any financial interest that could reasonably be viewed as an interest which might compromise the employee's integrity, whether or not this is in fact true, is subject to this prohibition.
              (3) Except as provided in § 73.735-802 (b) and (c), an employee who has an indirect financial interest in a business entity through the ownership of shares in a widely-held mutual fund or other regulated investment company will not violate E.O. 11222. Stocks in business entities held by an intermediary such as a mutual fund are generally too remote or inconsequential to affect the integrity of an employee's services.
              (b) Employees in regulatory activities. (1) An employee who is working in a regulatory activity shall not have a financial interest in any company whose business activities are subject to the regulations of the particular activity with which the employee is associated, unless the regulated activities of the company are an insignificant part of its total business operations.

              (2) An employee working in a regulatory activity may not hold shares in a mutual fund or other regulated investment company which specializes in holdings in industries that are regulated by the particular activity in which he or she is employed.
              
              
                Example:
                An employee working for the Bureau of Laboratories, Centers for Disease Control, may not hold shares in a regulated investment company which specializes in holdings that include medical testing laboratories.
              
              
              (c) Employees having procurement or contracting responsibilities. (1) An employee who serves as a procurement or contracting officer shall not have a financial interest in a company or companies with which he or she in the course of his or her official duties would be likely to have procurement or contracting relationships.

              (2) A procurement or contracting officer may not hold shares in a mutual fund or other regulated investment company that specializes in holdings in industries with which such officer would be likely to have procurement or contracting relationships.
              
              
                Example:
                A contracting officer in the Social Security Administration owns shares in the XYZ Mutual Fund which specializes in stock in firms manufacturing electronic data processing equipment. Ownership of XYZ Mutual Fund shares would be prohibited in this instance. On the other hand, a contracting officer for a Public Health Service hospital, who is not likely to have responsibility for major contracts relating to electronic data processing, could hold such shares.
              
            
            
              § 73.735-803
              Prohibition against involvement in financial transactions based on information obtained through Federal employment.

              An employee shall not engage in, directly or indirectly, a financial transaction as a result of, or in primary reliance upon, any information gained through his or her official duties. Information gained through official duties are those facts and other data that relate to the employee's official duties or to the functions of the employing component and would not be available to the employee were he or she not an officer of the Federal government.
              
              
                Example 1:

                An employee working part-time for a consulting firm that does no business with the employee's principal operating component, in the area of health care planning advises it, based upon his or her knowledge of a new health care planning program about to be initiated by the Public Health Service. The employee's knowledge of the program was acquired solely through reading policy statements and other PHS literature available to the public under the Freedom of Information Act. In such case, the employee would not violate this regulation if the outside activity was otherwise approvable under Subpart G.
              
              
                Example 2:
                A contracting officer with detailed knowledge of a negotiated procurement contract invests in a corporation that is likely to indirectly profit from the award of that contract. The officer's decision to invest is based upon technical details of the successful contract proposal that would not otherwise be available to a private citizen. The officer would violate this regulation in such a situation.
              
            
            
              § 73.735-804
              Waiver of the prohibitions in this subpart.
              (a) An employee may request approval to participate in his or her official capacity in a matter in which he or she has a direct or indirect financial interest if the employee believes the interest is so remote and inconsequential that it would not affect the integrity of his or her official duties. Also an employee who has a financial interest that would otherwise be prohibited under these regulations may request an exemption from the prohibition for the reason stated in the preceding sentence.
              (b) The request shall be in writing and shall include the following information:
              (1) Employee's name, occupational title, grade or rank and Federal salary;
              (2) Full description of financial interest: including whether ownership, service as officer, partner, etc.;
              (3) Business or activity in which financial interest exists;
              (4) Description of official matter in which employee is requesting approval to participate;
              (5) Basis for requesting determination that the interest is “not so substantial as to be deemed likely to affect the integrity of the services which the Government may expect.” (If based on a small total value of investment, supply appropriate information on total value, such as total shares held and latest quoted market price. If other basis, explain fully.)
              The request should be sent through usual administrative channels to the official responsible for reviewing financial disclosure reports or statements for the employee's organization (Subpart I). That official, after conferring with a deputy ethics counselor or with the Department Ethics Counselor as appropriate, will make a decision about the exemption or exception and inform the employee in writing.
            
            
              § 73.735-805
              Advice and guidance on conflicts matters.
              (a) Whenever an employee has a question about the appropriate course of conduct to be followed in a matter that may involve an actual or apparent conflict of interest, he or she should immediately consult with his or her supervisor or a deputy ethics counselor, or both. If a supervisor who is consulted determines that the matter warrants further consideration, he or she may, in conjunction with the employee, submit the details of the matter, in writing, to the appropriate deputy ethics counselor. These details should include a description of:
              (1) The activity, relationship, or interest giving rise to the question posed by the employee;
              (2) The duties or official responsibilities of the employee(s) involved;
              (3) The nature of the actual or apparent conflict of interest; and
              (4) Any other information that may be helpful in reviewing the problem.
              (b) Upon receiving the submission of an employee or a supervisor, the deputy ethics counselor will develop any additional information about the matter as necessary, and will confer with the Department Ethics Counselor as appropriate. The Department Ethics Counselor and the head of the principal operating component or his or her designee will be informed of any serious violation of the standards of this subpart or any other conflict of interest law. Questions of first impression or other unusual matters shall be brought to the attention of the Department Ethics Counselor and the head of the principal operating component or his or her designee.

              (c) On the basis of all information gathered including, where appropriate, the advice of the Department Ethics Counselor, the deputy ethics counselor will:
              
              (1) Decide that there is no violation or potential violation of the standards of this subpart or any other law and so notify the employee and his or her supervisor in writing; or
              (2) Decide that a violation or potential violation of the standards of this subpart or other law has occurred or may occur, and that the employee involved shall take one or more of the steps set forth in § 731.735-904 to resolve the problem and notify the employee and his or her supervisor in writing; or
              (3) Decide that, although no violation of this subpart or other law has occurred, the nature of the matter is such that the employee should periodically report any additional information that would require reconsideration of the initial submission.
            
            
              § 73.735-806
              Documentation and publication of opinions.
              (a) The Department Ethics Counselor, deputy ethics counselors, and any other individuals required to be involved in the review and resolution of violations or potential violations of this subpart shall maintain full and accurate documentation of the formal advice and guidance given.
              (b) From time to time, the Department Ethics Counselor shall publish summaries of advisory opinions issued by his or her office, deleting, as necessary, any personal identifiers or other information which may give rise to an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. These summaries shall be distributed to all deputy ethics counselors, heads of principal operating components, and principal regional officials.
              (c) From time to time, the Department Ethics Counselor shall publish an index of all summaries issued in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, and shall distribute these indexes to all deputy ethics counselors and heads of principal operating components who shall in turn make them available for review by supervisors and interested employees.
            
          
          
            Subpart I—Reporting Financial Interests
            
              § 73.735-901
              Reporting requirement of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978.
              (a) Applicability. The following employees and special Government employees shall submit public financial disclosure reports in accordance with the provisions of Title II of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, Pub. L. 95-521, as amended:
              (1) Officers and employees (including consultants who will work more than 60 days in a calendar year) whose positions are classified at GS-16 or above of the General Schedule, or whose basic rate of pay (excluding “step” increases) under other pay schedules is equal to, or greater than, the rate for GS-16 (step 1);
              (2) Members of the uniformed services whose pay grade is 0-7 or above;
              (3) Officers and employees in any other positions determined by the Director of the Office of Government Ethics to be of equal classification to GS-16;
              (4) Administrative Law Judges;
              (5) Employees in the excepted service in positions which are of a confidential or policy-making character, unless their position has been excluded by the Director of the Office of Government Ethics;
              (6) Department Ethics Counselor; and
              (7) Deputy Ethics Counselors.
              
              An employee who thinks that his or her position has been improperly included under the reporting requirements of this part may obtain a review of that determination by writing to the Department Ethics Counselor.
              (b) Filing Dates. Employees listed in § 73.735-901 (a) of this subpart shall file a financial disclosure report:
              (1) Within 5 days after the transmittal by the President to the Senate of their nomination to a position requiring Senate confirmation, or

              (2) Within 30 days after assuming a covered position not requiring Senate confirmation unless the employee has left another covered position listed in § 73.735-901 (a) of this subpart, or
              
              (3) Within 30 days after terminating Federal employment or assuming a position which is not listed in § 73.735-901 (a) of this subpart; and
              (4) By May 15 of each calendar year, unless the employee has in that calendar year already submitted a financial disclosure report covering the preceding calendar year.
              (c) Submission of reports. (1) Executive level officers, non-career executives, deputy ethics counselors and Schedule C employees in the Office of the Secretary who are required to report in accordance with § 73.735-901 (a) of this subpart shall submit their reports to the Department Ethics Counselor.
              (2) All other employees required to report in accordance with § 73.735-901 (a) of this subpart shall submit their reports to the reviewing official for their organizational component under procedures described in the Department's Personnel Manual. Personnel offices will keep a list of reviewing officials and will give each covered employee the name of the official to whom his or her report should be sent.
              (d) Review and certification of reports. (1) Each report submitted in accordance with this section shall be reviewed by the appropriate reviewing official within 60 days of its receipt. Upon reviewing a report and finding that the information contained therein reveals no conflict of interest or other violation of any provision of this part or applicable law, the reviewing officer shall certify the report with his or her signature.
              (2) The certification of a report filed in accordance with this section shall have the concurrence of the Office of the General Counsel.
              (3) Action to be taken by the reviewing official if the individual is not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations is discussed in §§ 73.735-903 and 73.735-904.
            
            
              § 73.735-902
              Reporting requirements for certain employees not covered by the Ethics in Government Act of 1978.
              (a) Applicability. The following employees and special Government employees shall submit confidential statements of employment and financial interests in accordance with the provisions of this subpart, provided they are not required to submit financial disclosure reports under § 73.735-901. A list of the positions in this Department whose incumbents are required to file financial interest statements as prescribed by this subpart is available for review in all of the Departments servicing personnel offices.
              (1) Officers and employees in positions classified at GS-13 or above (or comparable pay level) who have decision-making responsibility for the following matters:
              (i) Contracting or procurement,
              (ii) Administering or monitoring grants or subsidies,
              (iii) Regulating or auditing private or other non-Federal enterprises, or
              (iv) Other activities where the decision or action would have an economic impact on the interest of any non-Federal enterprise.
              (2) Incumbents of any other positions designated by the head of the principal operating component, or by the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget for the Office of the Secretary, to report employment and financial interests in order to protect the integrity of the Government and to avoid possible conflicts of interest. The designation of any such positions below the GS-13 grade must be approved by the Office of Personnel Management.
              (3) All experts, consultants, or advisory committee members who are not required to submit a public financial disclosure report in accordance with the Ethics in Government Act except:
              (i) Doctors, dentists and allied medical specialists performing services for, or consulted as to the diagnosis or treatment of, individual patients; or
              (ii) Veterinarians performing services for or consulted as to care and service to animals.
              (b) Filing dates. (1) Experts, consultants, and advisory committee members shall file a confidential Statement of Employment and Financial Interest no later than the date employment commences and shall file supplemental statements as necessary to keep all information submitted current and accurate.

              (2) Other individuals covered by § 73.735-902 (a) of this subpart shall:
              
              (i) File a confidential statement no later than 30 days after assuming a covered position unless the employee, within 30 days before assuming the position, left another covered position in HHS that is included in § 73.735-901(a) or § 73.735-902(a) of this subpart; and
              (ii) Report changes in or additions to the information in the statement as of June 30 of each calendar year, or a different date set by employee's component with authorization by the Office of Personnel Management.
              (c) Submission and review of financial statements. (1) Heads of principal operating components, the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget, and principal regional officials for employees under their appointing authority shall establish procedures to ensure that financial statements from covered employees are received and updated on a timely basis and are referred to the appropriate reviewing officials for review and certification. (See § 73.735-202 (e)(1)).
              (2) The reviewing official shall review statements to determine whether conflicts of interest or apparent conflicts might arise from the activities reported thereon. If the review discloses no conflict or apparent conflict, the reviewing official shall certify the statement with his or her signature. Action to take if the individual is not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations is discussed in § 73.735-903 and § 73.735-904.
            
            
              § 73.735-903
              Action if conflicts of interest or possible conflicts are noted.
              (a) If after reviewing a financial disclosure report or a financial interest statement, a reviewing official believes that additional information is needed, he or she shall tell the individual submitting such report what additional information is required and the time by which it must be submitted.
              (b) If the reviewing official is of the opinion that, on the basis of information submitted, the reporting individual is not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, he or she shall notify the individual, afford him or her a reasonable opportunity for a written or oral response, and after consideration of such response, determine whether or not the individual is in compliance.
              (c) If the reviewing official determines that an individual is not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, he or she shall notify the individual of that determination in writing and, after an opportunity for personal consultation, determine and notify the individual of the action, including those actions set forth in § 73.735-904, that would be appropriate to assure compliance with such laws and regulations, and the date by which such action should be taken. The action required and the date for taking it shall be determined by the nature of the financial interest or other relationship, the particular circumstances of the reporting individual (including his or her ability to resolve the problem), and other factors which the reviewing official deems relevant. In no case, however, should the date be later than 90 days after the reporting individual is notified of the reviewing official's opinion.
              (d) If steps for assuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations are not taken by the date set in paragraph (c) of this section, the matter shall be referred to the Department Ethics Counselor.
            
            
              § 73.735-904
              Resolution of apparent or actual conflicts of interest.
              (a) Disqualification from participating in a particular matter or category of matters is an appropriate method for resolving apparent or actual conflicts of interest when the interest or activity giving rise to the problem:
              (1) Bears a direct or indirect relationship to particular, identifiable duties of the employee involved; and

              (2) Is not so substantial as to affect or give the appearance of affecting the integrity of the services which the Government may expect of the employee. Whenever disqualification is employed to resolve an apparent or actual conflict of interest, the disqualified employee shall sign a written statement reflecting the scope of the disqualification and the precise nature of the conflicting interest or activity. The reviewing official shall keep a file of all such disqualification statements and shall monitor compliance with these statements on a regular basis.
              (b) Change of assignment is an appropriate method for resolving apparent or actual conflicts of interest when the interest giving rise to the problem bears a direct or indirect relationship to particular, identifiable duties of the employee involved, and those duties constitute a significant portion of the employee's position.
              (c) Waiver under 18 U.S.C. 208(b) is an appropriate method for resolving apparent or actual conflicts of interest when:
              (1) The employee seeking the waiver reported the financial interest that bears some relationship to his or her official duties, and the reviewing official, in consultation with a deputy ethics counselor or the Department Ethics Counselor, determines that the financial interest is not so substantial as to be deemed likely to affect the integrity of the services which the Government may expect from such employee; or
              (2) By general rule or regulation published in the Federal Register, the Department has exempted the financial interest from the requirements of 18 U.S.C. 208 and this part as being too remote or too inconsequential to affect the integrity of the Government officers' service.
              (d) A trust containing a financial interest which may give rise to an apparent or actual conflict of interest is an appropriate method of resolving such conflicts when:
              (1) The trust is qualified under section 202(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-521), as amended, and subject to the regulations of the Office of Government Ethics; or
              (2) In the opinion of the Department's Ethics Counselor, it is sufficiently independent of the employee involved so that the integrity of the employee's services to the Government are not compromised.
              (e) Divestiture is an appropriate method for resolving actual conflicts of interest when the nature of the financial interest is such that the conflict of interest cannot be adequately resolved by any of the methods set forth in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section.
              (f) Terminating an appointment as a method for resolving an actual conflict of interest should be used only when it is clear that no other remedy can be found which would be acceptable to both the Department and the employee. Generally, this method will be employed only in the most extreme cases. Such a termination would be subject to adverse action.
            
          
          
            Subpart J—Provisions Relating to Experts, Consultants and Advisory Committee Members
            
              § 73.735-1001
              Coverage.
              (a) For purposes of this subpart the title “consultant” will be used to include those who are appointed to serve as experts, consultants or members of advisory committees. All persons who serve as an employee of the Government in the capacity of a consultant are covered by the provisions of this subpart irrespective of:
              (1) The title by which designated;
              (2) The statutory authority under which services are obtained;
              (3) The duration of the period for which services are obtained;
              (4) Whether services are obtained by appointment or invitation and acceptance;
              (5) Whether services are compensated or rendered without compensation;
              (6) Whether or not services are obtained pursuant to a statute excepting employees or special Government employees from conflict of interest statutes.
              (b) When the service is for less than 130 days in a service year, experts, consultants, and advisory committee members are included in the group of employees designated by law (18 U.S.C. 202) as “Special Government employees.”
            
            
              § 73.735-1002
              Ethical standards of conduct.
              (a) Like other Federal employees, an individual serving in a consultant capacity must conduct himself or herself according to ethical behavior standards of the highest order. In particular, such an individual must:

              (1) Refrain from any use of office which is, or appears to be, motivated by a private gain for himself or herself or other persons, particularly those with whom he or she has family, business, or financial ties. The fact that desired gain, if it materializes, will not take place at the expense of the Government makes his or her actions no less improper.
              (2) Conduct himself or herself in a manner devoid of any suggestion that he or she is exploiting Government employment for private advantage. A consultant must not, on the basis of any inside information, enter into any speculation or recommend speculation to members of his or her family or business associates, in commodities, land, or the securities of any private company. This injunction applies even though the consultant's duties have no connection whatever with the Government programs or activities which may affect the value of such commodities, land, or securities. He or she should be careful in all personal financial activities to avoid any appearance of acting on the basis of information obtained in the course of his or her Government work.
              (3) Refrain from using information not generally available to those outside the Government for the special benefit of a business or other entity by which the consultant is employed or retained or in which he or she has a financial interest. Information not available to private industry should remain confidential in the consultant's hands and not be divulged to his or her private employer or clients. In cases of doubt whether information is generally available to the public, the consultant should confer with the person for whom he or she provides services, with the office having functional responsibility for a specific type of information, or, as appropriate, with the officials designated in § 73.735-202 to give interpretive and advisory service.
              (4) Where requested by a private enterprise to act for it in a consultant or advisory capacity and the request appears motivated by the desire for inside information, make a choice between acceptance of the tendered private employment and continuation of his or her Government consultancy. He or she may not engage in both.
              (5) Not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, anyone to provide a financial benefit to him or her or another person, particularly one with whom the consultant has family, business, or financial ties.
              (6) Not receive or solicit anything of value as a gift, gratuity, loan, entertainment, or favor for himself or herself or another person, particularly one with whom he or she has family, business, or financial ties if the acceptance would result in loss of complete independence or impartiality in serving the Government. All consultants are subject to the restrictions in § 73.735-506 of this part concerning gifts and decorations from foreign governments.
              (b) Consultants may engage in other employment so long as there is no real or apparent conflict between the consultant's private employment and his or her official duties. See § 73.735 Subpart G. The regular employment of a consultant who is a special Government employee is not considered outside work for purposes of Subpart G. Also, the limitation in § 73.735-701(f) regarding the amount of an honorarium that may be received does not apply to special Government employees.
              (c) A consultant who has questions about conflicts of interest or the application of the regulations in this part to him or her or to his or her assigned work should make inquiry of the person for whom services are provided. That person may direct the consultant to the Department Ethics Counselor or a deputy ethics counselor for interpretative and advisory services as provided in § 73.735-202.
            
            
              § 73.735-1003
              Conflicts of interest statutes.
              (a) Each consultant should acquaint himself or herself with sections 203, 205, 207 and 208 of title 18, United States Code, all of which carry criminal penalties related to conflicts of interest. The restraints imposed by the four criminal sections are summarized in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
              (b) 18 U.S.C. 203 and 205.

              (1) These two sections in general operate to preclude a person who works for the Government, except in the discharge of his or her official duties, from representing anyone else before a court or Government agency in a matter in which the United States is a party or has a direct and substantial interest. The prohibition applies whether or not compensation is received for the representation. However, if the individual is a special Government employee, this restriction applies only if:
              (i) The representation involves a matter in which the individual has at any time participated personally and substantially in the course of his or her Government employment; or
              (ii) The individual has served the Department for more than 60 days in the immediately preceding period of 365 days, and the matter is one which is pending before the Department. This second restraint applies whether or not the matter is one in which the individual participated personally and substantially in his or her Government employment. These two provisions apply to a special Government employee on days when he or she does not serve the Government as well as on the days when services are rendered, and they apply to both paid and unpaid representation.
              (2) To a considerable extent the prohibitions of sections 203 and 205 are aimed at the sale of influence to gain special favors for private businesses and other organizations and at the misuse of governmental position or information. In accordance with these aims, a consultant, even when not compelled to do so by sections 203 and 205, should make every effort in his or her private work to avoid any personal contact with respect to negotiations for contracts or grants with the component of the department in which he or she is serving, if the subject matter is related to the subject matter of his or her consultancy or other service. This will not always be possible to achieve where, for example, a consultant has an executive position with his or her regular employer which requires him or her to participate personally in contract negotiations with the department or agency he or she is advising. Whenever this is the case, the consultant should participate in the negotiations for his or her employer only after advising the responsible Government official of his or her involvement in other matters in the Department. In other instances an occasional consultant may have technical knowledge which is indispensable to his or her regular employer in his efforts to formulate a research and development contract or a research grant, and for the same reason, it is in the interest of the Government that the consultant should take part in negotiations for his or her private employer. Again, the individual should participate only after advising the responsible Government official of the relevant facts.

              (3) Section 205 permits both the Government and the private employer of a special Government employee to benefit, in certain cases, from his or her performance of work under a grant or contract for which he or she would otherwise be disqualified because of having participated in the matter for the Government or because it is pending in a component in which the consultant had served more than 60 days in the past year. This provision gives the head of a department the authority, notwithstanding any prohibition in either section 203 or 205, to allow a special Government employee to represent before such department or agency either his or her regular employer or another person or organization in the performance of work under a grant or contract. As a basis for this action, the Secretary must first make a certification in writing, published in the Federal Register, that it is required by the national interest.
              (4) Section 205 contains two other exemptive provisions, which apply to both special and regular Government employees. See § 73.735-702.
              (c) 18 U.S.C. 207 applies to individuals who have left Government service. See Subpart N of these regulations.

              (d) 18 U.S.C. 208 bears on the activities of Government personnel, including special Government employees, in the course of their official duties. In general, it prevents a Government employee from participating as such in a particular matter in which, to his or her knowledge, he or she, his or her spouse, minor child, partner, or a profit or non-profit enterprise with which he or she is connected has a financial interest. However, the section permits an employee's agency to grant him or her an ad hoc exemption if the interest is not so substantial as to affect the integrity of his or her services. Insignificant interests may also be waived by a general rule or regulation. The matters in which special Government employees are disqualified by section 208 are not limited to those involving a specific party or parties in which the United States is a party or has an interest, as in the case of sections 203, 205 and 207. Section 208 therefore extends to matters in addition to contracts, grants, judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings, and other matters of an adversary nature. Accordingly, a special Government employee, like all government employees, should in general be disqualified from participating as such in a matter of any type the outcome of which will have a direct and predictable effect upon the financial interests covered by the section.
              However, the power of exemption may be exercised in this situation if the special Government employee renders advice of a general nature from which no preference or advantage over others might be gained by any particular person or organization. The power of exemption may also be exercised where the financial interests involved are minimal in value.
            
            
              § 73.735-1004
              Requesting waivers or exemptions.
              (a) A consultant may present in writing to the official for whom he or she provides services requests for the waivers or exemptions specified in § 73.735-1003. That official will take, or refer the request for, action as appropriate, and will see that the employee receives advice or decision on his or her request.
              (b) A file of all waivers or exemptions granted shall be maintained in such manner that information can be given promptly on individual cases or statistics provided upon request. Generally, these records, together with written advice given in connection with less formal requests concerning questions of ethical standards, are kept with the employee's statement of employment and financial interests or financial disclosure report (§ 73.735-1006).
              (c)(1) Waiver for reviewers from certain multi-campus institutions. Applicability of the prohibitions of 18 U.S.C. 208(a) and this subpart are hereby waived pursuant to a determination that the interest involved is too remote or too inconsequential to affect the integrity of a special Government employee's review of a funding application or contract proposal from one campus of one of the following multi-campus institutions, where the interest consists solely of employment as a faculty member (including Department Chairman) at a separate campus of the same multi-campus institution:
              
              
                The University of Alabama system consisting of the University of Alabama, the University of Alabama in Birmingham, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville.
                The campuses of the University of California.
                The system consisting of Colorado State University, the University of Southern Colorado, and Fort Lewis College.
                The Indiana University system consisting of eight universities on nine campuses, with the exception of the system-wide schools: the School of Business; the School of Dentistry; the School of Medicine; the School of Nursing; and the School of Public and Environmental Affairs.
                The University of Nebraska system consisting of the University of Nebraska—Lincoln, the University of Nebraska at Omaha, and the University of Nebraska Medical Center.
                The campuses of the State University of New York.
                The Oregon system of higher education consisting of the University of Oregon, Oregon State University, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland State University, Western Oregon State College, Southern Oregon State College, Eastern Oregon State College, and the Oregon Institute of Technology.
                The campuses of the University of Tennessee.
                The separate universities comprising the University of Texas System.
                The separate universities comprising the University of Wisconsin System.
              
              
              (2) Institutions that are not subject to 18 U.S.C. 208(a) and the subpart, because they are not part of the same organization within the State. The following State institutions and systems of higher education have been determined to be separate from each other to such a degree that no waiver is necessary in order to permit a faculty member (including Department Chairman) employed by one of the State institutions of higher education to review a funding application or contract proposal from another of the named institutions within that State:
              
              
                The University of Alabama System and other Alabama State owned institutions of higher education.
                The California Community Colleges, the California State Universities and Colleges, and the University of California.
                The University of Colorado, Colorado State University, and other Colorado State owned institutions of higher education.
                The University of Connecticut, Connecticut State University, the Connecticut Technical Colleges, and the Connecticut Community Colleges.
                The University of Illinois, Illinois State University, Western Illinois University, Southern Illinois University, and the Illinois Community Colleges.
                The Indiana University and the other Indiana State owned institutions of higher education.
                The University of Iowa, and Iowa State University.
                The University of Kansas, Kansas State University, Wichita State University, Fort Hays State University, Pittsburg State University, and the Kansas Technological Institute.
                Louisiana State University, and other Louisiana State owned institutions of higher education.
                The University of Massachusetts, and other Massachusetts State owned institutions of higher education.
                The University of Michigan, Michigan State University, and Wayne State University.
                The University of Minnesota, the Minnesota State University System, and the Minnesota Community College System.
                The University of Missouri, and other Missouri State owned institutions of higher education.
                The University of Nebraska, and other Nebraska State owned institutions of higher education.
                The State University of New York System, and the City University of New York System.
                The University of North Carolina, North Carolina State, and other North Carolina State owned institutions of higher education.
                Pennsylvania State University, the University of Pittsburgh, Temple University, Lincoln University, and the other State owned colleges and universities in Pennsylvania.
                The University of Texas System, the Texas A&M System, the Texas State University System, the University System of South Texas, the Lamar University System, the University of Houston System, East Texas State University, Stephen F. Austin State University, West Texas State University, Midwestern University, North Texas State University, Texas Southern University, Texas Woman's University, Texas Tech University and Pan American University.
                The University of Utah and Utah State University.
              
              [46 FR 7369, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 51 FR 15627, Apr. 25, 1986]
            
            
              § 73.735-1005
              Salary from two sources.
              Special Government employees are not subject to 18 U.S.C. 209 which prohibits other employees from receiving any salary, or supplementation of Government salary, from a private source as a compensation for services to the Government. This Department will not knowingly pay per diem to a consultant who also receives per diem pay for the same day from another Government agency (in or outside the Department). Erroneous payments in contravention of this provision will be subject to collection, and any consultant who willfully collects double payments may be barred from further employment.
            
            
              § 73.735-1006
              Reporting financial interests.
              (a) Consultants who will work more than 60 days in a calendar year are subject to the provisions of title II of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 when their rate of pay is equal to or greater than the basic rate for GS-16, Step 1. Such consultants are covered by the reporting requirements of § 73.735-901 of these regulations.
              (b) Consultants not subject to the Ethics in Government Act shall file statements of financial interests as provided by § 73.735-902 of these regulations.
            
            
              § 73.735-1007
              Political activity.
              Consultants who serve intermittently are subject to the political activity restrictions of Subchapter III of Chapter 73 of Title 5 U.S.C. and Civil Service Rule IV only on days on which service is rendered and then for the entire 24 hours of such service day. Other consultants are subject to these restrictions at all times.
            
          
          
            
            Subpart K—Special Government Employees Other Than Consultants
            
              § 73.735-1101
              General provision.
              Individuals who are designated as special Government employees because of the nature of their services but who are not serving as a consultant, expert, or advisory committee member are subject to the provisions of Subparts B through I of these regulations. However, the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 205, 206, 207, and 208 apply to them only as described in Subpart J. Also, the limitation in § 73.735-701(f) on the amount of an honorarium that may be received does not apply.
            
          
          
            Subpart L—Disciplinary Action
            
              § 73.735-1201
              General provisions.
              (a) Violations of the regulations contained in the part may be cause for disciplinary action which could be in addition to any penalty prescribed by law. (For a list of some offenses for which disciplinary action may be taken and “The Code of Ethics for Government Service,” the violation of which may also result in disciplinary action, see appendixes A and B of this part).
              (b) The type of disciplinary action to be taken must be determined in relation to the specific violation. Those responsible for recommending and for taking disciplinary action must apply judgment to each case, taking into account the general objectives of meeting any requirements of law, deterring similar offenses by the employee and other employees, and maintaining high standards of employee conduct and public confidence. Some types of disciplinary action which may be considered are:
              (1) Admonishment
              (2) Written reprimand
              (3) Reassignment
              (4) Suspension
              (5) Demotion
              (6) Removal
              (c) Suspension, demotion, and removal are adverse actions; and when such actions are taken, applicable laws, regulations, and policies must be followed.
              [46 FR 7369, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 53 FR 4409, Feb. 16, 1988]
            
          
          
            Subpart M—Reporting Violations
            
              § 73.735-1301
              Responsibility for reporting possible criminal violations.
              An employee who has information which he or she reasonably believes indicates a possible offense against the United States by an employee of the Department, or any other individual working on behalf of the Department, shall immediately report such information to his or her supervisor, any management official, or directly to the Office of the Inspector General. Offenses covered by the preceding sentence include, but are not limited to, bribery, fraud, perjury, conflict of interest, misuse of funds, equipment, or facilities, and other conduct by a government officer or employee, grantee, contractor or other person which is prohibited by title 18 of the United States Code. Employees and supervisors should refer to chapter 5-10 of the Department's General Administration Manual for procedures regarding the reporting and handling of such information.
            
            
              § 73.735-1302
              Responsibility for reporting allegations of misconduct.
              An employee who has information which he or she reasonably believes indicates the existence of an activity constituting (a) a possible violation of a rule or regulation of the Department; or (b) mismanagement, a gross waste of funds, or abuse of authority; or (c) a substantial and specific danger to the public health and safety, shall immediately report such information to his or her supervisor, any management official of the Department, or directly to the Office of the Inspector General. Employees and supervisors should refer to chapter 5-10 of the Department's General Administration Manual for procedures regarding the reporting and handling of such information. This subsection does not cover employee grievances, equal employment opportunity complaints, classification appeals, or other matters for which a formal government-wide review system has been established by the Federal government.
            
            
              
              § 73.735-1303
              Prohibition of reprisals.
              (a) Any employee who has authority to take, direct others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action, shall not, with respect to such authority, take or threaten to take any action against any employee as a reprisal for making a complaint or providing any information pursuant to §§ 73.735-1301 and 73.735-1302. If the complaint was made or the information was disclosed with the knowledge that it was false, or with willful disregard of its truth or falsity, any personnel action taken against the employee based on those reasons would not constitute a reprisal action.
              (b) An employee who believes that he or she has been threatened with a personnel action, any other action, or harassment or has been harmed by any action as a reprisal for having made a complaint or providing information pursuant to § 73.735-1301 or § 73.735-1302 may request the Office of the Inspector General to review his or her allegations. Whenever the Inspector General has reason to believe that the allegations may be true, he or she will refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration for appropriate action. The Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration may order a stay of any personnel action if he or she determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the personnel action is being taken as a reprisal for making a complaint or providing information pursuant to § 73.735-1301 or § 73.735-1302.
            
            
              § 73.735-1304
              Referral of matters arising under the standards of this part.
              (a) The Department Ethics Counselor may refer to the Inspector General for investigation and/or further action any matter arising under the standards of this part.
              (b) The Department Ethics Counselor may refer to the Office of Government Ethics, or the Inspector General may refer to the Department of Justice, suspected violations of the criminal laws regarding employee standards of conduct and conflicts of interest.
            
          
          
            Subpart N—Conduct and Responsibilities of Former Employees
            
              § 73.735-1401
              Prohibitions against post-employment conflicts of interest.
              (a) The purpose of criminal prohibition in 18 U.S.C. 207 is to prevent the unfair use of inside knowledge or influence that results from Federal service. 18 U.S.C. 207 generally prohibits a former employee from acting as another person's representative to the Government in particular matters involving a specific party or parties in which the employee had been involved while in Federal service. This prohibition does not require a former employee to decline employment with any organization regardless of his or her dealings with that organization while employed by the Government. It applies solely to activities, not the mere existence of an employment arrangement.
              (b) The Office of Government Ethics, Office of Personnel Management, has issued Government-wide regulations covering post-employment conflict of interest (5 CFR part 737). Those regulations are incorporated herein by reference, and they are available for review in personnel offices throughout the Department.
            
          
          
             
            
              Pt. 73, App. A
              Appendix A to Part 73—List of Some Offenses for Which Disciplinary Action May Be Taken
              Following is a list of some offenses for which disciplinary action may be taken under this Part. When a statute applies specifically to a particular offense, either wholly or in part, the statute is cited. Neither the list of offenses nor the statutory citations are all-inclusive. The “Code of Ethics for Government Service” is not cited because of its general applicability but is published in its entirety in appendix B.
              A. Concerning Efficiency of Operations in General. 1. Engaging in wasteful actions or behavior in the performance of assigned duties; conducting non-Government business during official work hours; or participating in a strike (18 U.S.C. 1918), work stoppage, slowdown, sickout, or other similar action.

              2. Absence without leave, failure to adhere to the rules and regulations for requesting and obtaining leave, or improper use of sick leave.
              
              3. Deliberate insubordination or refusal to carry out lawful orders or assignments given.
              4. Disruptive behavior, such as:
              a. Inflicting or threatening or attempting to inflict bodily injury on another (except for necessary defense of self or others) while on the job or on Federal premises.
              b. Discourtesy, disreputable conduct, or use of insulting, abusive or obscene language to or about other individuals while on the job.
              5. Sexual harassment of employees or members of the public.
              6. Failure to observe precautions for safety, such as failure to use safety equipment when it is provided or ignoring signs, posted rules or regulations, or written or verbal safety instructions.
              7. Unauthorized use, possession, or distribution of alcoholic beverages (5 U.S.C. 7352) or controlled substances (e.g., hallucinogens, such as LSD; stimulants, such as cocaine and amphetamines; sedatives, such as barbiturates; narcotics and other drugs or substances, such as hashish and other cannabis substances).
              8. Unauthorized gambling; or canvassing, soliciting, or peddling on Government premises.
              9. Failure to carry or show proper identification or credentials as required by competent authority; misuse of identification cards or investigative or identification credentials or badges.
              10. Failure to disclose (i.e., report) information, when such disclosure is not specifically prohibited by law or Executive Order, that involves (a) violation of law, rule, or regulation, (b) mismanagement or gross waste of funds or abuse of authority, or (c) posing a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety; failure to cooperate in an official Department inquiry.
              11. Failure to pay just debts, including taxes to and loans from governmental sources.
              12. Deceit or interference in a Civil Service examination (18 U.S.C. 1917) or in connection with a Government personnel action.
              13. Fraud or false statements in a Government matter. (18 U.S.C. 1001 through 1003.)
              14. Supervisory failure to initiate disciplinary or corrective action when the facts are known and disciplinary or corrective action is warranted.
              15. Employment of a member of an organization that advocates the overthrow of our constitutional form of government. (5 U.S.C. 7311; 50 U.S.C. 784.)
              B. Concerning Government Funds, Property, Documents, and Records. 1. Actual or attempted embezzlement or theft of Government or personal money or property either directly or through use of Government documents, automated equipment, or other means; actual or attempted embezzlement or theft of the money or property of another person in the possession of an employee by reason of his or her employment. (18 U.S.C. 641 and 654.)
              2. Failure to account for public money. (18 U.S.C. 643.)
              3. Deliberate falsifying of official time and attendance records; improper use of official travel or forging, counterfeiting, or otherwise falsifying official Government travel records or documents. (18 U.S.C. 508.)
              4. False record entries or false reports of money or securities. (18 U.S.C. 2073.)
              5. Loss or misuse of or damage to Government property or endangering persons or Government property through carelessness or by willful malicious conduct.
              6. Mutilating, destroying, or concealing public records. (18 U.S.C. 2071.)
              7. Misuse of penalty (postal) privilege. (18 U.S.C. 1719.)
              8. Failure to safeguard administratively confidential, financial, and trade secrets information.
              9. Unauthorized use of documents presented or used to procure the payment of money from or by the Government. (18 U.S.C. 285.)
              10. Unauthorized use of a Government vehicle; serious or repeated violations of traffic regulations while driving a Government vehicle or a vehicle rented or leased for official Government purposes; reckless driving or improper operation of any Government owned, rented, or leased motor vehicle. (31 U.S.C. 1349[b].)
              11. Violations of the Privacy Act, including:
              a. Willful prohibited disclosure of individually identifiable information in violation of 5 U.S.C. 552a.
              b. Willfully maintaining a system of records without meeting the notice requirements of the Privacy Act as required by 5 U.S.C. 552a.
              12. Violation of regulations concerning the release of classified information, confidential, or security and investigative information. (18 U.S.C. 798 and 1905; 21 U.S.C. 331j; and 50 U.S.C. 783.)
              C. Concerning Conflicts of Interest and Related Unethical Conduct: 1. Violations of 18 U.S.C. Chapter 11: Bribery, Graft, and Conflicts of Interest, including:

              a. Having a direct or indirect financial interest (includes employee ownership of stocks, bonds, or partnership interests in an entity or employment of the employee, his or her spouse, or dependent child) that conflicts with one's Government duties because such entity is either regulated by, has or seeks to do business with the agency, or has any other particular matter with or pending before the agency that may give rise to either an actual conflict or the appearance thereof. (18 U.S.C. 208.)
              
              b. Bribery of a public official; soliciting or accepting directly or indirectly anything of monetary value, including gifts, gratuities, favors, entertainment, or loans either as compensation for governmental services or from individuals who are seeking contractual or other business or financial relations with the Department, are conducting operations or activities that are regulated by the Department, or have interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the employee's official duties; receiving salary or any contribution to or supplementation of salary from a private source as compensation for services for the Government. (18 U.S.C. 201 and 209.)
              c. Acting as the agent of a foreign principal registered under the Foreign Agents Registration Act. (18 U.S.C. 219.)
              2. Engaging, directly or indirectly, in a financial transaction as a result of or primarily relying on information that is obtained through one's official duties and would not be available were the employee not an employee of the Federal Government.
              3. Soliciting a contribution from another employee for a gift to an official superior, making a donation as a gift to an official superior, or accepting a gift from an employee receiving less pay than oneself. (5 U.S.C. 7351.)
              4. Engaging, without required permission, in outside activities that result in or create the appearance of a conflict of interest.
              5. Teaching, lecturing, or writing that depends on specific information obtained as a result of one's Government employment when that information is not otherwise available to the public.
              6. Failure to obtain required clearance of an official speech or article.
              7. Lobbying with appropriated funds. (18 U.S.C. 1913.)
              8. Representation before a Federal agency (other than in the proper discharge of one's official duties) as an agent or attorney in a claim against the United States (or receiving any gratuity or share in any such claim in considertion for assistance given) or as an agent or attorney for anyone before any department, agency, court, or otherwise in connection with any proceeding, application, request for a ruling, or claim on any other particular matter in which the United States is a party or has a direct and substantial interest. (18 U.S.C. 205.) (Note: This section notwithstanding, an employee may, if not inconsistent with the performance of his or her official duties, act without compensation as an agent or attorney for another person who is the subject of any disciplinary or other administrative proceeding or as an agent or attorney for one's parent, spouse, child, or any person or estate for whom or which he or she serves as personal fiduciary except in those matters in which the employee has participated personally and substantially.)
              D. Concerning Prohibited Political and Election Activities. 1. Activities prohibited by 5 U.S.C. Chapter 73, Subchapter III, including:
              a. Section 7323, “Political contributions; prohibition.”
              b. Section 7324, “Influencing elections; taking part in political campaigns; prohibitions; exceptions.”
              2. Activities prohibited by 18 U.S.C. Chapter 29, including:
              a. Section 594, “Intimidation of voters.”
              b. Section 597, “Expenditures to influence voting.”
              c. Section 598, “Coercion by means of relief appropriations.”
              d. Section 600, “Promise of employment or other benefit for political activity.”
              e. Section 601, “Deprivation of employment or other benefit for political contribution.”
              f. Section 602, “Solicitation of political contributions.”
              g. Section 604, “Solicitation from persons on relief.”
              h. Section 606, “Intimidation to secure political contributions.”
              E. Concerning Prohibited Personnel Practices. 1. Commission of a prohibited personnel practice (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 2302[b] [1-11]); that is, any employee who has authority to take, direct others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action, shall not, with respect to such authority, commit any of the following practices:
              a. Discriminate for or against any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicapping condition, marital status, or political affiliation.
              b. Solicit or consider any recommendation or statement, oral or written, with respect to any individual who requests or is under consideration for any personnel action unless such recommendation or statement is based on the personal knowledge or records of the person furnishing it and consists of (1) an evaluation of the work performance ability, aptitude, or general qualifications of such individual or (2) an evaluation of the character, loyalty, or suitability of such individual.
              c. Coerce the political activity of any person (including the providing of any political contribution or service) or take any action against any employee or applicant for employment as a reprisal for the refusal of any person to engage in such political activity.
              d. Deceive or willfully obstruct any person with respect to such person's right to compete for employment.
              e. Influence any person to withdraw from competition for any position for the purpose of improving or injuring the prospects of any other person for employment.

              f. Grant any preference or advantage not authorized by law, rule, or regulation to any employee or applicant for employment (including defining the scope or manner of competition or the requirements for any position) for the purpose of improving or injuring the prospects of any particular person for employment.
              g. Appoint, employ, promote, advance, or advocate for appointment, employment, promotion, or advancement, in or to a civilian position any individual who is a relative (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 3110) when the civilian position is in the Department or under his or her jurisdiction or control.
              h. Take or fail to take a personnel action with respect to any employee or applicant for employment as a reprisal for the lawful disclosure of information.
              i. Take or fail to take any personnel action against an employee or applicant for employment as a reprisal for the exercise of any appeal right granted by any law, rule, or regulation (including HHS Instructions and issuances).
              j. Discriminate for or against any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of conduct that does not adversely affect the performance of the employee or applicant or the performance of others (except criminal conviction in determining suitability or fitness).
              k. Take or fail to take any personnel action when the taking of or failure to take such action violates any law, rule, or regulation implementing, or directly concerning the merit system principles (as set forth in 5 U.S.C. 2301).
              [53 FR 4410, Feb. 16, 1988]
            
            
              Pt. 73, App. B
              Appendix B to Part 73—Code of Ethics for Government Service
              Any person in Government service should:
              I. Put loyalty to the highest moral principles and to country above loyalty to persons, party, or Government department.
              II. Uphold the Constitution, laws, and regulations of the United States and all governments therein and never be a party to their evasion.
              III. Give a full day's labor for a full day's pay, giving earnest effort and best thought to the performance of duties.
              IV. Seek to find and employ more efficient and economical ways of getting tasks accomplished.
              V. Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not; and never accept, for himself or herself or family members, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of governmental duties.
              VI. Make no private promises of any kind binding upon the duties of office, since a Government employee has no private word which can be binding on public duty.
              VII. Engage in no business with the Government, either directly or indirectly, which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of governmental duties.
              VIII. Never use any information gained confidentially in the performance of governmental duties as a means of making private profit.
              IX. Expose corruption wherever discovered.
              X. Uphold these principles, ever conscious that public office is a public trust.
              [53 FR 4410, Feb. 16, 1988]
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 73a
          PART 73a—STANDARDS OF CONDUCT: FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION SUPPLEMENT
          
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              Sec.
              73a.735-101
              Principles and purpose.
              73a.735-103
              Responsibilities.
              73a.735-104
              Advice and guidance.
            
            
              Subpart B—Miscellaneous Provisions
              73a.735-201
              Control activity employees formerly associated with organizations subject to FDA regulation.
            
            
              Subpart C [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart D—Outside Employment
              73a.735-401
              General provisions.
            
            
              Subpart E—Financial Interests
              73a.735-501
              General provisions.
              73a.735-502
              Employees in regulatory activities.
              73a.735-504
              Exceptions.
            
            
              Subparts F-I [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart J—Statements of Employment and Financial Interests
              73a.735-1004
              Submission and review of statements.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            45 CFR 73.735-105.
          
          
            Source:
            43 FR 7619, Feb. 24, 1978, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            
              § 73a.735-101
              Principles and purpose.

              (a) To assure that the business of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is conducted effectively, objectively, and without improper influence or appearance thereof, all employees must be persons of integrity and observe the highest standards of conduct. Because of FDA's special regulatory responsibilities to the consumer and industry, its employees must be especially alert to avoid any real or appearance of conflict of their private interests with their public duties. Their actions must be unquestionable and free from suspicion of partiality, favoritism, or any hint of conflicting interests. This supplement recognizes FDA's public obligation to set reasonable and fair safeguards for the prevention of employee conflicts of interest. It is necessary to meet FDA's regulatory responsibilities and to otherwise assure full protection of the public confidence in the integrity of its employees.
              (b) Since FDA is a unique consumer protection and regulatory agency within the Department, the DHHS Standards of Conduct need further supplementation to reflect this role. Therefore, for purposes of implementing the DHHS Standards of Conduct regulations within the FDA, this supplement provides interpretive definitions and additional requirements. As further guidance to its employees and supervisory officials, FDA will issue internal procedural instructions in accordance with this supplement.
            
            
              § 73a.735-103
              Responsibilities.
              (a) A “control activity” employee shall be personally responsible for assuring that he does not hold an interest in any organization whose FDA-regulated activities constitute more than an insignificant part of its business as defined in § 73a.735-502(b)(2). The Associate Commissioner for Administration (or his designee) is available to assist such employees in obtaining corporate data necessary to make such a determination.
              (b) Other employees are similarly responsible for observing the financial interest retention requirements in §§ 73a.735-501(b) and 73a.735-502(a)(2).
            
            
              § 73a.735-104
              Advice and guidance.
              (a) The Associate Commissioner for Administration (or his designee) shall provide day-to-day guidance and assistance to employees and supervisors on matters covered by regulations in part 73 and this part of this chapter.
              (b) The FDA Conflict of Interest Review Board shall review and make recommendations to the Commissioner on requests for exceptions to conflict of interest policies and procedures in regulations in this part and part 73 of this chapter.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Miscellaneous Provisions
            
              § 73a.735-201
              Control activity employees formerly associated with organizations subject to FDA regulation.
              (a) For a period of 1 year after FDA appointment, or appointment to the Food and Drug Division, Office of the General Counsel, a control activity employee who was employed in a regulated organization within 1 year before FDA employment shall not participate in any regulatory action before FDA that involves the former employer organization. Exceptions may be authorized only under paragraph (e) of this section.
              (b) A control activity employee who was previously employed in a regulated organization shall not participate in any regulatory action before FDA in which the employee had participated personally and substantially in behalf of the former employer organization, e.g., drug investigations/applications, food additive petitions, matters dealing with compliance in areas of radiation-producing products or medical devices. Exceptions may be authorized only under paragraph (e) of this section.
              (c) Employment in a regulated organization includes contractual relationships, e.g., attorneys who may have represented an FDA-regulated firm or industry or an association of such firms and individuals who may have served a firm, industry or association in a consultant capacity.
              (d) Within 30 days after assignment to a control activity position, an employee shall submit to his supervisor detailed information concerning former industry employers, and dates and substance of involvement in such regulatory matters as may be subject to the prohibition in paragraph (b) of this action.

              (e) The Commissioner may grant individual exceptions to paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section whenever he determines that strict application would not be in the best interests of the United States. A memorandum of any exception granted shall be filed for public inspection in the Public Records and Documents Center, Food and Drug Administration, Room 4-68, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Md. 20857, within 10 days after the Commissioner's decision. The memorandum shall include the employee's name, title, grade, summary of official duties, prior pertinent industry involvement, a brief description of the specific regulatory action in which the employee has been permitted to participate, and a statement explaining why such strict application of the subpart would not be in the best interests of the United States.
            
          
          
            Subpart C [Reserved]
          
          
            Subpart D—Outside Employment
            
              § 73a.735-401
              General provisions.
              (a) Employees of the Food and Drug Administration shall obtain advance approval for all outside employment, whether paid or unpaid. Employment, as used in this section, does not include:
              (1) Memberships in charitable, religious, social, fraternal, recreational, public service, civic, or similar nonbusiness organizations.
              (2) Memberships in professional organizations. (Officeholding, however, requires advance approval.)
              (3) Performance of duties in the Armed Forces Reserve or National Guard.
              (b) Control activity employees (defined in § 73a.735-502) will not generally be granted approval to:
              (1) Manage or direct an organization whose activities are subject to FDA regulation, or
              (2) Be employed in an organization whose business activities are subject to FDA regulation unless:
              (i) The regulated activities of the organization are an insignificant part of its total operations, i.e., the regulated products of the organization constitute no more than 10 percent of its annual gross sales, and
              (ii) The outside employment is in nonregulated activities of the organization.
              (c) All other employees will generally be granted approval to engage in outside employment which is compatible with the full performance of their FDA duties and responsibilities and which will not give rise to a real or apparent conflict of interest. Permissible employment includes but is not limited to:
              (1) Employment where the sale of FDA-regulated products is incidential to the purpose of the establishment, e.g., hotels, theaters, bowling alleys, and sports arenas.
              (2) Sales and clerical occupations relating to regulated products, e.g., supermarkets, drugstores, department stores, liquor stores.
              (3) Trade, industrial, and service occupations relating to regulated products, e.g., gasoline service station attendant, line production or assembly work, cook, waiter, waitress, hospital attendant, snack bar vendor, warehouseman.
              (d) All employees will generally be granted approval to engage in paid or unpaid outside employment which contributes to their technical or professional development, e.g.,
              (1) Medical, dental, and veterinary practices.
              (2) Pharmacy practice after meeting the following conditions which will serve to protect against possible conflicts or apparent conflicts of interest and to avoid other problems resulting in embarrassment to the employee or FDA:
              (i) The primary purpose of the part-time employment is to contribute to the overall professional development of the employee and generally enhance his capability to better perform his current FDA duties.
              (ii) The part-time duties will be confined generally to dispensing Rx drugs and related professional pharmacy duties.

              (iii) The employee will avoid unrelated nonprofessional duties such as supervision or management of store operations, contractual or purchasing responsibilities (except normal “out-of-stock” requisitioning) and repacking and relabeling of bulk items.
              
              (iv) The employee will demonstrate a high degree of discretion and judgment in his contacts with customers and representatives of regulated industry and competitor firms so as to avoid giving the impression that:
              (a) His part-time actions, recommendations, opinions, or remarks are official points of view;
              (b) He is using his FDA position for private gain by oral misrepresentations and false claims of the company's products;
              (c) He is making a Government decision outside official channels, e.g., to customers, prescribing physicians, buyers, distributors;
              (d) He or other FDA representatives will give preferential treatment to any regulated organization or representatives of such organizations, or that FDA employees have not exercised complete independence or impartiality in carrying out their regulatory and consumer protection responsibilities; or
              (e) His part-time work is creating an adverse effect on the image of FDA or discrediting the integrity of official FDA regulatory decisions.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Financial Interests
            
              § 73a.735-501
              General provisions.
              (a) No restrictions are placed on ownership of diversified mutual funds.
              (b) An FDA employee, other than a control activity employee (defined in § 73a.735-502), may have financial interests:
              (1) In an organization whose FDA-regulated activities are an insignificant part of its total operations, i.e., no more than 10 percent of the organization's annual gross sales are in products regulated by FDA; or

              (2) In an organization whose FDA-regulated business activities are a significant part of its total business operations: Provided, That:
              (i) The holding is less than $5,000 (value or cost at time of initial reporting),
              (ii) The holding represents less than 1 percent of the total outstanding stock shares of that organization, and
              (iii) No more than 50 percent of the employee's total investment value is concentrated in organizations whose FDA-regulated business activities are a significant part of their business operations.
              (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this part permitting employees to hold financial interests in organizations subject to FDA regulation, an employee holding such an interest shall not participate in an official matter whose outcome would have a direct and predictable effect on his financial interest. However, this prohibition is not applicable to:
              (1) Diversified mutual funds, which are exempted from 18 U.S.C. 208 by § 73.735-501(a) of this chapter.
              (2) Financial interests for which the Commissioner has in advance granted a written exception on the ground that the public interest would be served if a particular employee is allowed to participate in an official matter whose outcome may have a direct and predictable effect on the employee's financial interest. Such exemptions will be granted only in exceptional circumstances. Any determination to authorize such exceptions shall be made in accordance with 18 U.S.C. 208(b)(1) and documented for public inspection in accordance with § 73a.735-504.
            
            
              § 73a.735-502
              Employees in regulatory activities.
              (a) An employee in regulatory activities (“control activity” employee) may hold financial interests in an FDA-regulated organization only if either of the following conditions are met:
              (1) The regulated activities of the organization are an “insignificant” part of its total business operations, or
              (2) Written approval for an individual exception is granted by the Commissioner in accordance with § 73a.735-504; however, such approval will not be considered unless all of the following conditions are met:
              (i) Retention of the financial interest does not give rise to an actual conflict of interest;

              (ii) Acquisition of the financial interest occurred by marriage or inheritance, or the interest was held prior to an FDA reorganization, change in regulations, or similar circumstances beyond the control of the employee that resulted in the interest becoming prohibited;
              
              (iii) No direct relationship exists between the employee's official duties and the regulated activities of the organization in which the financial interest is held;
              (iv) The employee occupies a position below that of Bureau/Deputy Bureau Director (or Assistant/Deputy General Counsel, Food and Drug Division, Office of the General Counsel); and
              (v) The employee agrees to refrain from engaging, either directly or indirectly, in transactions that are designed to increase the value of his “excepted” financial interest.
              (b) To administer provisions within this part, the following interpretations apply:
              (1) A “control activity” employee (“control activity” positions are identified in appendix C to part 73 of this chapter), means one who:
              (i) Occupies an FDA position classified at GS-11 or above, or PHS Commissioned Officer 0-3 or above, or equivalent;
              (ii) Occupies an FDA position below GS-11 with duties of a nature that the employee could in the discharge of his official duties and responsibilities cause an economic advantage for or impose a handicap on a non-Federal enterprise (includes investigators, inspectors, regulatory analysts);
              (iii) Occupies a position at GS-11 or above in the Office of the Assistant General Counsel, Food and Drug Division.
              (2) “Insignificant” (part of an organization's total business operations) means that the FDA-regulated products constitute no more than 10 percent of the organization's annual gross sales.
            
            
              § 73a.735-504
              Exceptions.
              (a) A control activity employee who can satisfy all of the conditions specified in § 73a.735-502(a)(2) may submit a request to retain a prohibited financial interest. Any such request must be submitted no later than 30 days after the event that results in the employee holding the prohibited financial interest. Such requests for exception should be forwarded in writing through supervisory channels to the Associate Commissioner for Administration for review by the FDA Conflict of Interest Review Board and subsequent recommendation to the Commissioner. All decisions on requests for exceptions shall be in writing and a copy furnished to the employee involved.
              (b) A memorandum of each approved exception shall be filed in the Public Records and Documents Center for public inspection. Such public disclosure shall be made within 10 days after the Commissioner's decision. The following is an example of the format of such memorandum (in a hypothetical employee situation):
              (1) Employee: Joe Doe.
              (2) Title: Research Chemist.
              (3) Grade/Salary: GS-14.
              (4) Organization: Bureau of Biologics, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Md.
              (5) Date of employee's request for exception: ___.
              (6) Date of Commissioner's approval: ___.
              (7) Basis for exception: Employee owns financial interest in the ABC Foods Corporation, and permanent retention is normally prohibited under FDA/HHS conflict of interest regulations for such an employee. The employee, however, acquired this financial interest prior to his reassignment to FDA on ___, which was part of a major Department reorganization transferring certain functions from NIH to the FDA (i.e., FDA's Bureau of Biologics). At the time of acquisition and immediately prior to the reorganization, the employee's financial interest was allowable under Department regulations. The employee's official duties are fully confined to the matters under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Biologics, and his official duties do not involve any contact with the food industry. The Commissioner has determined that an exception is warranted under the following criteria:
              (i) Acquisition occurred prior to Department reorganization;
              (ii) Financial interest retention will not give rise to an actual conflict of interest situation;
              (iii) There is no direct relationship between the employee's official duties and the regulated activities of ABC Foods;

              (iv) The employee occupies a position below that of Bureau or Deputy Bureau Director (or equivalent position in the Office of the Commissioner); and
              (v) The employee agrees to refrain from engaging in any direct or indirect transactions that are designed to increase the value/shares of the “excepted” ABC Foods interests.
              This exception is considered equitable to the employee involved, and retention of the ABC Foods interest will not in any way impair the interests of the Government or of the public.
              (c) In interpreting the requirement of § 73a.735-502(a)(2)(v), events not involving employee discretion (e.g., accepting dividends in the form of cash or additional shares) do not constitute transactions designed to increase the value/shares of an “excepted” financial interest. A transaction involving discretion, e.g., exercise of stock options, may be made only if proposed to the Associate Commissioner for Administration and approved by the Conflict of Interest Review Board as an amendment to the original exception. A memorandum recording such approval shall be made public in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
              (d) An employee may temporarily retain a prohibited financial interest pending review of a written request for an exception submitted in accordance with this section.
              (e) Except as provided in § 73a.735-501(c), no employee may participate in an official matter whose outcome will have a direct and predictable effect on a financial interest held by him. This prohibition applies to official matters handled before and after approval of an exception under this section.
            
          
          
            Subparts F-I [Reserved]
          
          
            Subpart J—Statements of Employment and Financial Interests
            
              § 73a.735-1004
              Submission and review of statements.
              (a) Employees occupying control activity positions shall file Form HHS-473 “Confidential Statement of Employment and Financial Interests” with the Associate Commissioner for Administration within 30 days after entrance in this category and annually thereafter as of June 30, or such other dates as the Secretary, with the concurrence of the Civil Service Commission, may approve. Prior to the due date, the Associate Commissioner for Administration shall advise “control activity” employees of the annual filing requirement through normal administrative channels. The annual reporting requirement shall commence as of June 30, 1977.
              (b) The Associate Commissioner for Administration (or his designee) shall serve as the principal reviewing official for Outside Activity Forms, HHS-520 and 521, and shall make final determinations on matters arising from activities reported on Form HHS-473.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 73b
          PART 73b—DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION OF FORMER EMPLOYEES
          
            Sec.
            73b.1
            Scope.
            73b.2
            Rules and regulations.
            73b.3
            Reports of violations.
            73b.4
            Proceedings.
            73b.5
            Hearings.
          
          
            Authority:
            18 U.S.C. 207(j).
          
          
            Source:
            47 FR 17505, Apr. 23, 1982, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 73b.1
            Scope.
            This part contains rules governing debarment or disqualification action against a former officer or employee of the Department, including former and retired officers of the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, because of violation of the post-employment restrictions of the conflict of interest laws and regulations.
          
          
            § 73b.2
            Rules and regulations.
            This part will be applied in conformance with the standards established by the Office of Government Ethics in its regulations, 5 CFR part 737, and interpretations thereof. Former officers and employees of the Department may request advice and assistance in compliance with those regulations from the Assistant General Counsel, Business and Administrative Law Division, Department of Health and Human Services.
          
          
            
            § 73b.3
            Reports of violations.
            (a) If an officer or employee of the Department has reason to believe that a former officer or employee of the Department has violated any provision of 18 U.S.C. 207 (a), (b) or (c) or if any such officer or employee receives information to that effect, he/she shall promptly make a written report thereof which shall be forwarded to the Inspector General. If any other person has information of such violations, he/she may make a report thereof to the Inspector General or to any officer or employee of the Department.
            (b) The Inspector General shall coordinate proceedings under this part with the Department of Justice in cases where it appears criminal prosecution is warranted.
          
          
            § 73b.4
            Proceedings.
            (a) Upon a determination by the Assistant General Counsel, Business and Administrative Law Division, or his/her designee, after investigation by the Inspector General, that there is reasonable cause to believe that a former officer or employee, including a former special Government employee, of the Department of Health and Human Services (former departmental employee) has violated 18 US.C. 207 (a), (b) or (c), the Assistant General Counsel, or his/her designee, shall cause a copy of written charges of the violation(s) to be served upon such individual, either personally or by registered mail. The charges shall be accompanied by a notice to the former departmental employee to show cause within a specified time of not less than 30 days after receipt of the notice why he/she should not be prohibited from engaging in representational activities in relation to matters pending in the Department, as authorized by 18 U.S.C. 207(j), or subjected to other appropriate debarment or disqualification action under that statute. The notice to show cause shall include:
            (1) A statement of allegations, and their bases, sufficiently detailed to enable the former departmental employee to prepare an adequate defense;
            (2) Notification of the right to a hearing, and that failure to answer shall constitute a waiver of defense; and
            (3) An explanation of the method by which a hearing may be requested.
            (b) If a former departmental employee who submits an answer to the notice to show cause does not request a hearing or if the Assistant General Counsel does not receive an answer within the time prescribed by the notice, the Assistant General Counsel shall forward the record, including the report(s) of investigation, to the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration (Assistant Secretary). In the case of a failure to answer, such failure shall constitute a waiver of defense.
            (c) Upon receipt of a former departmental employee's request for a hearing, the Assistant General Counsel shall notify him/her of the time and place thereof, giving due regard both to such person's need for an adequate period to prepare a suitable defense and an expeditious resolution of allegations that may be damaging to his or her reputation.
            (d) The presiding officer at the hearing and any related proceedings shall be a federal administrative law judge. He/she shall insure that the former departmental employee has the following rights:
            (1) To self-representation or representation by counsel,
            (2) To introduce and examine witnesses and submit physical evidence,
            (3) To confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses,
            (4) To present oral argument, and
            (5) To a transcript or recording of the proceedings, upon request.
            (e) The Assistant General Counsel shall designate one or more officers or employees of the Department to present the evidence against the former departmental employee and perform other functions incident to the proceedings.

            (f) A decision adverse to the former departmental employee must be sustained by substantial evidence that he/she violated 18 U.S.C. 207 (a), (b) or (c). If a judgment of conviction has been entered by a Federal district court against the former departmental employee for violation of 18 U.S.C. 207 (a), (b) or (c), regardless of whether the judgment is based upon a verdict or a plea of guilty, such judgment of conviction shall be conclusive evidence of a violation of 18 U.S.C. 207 (a), (b) or (c), unless and until the judgment is vacated or reversed on appeal.
            (g) The administrative law judge shall issue an initial decision based exclusively on the transcript of testimony and exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the proceeding, and shall set forth in the decision findings and conclusions, supported by reasons, on the material issues of fact and law presented on the record.
            (h) Within 30 days after issuance of the initial decision, either party may appeal in writing to the Assistant Secretary who in that event shall issue the final decision based on the record of the proceedings or those portions thereof cited by the parties to limit the issues. If the final decision modifies or reverses the initial decision, the Assistant Secretary shall specify the findings of fact and conclusions of law that vary from those of the presiding officer.
            (i) If a former departmental employee fails to appeal from an adverse initial decision within the prescribed period of time, the administrative law judge shall forward the record of the proceedings to the Assistant Secretary.
            (j) In the case of a former departmental employee who filed an answer to the notice to show cause but did not request a hearing, the Assistant Secretary shall make the final decision on the record submitted to him by the Assistant General Counsel pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.
            (k) In a case where:
            (1) The defense has been waived,
            (2) The former departmental employee has failed to appeal from an adverse initial decision, or
            (3) The Assistant Secretary has issued a final decision that the former departmental employee violated 18 U.S.C. 207 (a), (b) or (c),
            The Assistant Secretary may issue an order:
            (i) Prohibiting the former departmental employee from making, on behalf of any other person (except the United States), any informal or formal appearance before, or, with the intent to influence, any oral or written communication to, the Department on a pending matter of business for a period not to exceed five years, or
            (ii) Prescribing other appropriate debarment or disqualification action, such as limiting the action to a particular organization or organizations within the Department.
            (l) An order issued under either paragraph (k)(i) or (k)(ii) of this section shall be supplemented by a directive to officers and employees of the Department not to engage in conduct in relation to the former departmental employee that would contravene such order.
          
          
            § 73b.5
            Hearings.
            (a) Hearings shall be stenographically recorded and transcribed and the testimony of witnesses shall be taken under oath or affirmation. Hearings will be closed unless an open hearing is requested by the respondent, except that if classified information or protected information of third parties is likely to be adduced at the hearing, it will remain closed. If either party to the proceeding fails to appear at the hearing, after due notice thereof has been sent to him/her, he/she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the administrative law judge may make a decision on the basis of the record before him/her at that time.
            (b) The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law and equity are not controlling in hearings under this part. However, the administrative law judge shall exclude evidence which is irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious.

            (c) Depositions for use at a hearing may, with the consent of the parties in writing or the written approval of the administrative law judge be taken by either the Assistant General Counsel or the respondent or their duly authorized representatives. Depositions may be taken upon oral or written interrogatories. There shall be at least 10 days written notice to the other party. The requirement of a 10-day written notice may be waived by the parties in writing. When a deposition is taken upon written interrogatories, any cross-examination shall be upon written interrogatories. Copies of such written interrogatories shall be served upon the other party with the notice, and copies of any written cross-interrogation shall be mailed or delivered to the opposing party at least 5 days before the date of taking the depositions, unless the parties mutually agree otherwise. Expenses in the reporting of depositions shall be borne by the party at whose instance the deposition is taken.
          
        
        
          PART 74 [RESERVED]
        
        
          Pt. 75
          PART 75—UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT REQUIREMENTS FOR HHS AWARDS
          
            
              Subpart A—Acronyms and Definitions
              Sec.
              75.1
              Acronyms.
              75.2
              Definitions.
            
            
              Subpart B—General Provisions
              75.100
              Purpose.
              75.101
              Applicability.
              75.102
              Exceptions.
              75.103
              Authorities.
              75.104
              Supersession.
              75.105
              Effects on other issuances.
              75.106
              Agency implementation.
              75.107
              OMB responsibilities.
              75.108
              Inquiries.
              75.109
              Review date.
              75.110
              Effective/Applicability date.
              75.111
              English language.
              75.112
              Conflict of interest.
              75.113
              Mandatory disclosures.
            
            
              Subpart C—Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
              75.200
              Purpose.
              75.201
              Use of grant agreements (including fixed amount awards), cooperative agreements, and contracts.
              75.202
              Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial assistance programs.
              75.203
              Notices of funding opportunities.
              75.204
              HHS funding agency review of merit of proposals.
              75.205
              HHS awarding agency review of risk posed by applicants.
              75.206
              Standard application requirements, including forms for applying for HHS financial assistance, and state plans.
              75.207
              Specific award conditions.
              75.208
              Certifications and representations.
              75.209
              Pre-award costs.
              75.210
              Information contained in a Federal award.
              75.211
              Public access to Federal award information.
              75.212
              Reporting a determination that a recipient is not qualified for a Federal award.
              75.213
              Suspension and debarment.
              75.214
              Metric system of measurement.
              75.215
              Disclosure of lobbying activities.
              75.216
              Special provisions for awards to commercial organizations as recipients.
              75.217
              Special provisions for awards to Federal agencies.
              75.218
              Participation by faith-based organizations.
            
            
              Subpart D—Post Federal Award Requirements
              
                Standards for Financial and Program Management
                75.300
                Statutory and national policy requirements.
                75.301
                Performance measurement.
                75.302
                Financial management and standards for financial management systems.
                75.303
                Internal controls.
                75.304
                Bonds.
                75.305
                Payment.
                75.306
                Cost sharing or matching.
                75.307
                Program income.
                75.308
                Revision of budget and program plans.
                75.309
                Period of performance and availability of funds.
                75.310-75.315
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Property Standards
                75.316
                Purpose of property standards.
                75.317
                Insurance coverage.
                75.318
                Real property.
                75.319
                Federally-owned and exempt property.
                75.320
                Equipment.
                75.321
                Supplies.
                75.322
                Intangible property and copyrights.
                75.323
                Property trust relationship.
                75.324-75.325
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Procurement Standards
                75.326
                Procurements by states.
                75.327
                General procurement standards.
                75.328
                Competition.
                75.329
                Procurement procedures.
                75.330
                Contracting with small and minority businesses, women's business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms.
                75.331
                Procurement of recovered materials.
                75.332
                Contract cost and price.
                75.333
                HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity review.
                75.334
                Bonding requirements.
                75.335
                Contract provisions.
                75.336-75.340
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Performance and Financial Monitoring and Reporting
                75.341
                Financial reporting.
                
                75.342
                Monitoring and reporting program performance.
                75.343
                Reporting on real property.
                75.344-75.350
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Subrecipient Monitoring and Management
                75.351
                Subrecipient and contractor determinations.
                75.352
                Requirements for pass-through entities.
                75.353
                Fixed amount subawards.
                75.354-75.360
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Record Retention and Access
                75.361
                Retention requirements for records.
                75.362
                Requests for transfer or records.
                75.363
                Methods for collection, transmission and storage of information.
                75.364
                Access to records.
                75.365
                Restrictions on public access to records.
                75.366-75.370
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Remedies for Noncompliance
                75.371
                Remedies for noncompliance.
                75.372
                Termination.
                75.373
                Notification of termination requirement.
                75.374
                Opportunities to object, hearings, and appeals.
                75.375
                Effects of suspension and termination.
                75.376-75.380
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Closeout
                75.381
                Closeout.
                75.382-75.385
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Post-Closeout Adjustments and Continuing Responsibilities
                75.386
                Post-closeout adjustments and continuing responsibilities.
                75.387-75.390
                [Reserved]
              
              
                Collection of Amounts Due
                75.391
                Collection of amounts due.
              
            
            
              Subpart E—Cost Principles
              
                General Provisions
                75.400
                Policy guide.
                75.401
                Application.
              
              
                Basic Considerations
                75.402
                Composition of costs.
                75.403
                Factors affecting allowability of costs.
                75.404
                Reasonable costs.
                75.405
                Allocable costs.
                75.406
                Applicable credits.
                75.407
                Prior written approval (prior approval).
                75.408
                Limitation on allowance of costs.
                75.409
                Special considerations.
                75.410
                Collection of unallowable costs.
                75.411
                Adjustment of previously negotiated indirect (F&A) cost rates containing unallowable costs.
              
              
                Direct and Indirect (F&A) Costs
                75.412
                Classification of costs.
                75.413
                Direct costs.
                75.414
                Indirect (F&A) costs.
                75.415
                Required certifications.
              
              
                Special Considerations for States, Local Governments and Indian Tribes
                75.416
                Cost allocation plans and indirect cost proposals.
                75.417
                Interagency service.
              
              
                Special Considerations for Institutions of Higher Education
                75.418
                Costs incurred by states and local governments.
                75.419
                Cost accounting standards and disclosure statement.
              
              
                General Provisions for Selected Items of Cost
                75.420
                Considerations for selected items of cost.
                75.421
                Advertising and public relations.
                75.422
                Advisory councils.
                75.423
                Alcoholic beverages.
                75.424
                Alumni/ae activities.
                75.425
                Audit services.
                75.426
                Bad debts.
                75.427
                Bonding costs.
                75.428
                Collections of improper payments.
                75.429
                Commencement and convocation costs.
                75.430
                Compensation—personal services.
                75.431
                Compensation—fringe benefits.
                75.432
                Conferences.
                75.433
                Contingency provisions.
                75.434
                Contributions and donations.
                75.435
                Defense and prosecution of criminal and civil proceedings, claims, appeals, and patent infringements.
                75.436
                Depreciation.
                75.437
                Employee health and welfare costs.
                75.438
                Entertainment costs.
                75.439
                Equipment and other capital expenditures.
                75.440
                Exchange rates.
                75.441
                Fines, penalties, damages and other settlements.
                75.442
                Fund raising and investment management costs.
                75.443
                Gains and losses on disposition of depreciable assets.
                75.444
                General costs of government.
                75.445
                Goods or services for personal use.
                75.446
                Idle facilities and idle capacity.
                75.447
                Insurance and indemnification.
                75.448
                Intellectual property.
                75.449
                Interest.
                75.450
                Lobbying.
                75.451
                Losses on other awards or contracts.
                75.452
                Maintenance and repair costs.
                
                75.453
                Materials and supplies costs, including costs of computing devices.
                75.454
                Memberships, subscriptions, and professional activity costs.
                75.455
                Organization costs.
                75.456
                Participant support costs.
                75.457
                Plant and security costs.
                75.458
                Pre-award costs.
                75.459
                Professional service costs.
                75.460
                Proposal costs.
                75.461
                Publication and printing costs.
                75.462
                Rearrangement and reconversion costs.
                75.463
                Recruiting costs.
                75.464
                Relocation costs of employees.
                75.465
                Rental costs of real property and equipment.
                75.466
                Scholarships and student aid costs.
                75.467
                Selling and marketing costs.
                75.468
                Specialized service facilities.
                75.469
                Student activity costs.
                75.470
                Taxes (including Value Added Tax).
                75.471
                Termination costs.
                75.472
                Training and education costs.
                75.473
                Transportation costs.
                75.474
                Travel costs.
                75.475
                Trustees.
              
              
                HHS Specific Selected Items of Cost
                75.476
                Independent research and development costs.
                75.477
                Shared responsibility payments.
              
            
            
              Subpart F—Audit Requirements
              
                General
                75.500
                Purpose.
              
              
                Audits
                75.501
                Audit requirements.
                75.502
                Basis for determining Federal awards expended.
                75.503
                Relation to other audit requirements.
                75.504
                Frequency of audits.
                75.505
                Sanctions.
                75.506
                Audit costs.
                75.507
                Program-specific audits.
              
              
                Auditees
                75.508
                Auditee responsibilities.
                75.509
                Auditor selection.
                75.510
                Financial statements.
                75.511
                Audit findings follow-up.
                75.512
                Report submission.
              
              
                Federal Agencies
                75.513
                Responsibilities.
              
              
                Auditors
                75.514
                Scope of audit.
                75.515
                Audit reporting.
                75.516
                Audit findings.
                75.517
                Audit documentation.
                75.518
                Major program determination.
                75.519
                Criteria for Federal program risk.
                75.520
                Criteria for a low-risk auditee.
              
              
                Management Decisions
                75.521
                Management decision.
                Appendix I to Part 75—Full Text of Notice of Funding Opportunity
                Appendix II to Part 75—Contract Provisions for Non-Federal Entity Contracts Under Federal Awards
                Appendix III to Part 75—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs)
                Appendix IV to Part 75—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations
                Appendix V to Part 75—State/Local Governmentwide Central Service Cost Allocation Plans
                Appendix VI to Part 75—Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plans
                Appendix VII to Part 75—States and Local Government and Indian Tribe Indirect Cost Proposals
                Appendix VIII to Part 75—Nonprofit Organizations Exempted from Subpart E of Part 75
                Appendix IX to Part 75—Principles for Determining Costs Applicable to Research and Development Under Grants and Contracts with Hospitals
                Appendix X to Part 75—Data Collection Form (SF-SAC)
                Appendix XI to Part 75—Compliance Supplement
                Appendix XII to Part 75—Award Term and Conditions for Recipient Integrity and Performance Matters
              
            
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301.
          
          
            Source:
            79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—Acronyms and Definitions
            
              § 75.1
              Acronyms.
              The following acronyms apply to this part:
              
              
                CAS Cost Accounting Standards
                CFDA Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance
                CFR Code of Federal Regulations
                CMIA Cash Management Improvement Act
                COG Councils Of Governments
                COSO Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
                EPA Environmental Protection Agency
                ERISA Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1301-1461)
                EUI Energy Usage Index
                F&A Facilities and Administration
                FAC Federal Audit Clearinghouse
                
                FAIN Federal Award Identification Number
                FAPIIS Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System
                FAR Federal Acquisition Regulation
                FFATA Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 or Transparency Act—Public Law 109-282, as amended by § 6202(a) of Public Law 110-252 (31 U.S.C. 6101)
                FICA Federal Insurance Contributions Act
                FOIA Freedom of Information Act
                FR Federal Register
                FTE Full-time equivalent
                GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
                GAGAS Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards
                GAO Government Accountability Office
                GOCO Government owned, contractor operated
                GSA General Services Administration
                HHS U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                IBS Institutional Base Salary
                IHE Institutions of Higher Education
                IRC Internal Revenue Code
                ISDEAA Indian Self-Determination and Education and Assistance Act
                MTC Modified Total Cost
                MTDC Modified Total Direct Cost
                OMB Office of Management and Budget
                PII Personally Identifiable Information
                PMS Payment Management System
                PRHP Post-retirement Health Plans
                PTE Pass-through Entity
                REUI Relative Energy Usage Index
                SAM System for Award Management (accessible at https://www.sam.gov)
                SF 424 Standard Form 424 series and Form Families Application for Federal Assistance
                SFA Student Financial Aid
                SNAP Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
                SPOC Single Point of Contact
                TANF Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
                TFM Treasury Financial Manual
                U.S.C. United States Code
                VAT Value Added Tax
              
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.2
              Definitions.
              These are the definitions for terms used in this part. Different definitions may be found in Federal statutes or regulations that apply more specifically to particular program or activities. These definitions could be supplemented by additional instructional information provided in in governmentwide standard information collections.
              
                Acquisition cost means the cost of the asset including the cost to ready the asset for its intended use. Acquisition cost for equipment, for example, means the net invoice price of the equipment, including the cost of any modifications, attachments, accessories, or auxiliary apparatus necessary to make it usable for the purpose for which it is acquired. Acquisition costs for software includes those development costs capitalized in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Ancillary charges, such as taxes, duty, protective in transit insurance, freight, and installation may be included in or excluded from the acquisition cost in accordance with the non-Federal entity's regular accounting practices.
              
                Advance payment means a payment that a Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity makes by any appropriate payment mechanism, including a predetermined payment schedule, before the non-Federal entity disburses the funds for program purposes.
              
                Allocation means the process of assigning a cost, or a group of costs, to one or more cost objective(s), in reasonable proportion to the benefit provided or other equitable relationship. The process may entail assigning a cost(s) directly to a final cost objective or through one or more intermediate cost objectives.
              
                Audit finding means deficiencies which the auditor is required by § 75.516(a) to report in the schedule of findings and questioned costs.
              
                Auditee means any non-Federal entity that expends Federal awards which must be audited under subpart F-of this part.
              
                Auditor means an auditor who is a public accountant, or a Federal, state, local government, or Indian Tribe audit organization, which meets the general standards specified for external auditors in generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS). The term auditor does not include internal auditors of nonprofit organizations.
              
                Awardee (see Non-Federal entity).
              
                Budget means the financial plan for the project or program that the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity approves during the Federal award process or in subsequent amendments to the Federal award. It may include the Federal and non-Federal share or only the Federal share, as determined by the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity.
              
                Capital assets means tangible or intangible assets used in operations having a useful life of more than one year which are capitalized in accordance with GAAP. Capital assets include:
              (1) Land, buildings (facilities), equipment, and intellectual property (including software) whether acquired by purchase, construction, manufacture, lease-purchase, exchange, or through capital leases; and
              (2) Additions, improvements, modifications, replacements, rearrangements, reinstallations, renovations or alterations to capital assets that materially increase their value or useful life (not ordinary repairs and maintenance).
              
                Capital expenditures means expenditures to acquire capital assets or expenditures to make additions, improvements, modifications, replacements, rearrangements, reinstallations, renovations, or alterations to capital assets that materially increase their value or useful life.
              
                Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) number means the number assigned to a Federal program in the CFDA.
              
                CFDA program title means the title of the program under which the Federal award was funded in the CFDA.
              
                Central service cost allocation plan means the documentation identifying, accumulating, and allocating or developing billing rates based on the allowable costs of services provided by a state, local government, or Indian tribe on a centralized basis to its departments and agencies. The costs of these services may be allocated or billed to users.
              
                Claim means, depending on the context, either:
              (1) A written demand or written assertion by one of the parties to a Federal award seeking as a matter of right:
              (i) The payment of money in a sum certain;
              (ii) The adjustment or interpretation of the terms and conditions of the Federal award; or
              (iii) Other relief arising under or relating to a Federal award.
              (2) A request for payment that is not in dispute when submitted.
              
                Class of Federal awards means a group of Federal awards either awarded under a specific program or group of programs or to a specific type of non-Federal entity or group of non-Federal entities to which specific provisions or exceptions may apply.
              
                Closeout means the process by which the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity determines that all applicable administrative actions and all required work of the Federal award have been completed and takes actions as described in § 75.381.
              
                Cluster of programs means a grouping of closely related programs that share common compliance requirements. The types of clusters of programs are research and development (R&D), student financial aid (SFA), and other clusters. “Other clusters” are as defined by OMB in the compliance supplement or as designated by a state for Federal awards the state provides to its subrecipients that meet the definition of a cluster of programs. When designating an “other cluster,” a state must identify the Federal awards included in the cluster and advise the subrecipients of compliance requirements applicable to the cluster, consistent with § 75.352(a). A cluster of programs must be considered as one program for determining major programs, as described in § 75.518, and, with the exception of R&D as described in § 75.501(c), whether a program-specific audit may be elected.
              
                Cognizant agency for audit means the Federal agency designated to carry out the responsibilities described in § 75.513(a). The cognizant agency for audit is not necessarily the same as the cognizant agency for indirect costs. A list of cognizant agencies for audit may be found at the FAC Web site.
              
                Cognizant agency for indirect costs means the Federal agency responsible for reviewing, negotiating, and approving cost allocation plans or indirect cost proposals developed under this part on behalf of all Federal agencies. The cognizant agency for indirect cost is not necessarily the same as the cognizant agency for audit. For assignments of cognizant agencies see the following:
              
              (1) For IHEs: Appendix III to part 75 C.11.
              (2) For nonprofit organizations: Appendix IV to part 75 C.2.a.
              (3) For state and local governments: Appendix V to part 75 F.1.
              (4) For Indian tribes: Appendix VII to part 75 D.1.
              
                Commercial organization means an organization, institution, corporation, or other legal entity, including, but not limited to, partnerships, sole proprietorships, and limited liability companies, that is organized or operated for the profit or benefit of its shareholders or other owners. The term includes small and large businesses and is used interchangeably with “for-profit organization.”
              
                Compliance supplement means appendix XI to part 75 (previously known as the Circular A-133 Compliance Supplement).
              
                Computing devices means machines used to acquire, store, analyze, process, and publish data and other information electronically, including accessories (or “peripherals”) for printing, transmitting and receiving, or storing electronic information. See also Supplies and Information technology systems.
              
              
                Contract means a legal instrument by which a non-Federal entity purchases property or services needed to carry out the project or program under a Federal award. The term as used in this part does not include a legal instrument, even if the non-Federal entity considers it a contract, when the substance of the transaction meets the definition of a Federal award or subaward (see Subaward).
              
                Contractor means an entity that receives a contract as defined in Contract.
              
              
                Cooperative agreement means a legal instrument of financial assistance between a Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity and a non-Federal entity that, consistent with 31 U.S.C. 6302-6305:
              (1) Is used to enter into a relationship the principal purpose of which is to transfer anything of value from the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity to the non-Federal entity to carry out a public purpose authorized by a law of the United States (see 31 U.S.C. 6101(3)); and not to acquire property or services for the Federal Government or pass-through entity's direct benefit or use;
              (2) Is distinguished from a grant in that it provides for substantial involvement between the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity and the non-Federal entity in carrying out the activity contemplated by the Federal award.
              (3) The term does not include:
              (i) A cooperative research and development agreement as defined in 15 U.S.C. 3710a; or
              (ii) An agreement that provides only:
              (A) Direct United States Government cash assistance to an individual;
              (B) A subsidy;
              (C) A loan;
              (D) A loan guarantee; or
              (E) Insurance
              
                Cooperative audit resolution means the use of audit follow-up techniques which promote prompt corrective action by improving communication, fostering collaboration, promoting trust, and developing an understanding between the Federal agency and the non-Federal entity. This approach is based upon:
              (1) A strong commitment by Federal agency and non-Federal entity leadership to program integrity;
              (2) Federal agencies strengthening partnerships and working cooperatively with non-Federal entities and their auditors; and non-Federal entities and their auditors working cooperatively with Federal agencies;
              (3) A focus on current conditions and corrective action going forward;
              (4) Federal agencies offering appropriate relief for past noncompliance when audits show prompt corrective action has occurred; and
              (5) Federal agency leadership sending a clear message that continued failure to correct conditions identified by audits which are likely to cause improper payments, fraud, waste, or abuse is unacceptable and will result in sanctions.
              
                Corrective action means action taken by the auditee that:
              (1) Corrects identified deficiencies;
              (2) Produces recommended improvements; or

              (3) Demonstrates that audit findings are either invalid or do not warrant auditee action.
              
              
                Cost allocation plan means central service cost allocation plan or public assistance cost allocation plan.
              
                Cost objective means a program, function, activity, award, organizational subdivision, contract, or work unit for which cost data are desired and for which provision is made to accumulate and measure the cost of processes, products, jobs, capital projects, etc. A cost objective may be a major function of the non-Federal entity, a particular service or project, a Federal award, or an indirect (Facilities & Administrative (F&A)) cost activity, as described in subpart E of this part. See also Final cost objective and Intermediate cost objective.
              
              
                Cost sharing or matching means the portion of project costs not paid by Federal funds (unless otherwise authorized by Federal statute). This may include the value of allowable third party in-kind contributions, as well as expenditures by the recipient. See also § 75.306.
              
                Cross-cutting audit finding means an audit finding where the same underlying condition or issue affects Federal awards of more than one Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity.
              
                Departmental Appeals Board means the independent office established in the Office of the Secretary with delegated authority from the Secretary to review and decide certain disputes between recipients of HHS funds and HHS awarding agencies under 45 CFR part 16 and to perform other review, adjudication and mediation services as assigned.
              
                Disallowed costs means those charges to a Federal award that the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity determines to be unallowable, in accordance with the applicable Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
              
                Equipment means tangible personal property (including information technology systems) having a useful life of more than one year and a per-unit acquisition cost which equals or exceeds the lesser of the capitalization level established by the non-Federal entity for financial statement purposes, or $5,000. See also Capital assets, Computing devices, General purpose equipment, Information technology systems, Special purpose equipment, and Supplies.
              
              
                Excess property means property acquired in whole or in part under the control of any Federal awarding agency that, as determined by the head of the awarding agency or his/her delegate, is no longer required for the agency's needs or the discharge of its responsibilities.
              
                Expenditure report means:
              (1) For non-construction awards, the SF-425 Federal Financial Report (FFR) (or other OMB-approved equivalent report);
              (2) For construction awards, the SF-271 “Outlay Report and Request for Reimbursement” (or other OMB-approved equivalent report).
              
                Expenditures means charges made by a non-Federal entity to a project or program for which a Federal award was received.
              (1) The charges may be reported on a cash or accrual basis, as long as the methodology is disclosed and is consistently applied.
              (2) For reports prepared on a cash basis, expenditures are the sum of:
              (i) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;
              (ii) The amount of indirect expense charged;
              (iii) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and
              (iv) The amount of cash advance payments and payments made to subrecipients.
              (3) For reports prepared on an accrual basis, expenditures are the sum of:
              (i) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;
              (ii) The amount of indirect expense incurred;
              (iii) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and
              (iv) The net increase or decrease in the amounts owed by the non-Federal entity for:
              (A) Goods and other property received;
              (B) Services performed by employees, contractors, subrecipients, and other payees;

              (C) Programs for which no current services or performance are required such as annuities, insurance claims, or other benefit payments.
              
              
                Federal agency means an “agency” as defined at 5 U.S.C. 551(1) and further clarified by 5 U.S.C. 552(f).
              
                Federal Audit Clearinghouse (FAC) means the clearinghouse designated by OMB as the repository of record where non-Federal entities are required to transmit the reporting packages required by subpart F of this part. The mailing address of the FAC is Federal Audit Clearinghouse, Bureau of the Census, 1201 E. 10th Street, Jeffersonville, IN 47132 and the web address is: http://harvester.census.gov/sac/. Any future updates to the location of the FAC may be found at the OMB Web site.
              
                Federal award has the meaning, depending on the context, in either paragraph (1) or (2) of this definition:
              (1)(i) The Federal financial assistance that a non-Federal entity receives directly from a Federal awarding agency or indirectly from a pass-through entity, as described in § 75.101; or
              (ii) The cost-reimbursement contract under the Federal Acquisition Regulations that a non-Federal entity receives directly from a Federal awarding agency or indirectly from a pass-through entity, as described in § 75.101.

              (2) The instrument setting forth the terms and conditions. The instrument is the grant agreement, cooperative agreement, other agreement for assistance covered in paragraph (2) of Federal financial assistance, or the cost-reimbursement contract awarded under the Federal Acquisition Regulations.
              (3) Federal award does not include other contracts that a Federal agency uses to buy goods or services from a contractor or a contract to operate Federal Government owned, contractor operated facilities (GOCOs).
              (4) See also definitions of Federal financial assistance, grant agreement, and cooperative agreement.
              
              
                Federal award date means the date when the Federal award is signed by the authorized official of the Federal awarding agency.
              
                Federal awarding agency means the Federal agency that provides a Federal award directly to a non-Federal entity.
              
                Federal financial assistance means:
              (1) Assistance that non-Federal entities receive or administer in the form of:
              (i) Grants;
              (ii) Cooperative agreements;
              (iii) Non-cash contributions or donations of property (including donated surplus property);
              (iv) Direct appropriations;
              (v) Food commodities; and
              (vi) Other financial assistance (except assistance listed in paragraph (b) of this section).
              (2) For § 75.202 and subpart F of this part, Federal financial assistance also includes assistance that non-Federal entities receive or administer in the form of:
              (i) Loans;
              (ii) Loan Guarantees;
              (iii) Interest subsidies; and
              (iv) Insurance.
              (3) Federal financial assistance does not include amounts received as reimbursement for services rendered to individuals as described in § 75.502(h) and (i).
              
                Federal interest means, for purposes of § 75.343 or when used in connection with the acquisition or improvement of real property, equipment, or supplies under a Federal award, the dollar amount that is the product of the:
              (1) Federal share of total project costs; and
              (2) Current fair market value of the property, improvements, or both, to the extent the costs of acquiring or improving the property were included as project costs.
              
                Federal program means:
              (1) All Federal awards which are assigned a single number in the CFDA.
              (2) When no CFDA number is assigned, all Federal awards to non-Federal entities from the same agency made for the same purpose must be combined and considered one program.
              (3) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2) of this definition, a cluster of programs. The types of clusters of programs are:
              (i) Research and development (R&D);
              (ii) Student financial aid (SFA); and
              (iii) “Other clusters,” as described in the definition of Cluster of Programs
              
                Federal share means the portion of total project costs that are paid by Federal funds.
              
                Final cost objective means a cost objective which has allocated to it both direct and indirect costs and, in the non-Federal entity's accumulation system, is one of the final accumulation points, such as a particular award, internal project, or other direct activity of a non-Federal entity. See also Cost objective and Intermediate cost objective.
              
              
                Fixed amount awards means a type of grant agreement under which the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity provides a specific level of support without regard to actual costs incurred under the Federal award. This type of Federal award reduces some of the administrative burden and record-keeping requirements for both the non-Federal entity and Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity. Accountability is based primarily on performance and results. See §§ 75.201(b) and 75.353.
              
                Foreign organization means an entity that is:
              (1) A public or private organization located in a country other than the United States and its territories that is subject to the laws of the country in which it is located, irrespective of the citizenship of project staff or place of performance;
              (2) A private nongovernmental organization located in a country other than the United States that solicits and receives cash contributions from the general public;
              (3) A charitable organization located in a country other than the United States that is nonprofit and tax exempt under the laws of its country of domicile and operation, and is not a university, college, accredited degree-granting institution of education, private foundation, hospital, organization engaged exclusively in research or scientific activities, church, synagogue, mosque or other similar entities organized primarily for religious purposes; or

              (4) An organization located in a country other than the United States not recognized as a Foreign Public Entity.
              
              
                Foreign public entity means:
              (1) A foreign government or foreign governmental entity;
              (2) A public international organization, which is an organization entitled to enjoy privileges, exemptions, and immunities as an international organization under the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288-288f);
              (3) An entity owned (in whole or in part) or controlled by a foreign government; or
              (4) Any other entity consisting wholly or partially of one or more foreign governments or foreign governmental entities.
              
                General purpose equipment means equipment which is not limited to research, medical, scientific or other technical activities. Examples include office equipment and furnishings, modular offices, telephone networks, information technology equipment and systems, air conditioning equipment, reproduction and printing equipment, and motor vehicles. See also Equipment and Special Purpose Equipment.
              
              
                Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) has the meaning specified in accounting standards issued by the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB).
              
                Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS), also known as the Yellow Book, means generally accepted government auditing standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, which are applicable to financial audits.
              
                Grant agreement means a legal instrument of financial assistance between a Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity and a non-Federal entity that, consistent with 31 U.S.C. 6302, 6304:
              (1) Is used to enter into a relationship the principal purpose of which is to transfer anything of value from the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity to the non-Federal entity to carry out a public purpose authorized by a law of the United States (see 31 U.S.C. 6101(3)); and not to acquire property or services for the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity's direct benefit or use;
              (2) Is distinguished from a cooperative agreement in that it does not provide for substantial involvement between the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity and the non-Federal entity in carrying out the activity contemplated by the Federal award.

              (3) Does not include an agreement that provides only:
              
              (i) Direct United States Government cash assistance to an individual;
              (ii) A subsidy;
              (iii) A loan;
              (iv) A loan guarantee; or
              (v) Insurance.
              
                Grantee (see Recipient)
              
                HHS awarding agency means any organization component of HHS that is authorized to make and administer awards.
              
                Hospital means a facility licensed as a hospital under the law of any state or a facility operated as a hospital by the United States, a state, or a subdivision of a state.
              
                Improper payment:
              
              (1) Means any payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount (including overpayments and underpayments) under statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements; and
              (2) Includes any payment to an ineligible party, any payment for an ineligible good or service, any duplicate payment, any payment for a good or service not received (except for such payments where authorized by law), any payment that does not account for credit for applicable discounts, and any payment where insufficient or lack of documentation prevents a reviewer from discerning whether a payment was proper.
              
                Indian tribe means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. Chapter 33), which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians (25 U.S.C. 450b(e)). See annually published Bureau of Indian Affairs list of Indian Entities Recognized and Eligible to Receive Services.
              
                Indirect cost rate proposal means the documentation prepared by a non-Federal entity to substantiate its request for the establishment of an indirect cost rate as described in appendix III through appendix VII, and appendix IX of this part.
              
                Indirect (Facilities and Administration or F&A) costs means costs incurred for a common or joint purpose benefitting more than one cost objective, and not readily assignable to the cost objectives specifically benefitted, without effort disproportionate to the results achieved. To facilitate equitable distribution of indirect expenses to the cost objectives served, it may be necessary to establish a number of pools of indirect (F&A) costs. Indirect (F&A) cost pools must be distributed to benefitted cost objectives on bases that will produce an equitable result in consideration of relative benefits derived.
              
                Information technology systems means computing devices, ancillary equipment, software, firmware, and similar procedures, services (including support services), and related resources. See also Computing devices and Equipment.
              
              
                Institution of Higher Education (IHE) is defined at 20 U.S.C. 1001.
              
                Intangible property means property having no physical existence, such as trademarks, copyrights, patents and patent applications and property, such as loans, notes and other debt instruments, lease agreements, stock and other instruments of property ownership (whether the property is tangible or intangible).
              
                Intermediate cost objective means a cost objective that is used to accumulate indirect costs or service center costs that are subsequently allocated to one or more indirect cost pools or final cost objectives. See also Cost objective and Final cost objective.
              
              
                Internal control over compliance requirements for Federal awards means a process implemented by a non-Federal entity designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of the following objectives for Federal awards:
              (1) Transactions are properly recorded and accounted for, in order to:
              (i) Permit the preparation of reliable financial statements and Federal reports;
              (ii) Maintain accountability over assets; and

              (iii) Demonstrate compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award;
              
              (2) Transactions are executed in compliance with:
              (i) Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award that could have a direct and material effect on a Federal program; and
              (ii) Any other Federal statutes and regulations that are identified in the Compliance Supplement; and
              (3) Funds, property, and other assets are safeguarded against loss from unauthorized use or disposition.
              
                Internal controls means a process, implemented by a non-Federal entity, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of objectives in the following categories:
              (1) Effectiveness and efficiency of operations;
              (2) Reliability of reporting for internal and external use; and
              (3) Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
              
                Loan means a Federal loan or loan guarantee received or administered by a non-Federal entity, except as used in the definition of Program income.
              
              (1) The term “direct loan” means a disbursement of funds by the Federal Government to a non-Federal borrower under a contract that requires the repayment of such funds with or without interest. The term includes the purchase of, or participation in, a loan made by another lender and financing arrangements that defer payment for more than 90 days, including the sale of a Federal Government asset on credit terms. The term does not include the acquisition of a federally guaranteed loan in satisfaction of default claims or the price support loans of the Commodity Credit Corporation.
              (2) The term “direct loan obligation” means a binding agreement by a Federal awarding agency to make a direct loan when specified conditions are fulfilled by the borrower.
              (3) The term “loan guarantee” means any Federal Government guarantee, insurance, or other pledge with respect to the payment of all or a part of the principal or interest on any debt obligation of a non-Federal borrower to a non-Federal lender, but does not include the insurance of deposits, shares, or other withdrawable accounts in financial institutions.
              (4) The term “loan guarantee commitment” means a binding agreement by a Federal awarding agency to make a loan guarantee when specified conditions are fulfilled by the borrower, the lender, or any other party to the guarantee agreement.
              
                Local government means any unit of government within a state, including a:
              (1) County;
              (2) Borough;
              (3) Municipality;
              (4) City;
              (5) Town;
              (6) Township;
              (7) Parish;
              (8) Local public authority, including any public housing agency under the United States Housing Act of 1937;
              (9) Special district;
              (10) School district;
              (11) Intrastate district;
              (12) Council of governments, whether or not incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under state law; and
              (13) Any other agency or instrumentality of a multi-, regional, or intra-state or local government.
              
                Major program means a Federal program determined by the auditor to be a major program in accordance with § 75.518 or a program identified as a major program by a Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity in accordance with § 75.503(e).
              
                Management decision means the evaluation by the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity of the audit findings and corrective action plan and the issuance of a written decision to the auditee as to what corrective action is necessary.
              
                Micro-purchase means a purchase of supplies or services using simplified acquisition procedures, the aggregate amount of which does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold. Micro-purchase procedures comprise a subset of a non-Federal entity's small purchase procedures. The non-Federal entity uses such procedures in order to expedite the completion of its lowest-dollar small purchase transactions and minimize the associated administrative burden and cost. The micro-purchase threshold is set by the Federal Acquisition Regulation at 48 CFR Subpart 2.1 (Definitions). It is $3,000 except as otherwise discussed in subpart 2.1 of that regulation, but this threshold is periodically adjusted for inflation.
              
                Modified Total Direct Cost (MTDC) means all direct salaries and wages, applicable fringe benefits, materials and supplies, services, travel, and up to the first $25,000 of each subaward (regardless of the period of performance of the subawards under the award). MTDC excludes equipment, capital expenditures, charges for patient care, rental costs, tuition remission, scholarships and fellowships, participant support costs and the portion of each subaward in excess of $25,000. Other items may only be excluded when necessary to avoid a serious inequity in the distribution of indirect costs, and with the approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              
                Non-Federal entity means a state, local government, Indian tribe, institution of higher education (IHE), or nonprofit organization that carries out a Federal award as a recipient or subrecipient.
              
                Nonprofit organization means any corporation, trust, association, cooperative, or other organization, not including IHEs, that:
              (1) Is operated primarily for scientific, educational, service, charitable, or similar purposes in the public interest;
              (2) Is not organized primarily for profit; and
              (3) Uses net proceeds to maintain, improve, or expand the operations of the organization.
              
                Obligations, when used in connection with a non-Federal entity's utilization of funds under a Federal award, obligations means orders placed for property and services, contracts and subawards made, and similar transactions during a given period that require payment by the non-Federal entity during the same or a future period.
              
                Office of Management and Budget (OMB) means the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.
              
                Oversight agency for audit means the Federal awarding agency that provides the predominant amount of funding directly to a non-Federal entity not assigned a cognizant agency for audit. When there is no direct funding, the Federal awarding agency which is the predominant source of pass-through funding must assume the oversight responsibilities. The duties of the oversight agency for audit and the process for any reassignments are described in § 75.513(b).
              
                Participant support costs means direct costs for items such as stipends or subsistence allowances, travel allowances, and registration fees paid to or on behalf of participants or trainees (but not employees) in connection with conferences, or training projects.
              
                Pass-through entity means a non-Federal entity that provides a subaward to a subrecipient to carry out part of a Federal program.
              
                Performance goal means a target level of performance expressed as a tangible, measurable objective, against which actual achievement can be compared, including a goal expressed as a quantitative standard, value, or rate. In some instances (e.g., discretionary research awards), this may be limited to the requirement to submit technical performance reports (to be evaluated in accordance with agency policy).
              
                Period of performance means the time during which the non-Federal entity may incur new obligations to carry out the work authorized under the Federal award. The Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity must include start and end dates of the period of performance in the Federal award (see §§ 75.210(a)(5) and 75.352(a)(1)(v)).
              
                Personal property means property of any kind except real property. It may be tangible, having physical existence, or intangible, such as copyrights, patents, or securities.
              
                Personally Identifiable Information (PII) means information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual's identity, either alone or when combined with other personal or identifying information that is linked or linkable to a specific individual. Some information that is considered to be PII is available in public sources such as telephone books, public Web sites, and university listings. This type of information is considered to be Public PII and includes, for example, first and last name, address, work telephone number, email address, home telephone number, and general educational credentials. The definition of PII is not anchored to any single category of information or technology. Rather, it requires a case-by-case assessment of the specific risk that an individual can be identified. Non-PII can become PII whenever additional information is made publicly available, in any medium and from any source, that, when combined with other available information, could be used to identify an individual.
              
                Principal Investigator/Program Director (PI/PD) means the individual (s) designated by the recipient to direct the project or program being supported by the grant. The PI/PD is responsible and accountable to officials of the recipient organization for the proper conduct of the project, program, or activity.
              
                Prior approval means written approval by an authorized HHS official evidencing prior consent before a recipient undertakes certain activities or incurs specific costs.
              
                Program income means gross income earned by the non-Federal entity that is directly generated by a supported activity or earned as a result of the Federal award during the period of performance except as provided in § 75.307(f). (See Period of performance.) Program income includes but is not limited to income from fees for services performed, the use or rental or real or personal property acquired under Federal awards, the sale of commodities or items fabricated under a Federal award, license fees and royalties on patents and copyrights, and principal and interest on loans made with Federal award funds. Interest earned on advances of Federal funds is not program income. Except as otherwise provided in Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award, program income does not include rebates, credits, discounts, and interest earned on any of them. See also §§ 75.307, 75.407 and 35 U.S.C. 200-212 (applies to inventions made under Federal awards).
              
                Project costs means total allowable costs incurred under a Federal award and all required cost sharing and voluntary committed cost sharing, including third-party contributions.
              
                Project period (see Period of performance).
              
                Property means real property or personal property.
              
                Protected Personally Identifiable Information (Protected PII) Protected PII means an individual's first name or first initial and last name in combination with any one or more of types of information, including, but not limited to, social security number, passport number, credit card numbers, clearances, bank numbers, biometrics, date and place of birth, mother's maiden name, criminal, medical and financial records, educational transcripts. This does not include PII that is required by law to be disclosed. (See also Personally Identifiable Information (PII)).
              
                Questioned cost means a cost that is questioned by the auditor because of an audit finding:
              (1) Which resulted from a violation or possible violation of a statute, regulation, or the terms and conditions of a Federal award, including for funds used to match Federal funds;
              (2) Where the costs, at the time of the audit, are not supported by adequate documentation; or
              (3) Where the costs incurred appear unreasonable and do not reflect the actions a prudent person would take in the circumstances.
              
                Real property means land, including land improvements, structures and appurtenances thereto, but excludes moveable machinery and equipment.
              
                Recipient means an entity, usually but not limited to non-Federal entities, that receives a Federal award directly from a Federal awarding agency to carry out an activity under a Federal program. The term recipient does not include subrecipients. See also Non-Federal entity.
              
              
                Research is defined as a systematic study directed toward fuller scientific knowledge or understanding of the subject studied. “Development” is the systematic use of knowledge and understanding gained from research directed toward the production of useful materials, devices, systems, or methods, including design and development of prototypes and processes.
              
                Research and Development (R&D) means all research activities, both basic and applied, and all development activities that are performed by HHS award recipients. The term research also includes activities involving the training of individuals in research techniques where such activities utilize the same facilities as other research and development activities and where such activities are not included in the instruction function.
              
                Simplified acquisition threshold means the dollar amount below which a non-Federal entity may purchase property or services using small purchase methods. Non-Federal entities adopt small purchase procedures in order to expedite the purchase of items costing less than the simplified acquisition threshold. The simplified acquisition threshold is set by the Federal Acquisition Regulation at 48 CFR subpart 2.1 and in accordance with 41 U.S.C. 1908. As of the publication of this part, the simplified acquisition threshold is $150,000, but this threshold is periodically adjusted for inflation. See also Micro-purchase.
              
                Special purpose equipment means equipment which is used only for research, medical, scientific, or other technical activities. Examples of special purpose equipment include microscopes, x-ray machines, surgical instruments, and spectrometers. See also Equipment and General purpose equipment.
              
              
                State means any state of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any agency or instrumentality thereof exclusive of local governments.
              
                Student Financial Aid (SFA) means Federal awards under those programs of general student assistance, such as those authorized by Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, (20 U.S.C. 1070-1099d), which are administered by the U.S. Department of Education, and similar programs provided by other Federal agencies. It does not include Federal awards under programs that provide fellowships or similar Federal awards to students on a competitive basis, or for specified studies or research.
              
                Subaward means an award provided by a pass-through entity to a subrecipient for the subrecipient to carry out part of a Federal award received by the pass-through entity. It does not include payments to a contractor or payments to an individual that is a beneficiary of a Federal program. A subaward may be provided through any form of legal agreement, including an agreement that the pass-through entity considers a contract.
              
                Subrecipient means a non-Federal entity that receives a subaward from a pass-through entity to carry out part of a Federal program; but does not include an individual that is a beneficiary of such program. A subrecipient may also be a recipient of other Federal awards directly from a Federal awarding agency.
              
                Supplies means all tangible personal property other than those described in Equipment. A computing device is a supply if the acquisition cost is less than the lesser of the capitalization level established by the non-Federal entity for financial statement purposes or $5,000, regardless of the length of its useful life. See also Computing devices and Equipment.
              
              
                Surplus property (see Excess property)
              
                Suspension of award activities means an action by the HHS awarding agency requiring the recipient to cease all activities on the award pending corrective action by the recipient. It is a separate action from suspension under HHS regulations (2 CFR part 376) implementing Executive Orders 12549 and 12689.
              
                Termination means the ending of a Federal award, in whole or in part at any time prior to the planned end of period of performance.
              
                Third-party in-kind contributions means the value of non-cash contributions (i.e., property or services) that:
              (1) Benefit a federally assisted project or program; and
              (2) Are contributed by non-Federal third parties, without charge, to a non-Federal entity under a Federal award.
              
                Total Costs (see § 75.402).
              
                Unliquidated obligations means, for financial reports prepared on a cash basis, obligations incurred by the non-Federal entity that have not been paid (liquidated). For reports prepared on an accrual expenditure basis, these are obligations incurred by the non-Federal entity for which an expenditure has not been recorded.
              
              
                Unobligated balance means the amount of funds authorized under a Federal award that the non-Federal entity has not obligated. The amount is computed by subtracting the cumulative amount of the non-Federal entity's unliquidated obligations and expenditures of funds under the Federal award from the cumulative amount of the funds that the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity authorized the non-Federal entity to obligate.
              
                Voluntary committed cost sharing means cost sharing specifically pledged on a voluntary basis in the proposal's budget or the Federal award on the part of the non-Federal entity and that becomes a binding requirement of Federal award.
              
                Working capital advance means a procedure whereby funds are advanced to the recipient to cover its estimated disbursement needs for a given initial period.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3012, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 19044, Apr. 4, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—General Provisions
            
              § 75.100
              Purpose.
              (a)(1) This part establishes uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audit requirements for Federal awards to non-Federal entities, as described in § 75.101. HHS awarding agencies must not impose additional or inconsistent requirements, except as provided in §§ 75.102 and 75.210, or unless specifically required by Federal statute, regulation, or Executive Order.
              (2) This part provides the basis for a systematic and periodic collection and uniform submission by Federal agencies of information on all Federal financial assistance programs to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). It also establishes Federal policies related to the delivery of this information to the public, including through the use of electronic media. It prescribes the manner in which General Services Administration (GSA), OMB, and Federal agencies that administer Federal financial assistance programs are to carry out their statutory responsibilities under the Federal Program Information Act (31 U.S.C. 6101-6106).
              (b) Administrative requirements. Subparts B through D of this part set forth the uniform administrative requirements for grant and cooperative agreements, including the requirements for HHS awarding agency management of Federal grant programs before the Federal award has been made, and the requirements HHS awarding agencies may impose on non-Federal entities in the Federal award.
              (c) Cost principles. Subpart E of this part establishes principles for determining the allowable costs incurred by non-Federal entities under Federal awards. The principles are for the purpose of cost determination and are not intended to identify the circumstances or dictate the extent of Federal Government participation in the financing of a particular program or project. The principles are designed to provide that Federal awards bear their fair share of cost recognized under these principles except where restricted or prohibited by statute.
              (d) Single audit requirements and audit follow-up. Subpart F of this part is issued pursuant to the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996, (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507). It sets forth standards for obtaining consistency and uniformity among Federal agencies for the audit of non-Federal entities expending Federal awards. These provisions also provide the policies and procedures for HHS awarding agencies and pass-through entities when using the results of these audits.
              (e) For OMB guidance to Federal awarding agencies on Challenges and Prizes, please see M-10-11 Guidance on the Use of Challenges and Prizes to Promote Open Government, issued March 8, 2010, or its successor.
            
            
              § 75.101
              Applicability.
              (a) General applicability to Federal agencies. The requirements established in this part apply to Federal agencies that make Federal awards to non-Federal entities. These requirements are applicable to all costs related to Federal awards.
              (b)(1) Applicability to different types of Federal awards. The following table describes what portions of this part apply to which types of Federal awards. The terms and conditions of Federal-awards (including this part) flow down to subawards to subrecipients unless a particular section of this part or the terms and conditions of the Federal award specifically indicate otherwise. This means that non-Federal entities must comply with requirements in this part regardless of whether the non-Federal entity is a recipient or subrecipient of a Federal award. Pass-through entities must comply with the requirements described in subpart D of this part, §§ 75.351 through 75.353, but not any requirements in this part directed towards Federal awarding agencies unless the requirements of this part or the terms and conditions of the Federal award indicate otherwise. This table must be read along with the other provisions in this section
              
                
                  The following portions of the part:
                  Are applicable to the following types of Federal awards and fixed-price contracts and subcontracts (except as noted in paragraphs (d) and (e) below):
                  Are NOT applicable to the following types of Federal awards and fixed-price contracts and subcontracts:
                
                
                  
                    This table must be read along with the other provisions in this section
                  
                
                
                  Subpart A—Acronyms and Definitions
                  —All
                
                
                  Subpart B—General Provisions, except for §§ 75.111, 75.112. and 75.113
                  —All
                
                
                  Sections 75.111, 75.112, and 75.113
                  —Grant agreements and cooperative agreements
                  —Agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies and insurance.—Procurement contracts awarded by Federal Agencies under the Federal Acquisition Regulations and subcontracts under these contracts.
                  
                
                
                  Subparts C-D, except for §§ 75.202, 75.303, 75.351-.353
                  —Grant agreements and cooperative agreements
                  —Agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies and insurance.—Procurement contracts awarded under the Federal Acquisition Regulations and cost-reimbursement and subcontracts under these contracts.
                  
                
                
                  § 75.202
                  —Grant Agreements and cooperative agreements—Agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies and insurance
                  
                  —Procurement contracts awarded under the Federal Acquisition Regulations and cost-reimbursement and subcontracts under these contracts.
                
                
                  §§ 75.303, 75.351-.353
                  —All
                
                
                  Subpart E—Cost Principles
                  —Grant agreements and cooperative agreements, except those providing food commodities—All procurement contracts under the Federal Acquisition Regulations except those that are not negotiated
                  
                  —Grant agreements and cooperative agreements providing food commodities.—Fixed amount awards.
                    —Agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies and insurance.
                    —Federal awards to hospitals (See Appendix IX).
                  
                
                
                  
                  Subpart F—Audit Requirements
                  —Grant agreements and cooperative agreements—Contracts and subcontracts, except for fixed price contract and subcontracts, awarded under the Federal Acquisition Regulation
                    —Agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies and insurance and other forms of Federal Financial Assistance as defined by the Single Audit Act Amendment of 1996
                  
                  —Fixed-price contracts and subcontracts awarded under the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
                
              
              (2) Federal award of cost-reimbursement contract under the FAR to a non-Federal entity. When a non-Federal entity is awarded a cost-reimbursement contract, only subpart D of this part §§ 75.351 through 75.353 (in addition to any FAR related requirements for subaward monitoring), subpart E of this part and subpart F of this part are incorporated by reference into the contract. However, when the Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) are applicable to the contract, they take precedence over the requirements of this part except for subpart F of this part when they are in conflict. In addition, costs that are made unallowable under 10 U.S.C. 2324(e) and 41 U.S.C. 4304(a) as described in the FAR subpart 31.2 and subpart 31.603 are always unallowable. For requirements other than those covered in subpart D of this part, §§ 75.351 through 75.353, subpart E of this part and subpart F of this part, the terms of the contract and the FAR apply.
              (3) With the exception of subpart F of this part, which is required by the Single Audit Act, in any circumstances where the provisions of Federal statutes or regulations differ from the provisions of this part, the provision of the Federal statutes or regulations govern. This includes, for agreements with Indian tribes, the provisions of the Indian Self-Determination and Education and Assistance Act (ISDEAA), as amended, 25 U.S.C. 450-458ddd-2.
              (c) HHS awarding agencies may apply subparts A through E of this part to Federal agencies (see § 75.217), for-profit entities, foreign public entities, or foreign organizations, except where the HHS awarding agency determines that the application of these subparts would be inconsistent with the international obligations of the United States or the statutes or regulations of a foreign government.
              (d) Except for § 75.202 and §§ 75.351 through 75.353 of subpart D of this part, the requirements in subpart C of this part, subpart D of this part, and subpart E of this part do not apply to the following programs:
              (1) The block grant awards authorized by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (including Community Services), except to the extent that subpart E of this part apply to subrecipients of Community Services Block Grant funds pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 9916(a)(1)(B);
              (2) Federal awards to local education agencies under 20 U.S.C. 7702-7703b, (portions of the Impact Aid program);
              (3) Payments under the Department of Veterans Affairs' State Home Per Diem Program (38 U.S.C. 1741); and

              (4) Federal awards authorized under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990, as amended:
              
              (i) Child Care and Development Block Grant (42 U.S.C. 9858)
              (ii) Child Care Mandatory and Matching Funds of the Child Care and Development Fund (42 U.S.C. 9858)
              (e) Except for § 75.202, the guidance in subpart C of this part does not apply to the following programs:
              (1) Entitlement Federal awards to carry out the following programs of the Social Security Act:
              (i) Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (title IV-A of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 601-619);
              (ii) Child Support Enforcement and Establishment of Paternity (title IV-D of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 651-669b);
              (iii) Foster Care and Adoption Assistance (title IV-E of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 670-679c);
              (iv) Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled (titles I, X, XIV, and XVI-AABD of the Act, as amended);
              (v) Medical Assistance (Medicaid) (title XIX of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1396-1396w-5) not including the State Medicaid Fraud Control program authorized by § 1903(a)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(6)(B)); and
              (vi) Children's Health Insurance Program (title XXI of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1397aa-1397mm).
              (2) A Federal award for an experimental, pilot, or demonstration project that is also supported by a Federal award listed in paragraph (e)(1) of this section;
              (3) Federal awards under subsection 412(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act and subsection 501(a) of the Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-422, 94 Stat. 1809), for cash assistance, medical assistance, and supplemental security income benefits to refugees and entrants and the administrative costs of providing the assistance and benefits (8 U.S.C. 1522(e));
              (4) Entitlement awards under the following programs of The National School Lunch Act:
              (i) National School Lunch Program (section 4 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1753),
              (ii) Commodity Assistance (section 6 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1755),
              (iii) Special Meal Assistance (section 11 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1759a),
              (iv) Summer Food Service Program for Children (section 13 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1761), and
              (v) Child and Adult Care Food Program (section 17 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1766).
              (5) Entitlement awards under the following programs of The Child Nutrition Act of 1966:
              (i) Special Milk Program (section 3 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1772),
              (ii) School Breakfast Program (section 4 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1773), and
              (iii) State Administrative Expenses (section 7 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1776).
              (6) Entitlement awards for State Administrative Expenses under The Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (section 16 of the Act, 7 U.S.C. 2025).
              (7) Non-discretionary Federal awards under the following non-entitlement programs:
              (i) Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966) 42 U.S.C. 1786;
              (ii) The Emergency Food Assistance Programs (Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983) 7 U.S.C. 7501 note; and
              (iii) Commodity Supplemental Food Program (section 5 of the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of 1973) 7 U.S.C. 612c note.
              (f) Section 75.300(c) does not apply to the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program (title IV-A of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 601-619).
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3013, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 89395, Dec. 12, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.102
              Exceptions.

              (a) With the exception of subpart F of this part, OMB may allow exceptions for classes of Federal awards or non-Federal entities subject to the requirements of this part when exceptions are not prohibited by statute. However, in the interest of maximum uniformity, exceptions from the requirements of this part will be permitted only in unusual circumstances. Exceptions for classes of Federal awards or non-Federal entities will be published on the OMB Web site at www.whitehouse.gov/omb.

              (b) Exceptions on a case-by-case basis for individual non-Federal entities may be authorized by the HHS awarding agency or cognizant agency for indirect costs, except where otherwise required by law or where OMB or other approval is expressly required by this part.
              (c) The HHS awarding agency may apply more restrictive requirements to a class of Federal awards or non-Federal entities when approved by OMB, or when required by Federal statutes or regulations, except for the requirements in subpart F of this part. An HHS awarding agency may apply less restrictive requirements when making fixed amount awards as defined in subpart A of this part, except for those requirements imposed by statute or in subpart F of this part.
              (d) On a case-by-case basis, OMB will approve new strategies for Federal awards when proposed by the HHS awarding agency in accordance with OMB guidance (such as M-13-17) to develop additional evidence relevant to addressing important policy challenges or to promote cost-effectiveness in and across Federal programs. Proposals may draw on the innovative program designs discussed in M-13-17 to expand or improve the use of effective practices in delivering Federal financial assistance while also encouraging innovation in service delivery. Proposals submitted to OMB in accordance with M-13-17 may include requests to waive requirements other than those in subpart F of this part.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3014, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.103
              Authorities.
              This part is issued under the following authorities.
              (a) Subpart B of this part through subpart D of this part are authorized under 31 U.S.C. 503 (the Chief Financial Officers Act, Functions of the Deputy Director for Management), 31 U.S.C. 1111 (Improving Economy and Efficiency of the United States Government), 41 U.S.C. 1101-1131 (the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act), Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1970, and Executive Order 11541 Prescribing the Duties of the Office of Management and Budget and the Domestic Policy Council in the Executive Office of the President, the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996, (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507), as well as The Federal Program Information Act (Public Law 95-220 and Public Law 98-169, as amended, codified at 31 U.S.C. 6101-6106).
              (b) Subpart E of this part is authorized under the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921, as amended; the Budget and Accounting Procedures Act of 1950, as amended (31 U.S.C. 1101-1125); the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (31 U.S.C. 503-504); Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1970; and Executive Order No. 11541 Prescribing the Duties of the Office of Management and Budget and the Domestic Policy Council in the Executive Office of the President.
              (c) Subpart F of this part is authorized under the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996, (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507).
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3014, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.104
              Supersession.
              As described in § 75.110, this part supersedes:
              (a) The following OMB guidance documents and regulations under Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations:
              (1) A-21, “Cost Principles for Educational Institutions” (2 CFR part 220);

              (2) A-87, “Cost Principles for State, Local and Indian Tribal Governments” (2 CFR part 225) and also Federal Register notice 51 FR 552 (January 6, 1986);
              (3) A-89, “Federal Domestic Assistance Program Information”;
              (4) A-102, “Grant Awards and Cooperative Agreements with State and Local Governments”;
              (5) A-110, “Uniform Administrative Requirements for Awards and Other Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Nonprofit Organizations” (codified at 2 CFR 215);
              (6) A-122, “Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations” (2 CFR part 230);
              (7) A-133, “Audits of States, Local Governments and Non-Profit Organizations”, and
              (8) Those sections of A-50 related to audits performed under subpart F of this part.
              (b) This part also supersedes HHS' regulations at 45 CFR parts 74 and 92.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3014, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              
              § 75.105
              Effect on other issuances.
              For Federal awards subject to this part, all administrative requirements, program manuals, handbooks and other non-regulatory materials that are inconsistent with the requirements of this part are superseded upon implementation of this part by the HHS awarding agency, except to the extent they are required by statute or authorized in accordance with the provisions in § 75.102.
            
            
              § 75.106
              Agency implementation.
              HHS is implementing the language in 2 CFR part 200 in these codified regulations.
            
            
              § 75.107
              OMB responsibilities.
              OMB will review HHS agency regulations and implementation of 2 CFR part 200, and will provide interpretations of policy requirements and assistance to ensure effective and efficient implementation. Any exceptions will be subject to approval by OMB. Exceptions will only be made in particular cases where adequate justification is presented.
            
            
              § 75.108
              Inquiries.
              Inquiries concerning 2 CFR part 200 may be directed to the Office of Federal Financial Management, Office of Management and Budget, in Washington, DC. Inquiries concerning 45 CFR part 75 should be addressed to the HHS awarding agency, cognizant agency for indirect costs, cognizant or oversight agency for audit, or pass-through entity as appropriate.
            
            
              § 75.109
              Review date.
              OMB will review 2 CFR part 200 and HHS will review 45 part 75 at least every five years after December 26, 2013.
            
            
              § 75.110
              Effective/Applicability date.
              (a) The standards set forth in this part which affect administration of Federal awards issued by HHS agencies become effective December 26, 2014 unless different provisions are required by statute or approved by OMB. For the procurement standards in 45 CFR 75.326 through 75.335, non-Federal entities may continue to comply with the procurement standards in previous OMB guidance (superseded by this part as described in 45 CFR 75.104) for two additional fiscal years after this part goes into effect. If a non-Federal entity chooses to use the previous procurement standards for an additional two fiscal years before adopting the procurement standards in this part, the non-Federal entity must document this decision in their internal procurement policies.
              (b) The standards set forth in subpart F of this part and any other standards which apply directly to HHS agencies will be effective December 26, 2013, and will apply to audits of fiscal years beginning on or after December 26, 2014.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3014, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 89395, Dec. 12, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.111
              English language.
              (a) All Federal financial assistance announcements and Federal award information must be in the English language. Applications must be submitted in the English language and must be in the terms of U.S. dollars. If the HHS awarding agency receives applications in another currency, the HHS awarding agency will evaluate the application by converting the foreign currency to United States currency using the date specified for receipt of the application.
              (b) Non-Federal entities may translate the Federal award and other documents into another language. In the event of inconsistency between any terms and conditions of the Federal award and any translation into another language, the English language meaning will control. Where a significant portion of the non-Federal entity's employees who are working on the Federal award are not fluent in English, the non-Federal entity must provide the Federal award in English and the language(s) with which employees are more familiar.
            
            
              § 75.112
              Conflict of interest.

              (a) HHS awarding agencies must establish conflict of interest policies for Federal awards. The non-Federal entity must disclose in writing any potential conflict of interest to the respective HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity in accordance with applicable HHS awarding agency's policy. As a general matter, HHS awarding agencies' conflict of interest policies must:
              (1) Address conditions under which outside activities, relationships, or financial interests are proper or improper;
              (2) Provide for advance notification of outside activities, relationships, or financial interests, and a process of review as appropriate; and
              (3) Outline how financial conflicts of interest may be addressed.
              (b) Agencies with Public Health Service (PHS) funded research will ensure that any conflict of interest policies are aligned with the requirements of 42 CFR part 50, subpart F.
            
            
              § 75.113
              Mandatory disclosures.
              The non-Federal entity or applicant for a Federal award must disclose, in a timely manner, in writing to the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity all violations of Federal criminal law involving fraud, bribery, or gratuity violations potentially affecting the Federal award. Non-Federal entities that have received a Federal award including the term and condition outlined in Appendix XII are required to report certain civil, criminal, or administrative proceedings to SAM. Failure to make required disclosures can result in any of the remedies described in § 75.371, including suspension or debarment. (See also 2 CFR parts 180 and 376, and 31 U.S.C. 3321).
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3014, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
            
              § 75.200
              Purpose.
              (a) Sections 75.201 through 75.208 prescribe instructions and other pre-award matters to be used in the announcement and application process.
              (b) Use of §§ 75.203, 75.204, 75.205, and 75.207, is required only for competitive Federal awards, but may also be used by the HHS awarding agency for non-competitive awards where appropriate or where required by Federal statute.
            
            
              § 75.201
              Use of grant agreements (including fixed amount awards), cooperative agreements, and contracts.

              (a) The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must decide on the appropriate instrument for the Federal award (i.e., grant agreement, cooperative agreement, or contract) in accordance with the Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act (31 U.S.C. 6301-08).

              (b) Fixed Amount Awards. In addition to the options described in paragraph (a) of this section, HHS awarding agencies, or pass-through entities as permitted in § 75.353, may use fixed amount awards (see § 75.2 Fixed amount awards) to which the following conditions apply:
              (1) The Federal award amount is negotiated using the cost principles (or other pricing information) as a guide. The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may use fixed amount awards if the project scope is specific and if adequate cost, historical, or unit pricing data is available to establish a fixed amount award based on a reasonable estimate of actual cost. Payments are based on meeting specific requirements of the Federal award. Accountability is based on performance and results. Except in the case of termination before completion of the Federal award, there is no governmental review of the actual costs incurred by the non-Federal entity in performance of the award. Some of the ways in which the Federal award may be paid include, but are not limited to:
              (i) In several partial payments, the amount of each agreed upon in advance, and the “milestone” or event triggering the payment also agreed upon in advance, and set forth in the Federal award;
              (ii) On a unit price basis, for a defined unit or units, at a defined price or prices, agreed to in advance of performance of the Federal award and set forth in the Federal award; or,
              (iii) In one payment at Federal award completion.
              (2) A fixed amount award cannot be used in programs which require mandatory cost sharing or match.

              (3) The non-Federal entity must certify in writing to the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity at the end of the Federal award that the project or activity was completed or the level of effort was expended. If the required level of activity or effort was not carried out, the amount of the Federal award must be adjusted.
              (4) Periodic reports may be established for each Federal award.
              (5) Changes in principal investigator, project leader, project partner, or scope of effort must receive the prior written approval of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity.
            
            
              § 75.202
              Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial assistance programs.
              (a) The HHS awarding agency must notify the public of Federal programs in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA), maintained by the General Services Administration (GSA).
              (1) The CFDA, or any OMB-designated replacement, is the single, authoritative, government-wide comprehensive source of Federal financial assistance program information produced by the executive branch of the Federal Government.
              (2) The information that the HHS awarding agency must submit to GSA for approval by OMB is listed in paragraph (b) of this section. GSA must prescribe the format for the submission.
              (3) The HHS awarding agency may not award Federal financial assistance without assigning it to a program that has been included in the CFDA as required in this section unless there are exigent circumstances requiring otherwise, such as timing requirements imposed by statute.
              (b) For each program that awards discretionary Federal awards, non-discretionary Federal awards, loans, insurance, or any other type of Federal financial assistance, the HHS awarding agency must submit the following information to GSA:
              (1) Program Description, Purpose, Goals and Measurement. A brief summary of the statutory or regulatory requirements of the program and its intended outcome. Where appropriate, the Program Description, Purpose, Goals, and Measurement should align with the strategic goals and objectives within the HHS awarding agency's performance plan and should support the HHS awarding agency's performance measurement, management, and reporting as required by Part 6 of OMB Circular A-11;
              (2) Identification of whether the program makes Federal awards on a discretionary basis or the Federal awards are prescribed by Federal statute, such as in the case of formula grants.
              (3) Projected total amount of funds available for the program. Estimates based on previous year funding are acceptable if current appropriations are not available at the time of the submission;

              (4) Anticipated Source of Available Funds: The statutory authority for funding the program and, to the extent possible, agency, sub-agency, or, if known, the specific program unit that will issue the Federal awards, and associated funding identifier (e.g., Treasury Account Symbol(s));

              (5) General Eligibility Requirements: The statutory, regulatory or other eligibility factors or considerations that determine the applicant's qualification for Federal awards under the program (e.g., type of non-Federal entity); and
              (6) Applicability of Single Audit Requirements as required by subpart F of this part.
            
            
              § 75.203
              Notices of funding opportunities.
              For competitive grants and cooperative agreements, the HHS awarding agency must announce specific funding opportunities by providing the following information in a public notice:
              (a) Summary Information in Notices of Funding Opportunities. The HHS awarding agency must display the following information posted on the OMB-designated government-wide Web site for finding and applying for Federal financial assistance, in a location preceding the full text of the announcement:
              (1) HHS Awarding Agency Name;
              (2) Funding Opportunity Title;

              (3) Announcement Type (whether the funding opportunity is the initial announcement of this funding opportunity or a modification of a previously announced opportunity);
              
              (4) Funding Opportunity Number (required, if applicable). If the HHS awarding agency has assigned or will assign a number to the funding opportunity announcement, this number must be provided;
              (5) Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number(s);
              (6) Key Dates. Key dates include due dates for applications or Executive Order 12372 submissions, as well as for any letters of intent or pre-applications. For any announcement issued before a program's application materials are available, key dates also include the date on which those materials will be released; and any other additional information, as deemed applicable by the relevant HHS awarding agency.
              (b) The HHS awarding agency must generally make all funding opportunities available for application for at least 60 calendar days. The HHS awarding agency may make a determination to have a less than 60 calendar day availability period but no funding opportunity should be available for less than 30 calendar days unless exigent circumstances require as determined by the HHS awarding agency head or delegate.
              (c) Full Text of Funding Opportunities. The HHS awarding agency must include the following information in the full text of each funding opportunity. For specific instructions on the content required in this section, refer to appendix I of this part.
              (1) Full programmatic description of the funding opportunity.
              (2) Federal award information, including sufficient information to help an applicant make an informed decision about whether to submit an application. (See also § 75.414(c)(4)).
              (3) Specific eligibility information, including any factors or priorities that affect an applicant's or its application's eligibility for selection.
              (4) Application Preparation and Submission Information, including the applicable submission dates and time.
              (5) Application Review Information including the criteria and process to be used to evaluate applications. See also §§ 75.204 and 75.205. 
              (6) Federal Award Administration Information. See also § 75.210.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3014, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.204
              HHS funding agency review of merit of proposals.
              For competitive grants or cooperative agreements, unless prohibited by Federal statute, the HHS awarding agency must design and execute a merit review process for applications. This process must be described or incorporated by reference in the applicable funding opportunity (see appendix I to this part.) See also § 75.203.
            
            
              § 75.205
              HHS awarding agency review of risk posed by applicants.
              (a) Review of OMB-designated repositories of governmentwide data. (1) Prior to making a Federal award, the HHS awarding agency is required by 31 U.S.C. 3321 and 41 U.S.C. 2313 note to review information available through any OMB-designated repositories of governmentwide eligibility qualification or financial integrity information as appropriate. See also suspension and debarment requirements at 2 CFR parts 180 and 376.

              (2) In accordance 41 U.S.C. 2313, the HHS awarding agency is required to review the non-public segment of the OMB-designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM (currently the Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System (FAPIIS)) prior to making a Federal award where the Federal share is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold, defined in 41 U.S.C. 134, over the period of performance. At a minimum, the information in the system for a prior Federal award recipient must demonstrate a satisfactory record of executing programs or activities under Federal grants, cooperative agreements, or procurement awards; and integrity and business ethics. The HHS awarding agency may make a Federal award to a recipient who does not fully meet these standards, if it is determined that the information is not relevant to the current Federal award under consideration or there are specific conditions that can appropriately mitigate the effects of the non-Federal entity's risk in accordance with § 75.207.
              (b) In addition, for competitive grants or cooperative agreements, the HHS awarding agency must have in place a framework for evaluating the risks posed by applicants before they receive Federal awards. This evaluation may incorporate results of the evaluation of the applicant's eligibility or the quality of its application. If the HHS awarding agency determines that a Federal award will be made, special conditions that correspond to the degree of risk assessed may be applied to the Federal award. Criteria to be evaluated must be described in the announcement of funding opportunity described in § 75.203.
              (c) In evaluating risks posed by applicants, the HHS awarding agency may use a risk-based approach and may consider any items such as the following:
              (1) Financial stability;
              (2) Quality of management systems and ability to meet the management standards prescribed in this part;
              (3) History of performance. The applicant's record in managing Federal awards, if it is a prior recipient of Federal awards, including timeliness of compliance with applicable reporting requirements, conformance to the terms and conditions of previous Federal awards, and if applicable, the extent to which any previously awarded amounts will be expended prior to future awards;
              (4) Reports and findings from audits performed under subpart F of this part or the reports and findings of any other available audits; and
              (5) The applicant's ability to effectively implement statutory, regulatory, or other requirements imposed on non-Federal entities.
              (d) In addition to this review, the HHS awarding agency must comply with the guidelines on government-wide suspension and debarment in 2 CFR part 180, and must require non-Federal entities to comply with these provisions. These provisions restrict Federal awards, subawards and contracts with certain parties that are debarred, suspended or otherwise excluded from or ineligible for participation in Federal programs or activities.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3014, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 19044, Apr. 4, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.206
              Standard application requirements, including forms for applying for HHS financial assistance, and state plans.
              (a) Paperwork clearances. The HHS awarding agency may only use application information collections approved by OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 and OMB's implementing regulations in 5 CFR part 1320, Controlling Paperwork Burdens on the Public. Consistent with these requirements, OMB will authorize additional information collections only on a limited basis.
              (b) If applicable, the HHS awarding agency may inform applicants and recipients that they do not need to provide certain information otherwise required by the relevant information collection.
              (c) Forms for applying for HHS financial assistance. HHS awarding agencies should use the Standard Form 424 (SF-424 Application for Federal Assistance) series (or its successor) and its program narrative whenever possible. Alternative mechanisms may be used for formula grant programs which do not require applicants to apply for funds on a project basis.
              (1) Applicants shall use the SF-424 series or those forms and instructions prescribed by the HHS awarding agency.
              (2) For Federal programs covered by Executive Order 12372, as amended by Executive Order 12416, the applicant shall complete the appropriate sections of the SF-424 indicating whether the application was subject to review by the State Single Point of Contact (SPOC). The name and address of the SPOC for a particular State can be obtained from the HHS awarding agency or the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance. The SPOC shall advise the applicant whether the program for which application is made has been selected by that State for review. (See also 45 CFR part 100.)

              (3) HHS awarding agencies that do not use the SF-424 series will indicate on the application form they prescribe whether the application is subject to review by the State under Executive Order 12372.
              (4) This section does not apply to applications for subawards.
              (5) Except where otherwise noted, or granted by HHS deviation, HHS awarding agencies shall direct applicants to apply for HHS financial assistance through Grants.gov, an OMB-designated Web site for Find and Apply.
              (d) State plans. The statutes for some programs require States to submit plans before receiving grants. Under regulations implementing Executive Order 12372, States are allowed to simplify, consolidate and substitute plans. This section contains additional provisions for plans that are subject to regulations implementing Executive Order 12372.
              (1) Requirements. A State need meet only Federal administrative or programmatic requirements for a plan that are in statutes or codified regulations.
              (2) Assurances. In each plan, the State will include an assurance that the State will comply with all applicable Federal statutes and regulations in effect with respect to the periods for which it receives grant funding. For this assurance and other assurances required in this plan, the State may:
              (i) Cite by number the statutory or regulatory provisions requiring the assurances and affirm that it gives the assurances required by those provisions,
              (ii) Repeat the assurance language in the statutes or regulations, or
              (iii) Develop its own language to the extent permitted by law.
              (3) Amendments. A State will amend a plan whenever necessary to reflect:
              (i) New or revised Federal statutes or regulations, or
              (ii) A material change in any State law, organization, policy, or State agency operation. The State will obtain approval for the amendment and its effective date but need submit for approval only the amended portions of the plan.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.207
              Specific award conditions.
              (a) The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may impose additional specific award conditions as needed in accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, under the following circumstances:
              (1) Based on the criteria set forth in § 75.205;
              (2) When an applicant or recipient has a history of failure to comply with the general or specific terms and conditions of a Federal award;
              (3) When an applicant or recipient fails to meet expected performance goals as described in § 75.210, or;
              (4) When an applicant or recipient is not otherwise responsible.
              (b) These additional Federal award conditions may include items such as the following:
              (1) Requiring payments as reimbursements rather than advance payments;
              (2) Withholding authority to proceed to the next phase until receipt of evidence of acceptable performance within a given period of performance;
              (3) Requiring additional, more detailed financial reports;
              (4) Requiring additional project monitoring;
              (5) Requiring the non-Federal entity to obtain technical or management assistance; or
              (6) Establishing additional prior approvals.
              (c) The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must notify the applicant or non-Federal entity as to:
              (1) The nature of the additional requirements;
              (2) The reason why the additional requirements are being imposed;
              (3) The nature of the action needed to remove the additional requirement, if applicable;
              (4) The time allowed for completing the actions if applicable, and
              (5) The method for requesting reconsideration of the additional requirements imposed.
              (d) Any specific conditions must be promptly removed once the conditions that prompted them have been corrected.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              
              § 75.208
              Certifications and representations.
              Unless prohibited by Federal statutes or regulations, each HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity is authorized to require the non-Federal entity to submit certifications and representations required by Federal statutes, or regulations on an annual basis. Submission may be required more frequently if the non-Federal entity fails to meet a requirement of a Federal award.
              (a) The funds governed under this part shall be administered in compliance with the standards set forth in 45 CFR part 87.
              (b) For assurances under State plans, see § 75.206(d)(2).
            
            
              § 75.209
              Pre-award costs.
              For requirements on costs incurred by the applicant prior to the start date of the period of performance of the Federal award, see § 75.458.
            
            
              § 75.210
              Information contained in a Federal award.
              A Federal award must include the following information:
              (a) General Federal award information. The HHS awarding agency must include the following general Federal award information in each Federal award:
              (1) Recipient name (which must match the name associated with its unique entity identifier as defined in 2 CFR 25.315);
              (2) Recipient's unique entity identifier;
              
              (3) Unique Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN);
              (4) Federal Award Date (see § 75.2 Federal award date);
              (5) Period of Performance Start and End Date;
              (6) Amount of Federal Funds Obligated by this action,
              (7) Total Amount of Federal Funds Obligated;
              (8) Total Amount of the Federal Award;
              (9) Budget Approved by the HHS Awarding Agency;
              (10) Total Approved Cost Sharing or Matching, where applicable;

              (11) Federal award project description (to comply with statutory requirements (e.g., FFATA));
              (12) Name of HHS awarding agency and contact information for awarding official,
              (13) CFDA Number and Program Name;
              (14) Identification of whether the award is R&D; and
              (15) Indirect cost rate for the Federal award (including if the de minimis rate is charged per § 75.414).
              (b) General terms and conditions. (1) HHS awarding agencies must incorporate the following general terms and conditions either in the Federal award or by reference, as applicable:
              (i) Administrative requirements implemented by the HHS awarding agency as specified in this part.
              (ii) National policy requirements. These include statutory, executive order, other Presidential directive, or regulatory requirements that apply by specific reference and are not program-specific. See § 75.300.
              (iii) Recipient integrity and performance matters. If the total Federal share of the Federal award may include more than $500,000 over the period of performance, the HHS awarding agency must include the term and condition available in appendix XII. See also § 75.113.
              (2) The Federal award must include wording to incorporate, by reference, the applicable set of general terms and conditions, The reference must be to the Web site at which the HHS awarding agency maintains the general terms and conditions.
              (3) If a non-Federal entity requests a copy of the full text of the general terms and conditions, the HHS awarding agency must provide it.
              (4) Wherever the general terms and conditions are publicly available, the HHS awarding agency must maintain an archive of previous versions of the general terms and conditions, with effective dates, for use by the non-Federal entity, auditors, or others.
              (c) HHS awarding agency, program, or Federal award specific terms and conditions. The HHS awarding agency may include with each Federal award any terms and conditions necessary to communicate requirements that are in addition to the requirements outlined in the HHS awarding agency's general terms and conditions. Whenever practicable, these specific terms and conditions also should be shared on a public Web site and in notices of funding opportunities (as outlined in § 75.203) in addition to being included in a Federal award. See also § 75.206.
              (d) Federal award performance goals. The HHS awarding agency must include in the Federal award an indication of the timing and scope of expected performance by the non-Federal entity as related to the outcomes intended to be achieved by the program. In some instances (e.g., discretionary research awards), this may be limited to the requirement to submit technical performance reports (to be evaluated in accordance with HHS awarding agency policy). Where appropriate, the Federal award may include specific performance goals, indicators, milestones, or expected outcomes (such as outputs, or services performed or public impacts of any of these) with an expected timeline for accomplishment. Reporting requirements must be clearly articulated such that, where appropriate, performance during the execution of the Federal award has a standard against which non-Federal entity performance can be measured. The HHS awarding agency may include program-specific requirements, as applicable. These requirements should be aligned with agency strategic goals, strategic objectives or performance goals that are relevant to the program. See also OMB Circular A-11 Preparation, Submission and Execution of the Budget, Part 6 for definitions of strategic objectives and performance goals.
              (e) Any other information required by the HHS awarding agency.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.211
              Public access to Federal award information.

              (a) In accordance with statutory requirements for Federal spending transparency (e.g., FFATA), except as noted in this section, for applicable Federal awards the HHS awarding agency must announce all Federal awards publicly and publish the required information on a publicly available OMB-designated government-wide Web site (at time of publication, www.USAspending.gov).
              (b) All information posted in the designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM (currently FAPIIS) on or after April 15, 2011 will be publicly available after a waiting period of 14 calendar days, except for:
              (1) Past performance reviews required by Federal Government contractors in accordance with the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 42.15;
              (2) Information that was entered prior to April 15, 2011; or
              (3) Information that is withdrawn during the 14-calendar day waiting period by the Federal Government official.
              (c) Nothing in this section may be construed as requiring the publication of information otherwise exempt under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552), or controlled unclassified information pursuant to Executive Order 13556.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.212
              Reporting a determination that a recipient is not qualified for a Federal award.
              (a) If an HHS awarding agency does not make a Federal award to a non-Federal entity because the official determines that the non-Federal entity does not meet either or both of the minimum qualification standards as described in § 75.205(a)(2), the HHS awarding agency must report that determination to the designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM (currently FAPIIS), only if all of the following apply:

              (1) The only basis for the determination described in paragraph (a) of this section is the non-Federal entity's prior record of executing programs or activities under Federal awards or its record of integrity and business ethics, as described in § 75.205(a)(2), (i.e., the entity was determined to be qualified based on all factors other than those two standards), and

              (2) The total Federal share of the Federal award that otherwise would be made to the non-Federal entity is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold over the period of performance.
              (b) The HHS awarding agency is not required to report a determination that a non-Federal entity is not qualified for a Federal award if it makes the Federal award to the non-Federal entity and includes specific award terms and conditions, as described in § 75.207.
              (c) If an HHS awarding agency reports a determination that a non-Federal entity is not qualified for a Federal award, as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the HHS awarding agency also must notify the non-Federal entity that—
              (1) The determination was made and reported to the designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM, and include with the notification an explanation of the basis for the determination;
              (2) The information will be kept in the system for a period of five years from the date of the determination, as required by section 872 of Public Law 110-417, as amended (41 U.S.C. 2313), then archived;
              (3) Each HHS awarding agency that considers making a Federal award to the non-Federal entity during that five year period must consider that information in judging whether the non-Federal entity is qualified to receive the Federal award when the total Federal share of the Federal award is expected to include an amount of Federal funding in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold over the period of performance;
              (4) The non-Federal entity may go to the awardee integrity and performance portal accessible through SAM (currently the Contractor Performance Assessment Reporting System (CPARS)) and comment on any information the system contains about the non-Federal entity itself; and
              (5) HHS awarding agencies will consider that non-Federal entity's comments in determining whether the non-Federal entity is qualified for the future Federal award.
              (d) If an HHS awarding agency enters information into the designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM about a determination that a non-Federal entity is not qualified for a Federal award and subsequently:
              (1) Learns that any of that information is erroneous, the HHS awarding agency must correct the information in the system within three business days;
              (2) Obtains an update to that information that could be helpful to other Federal awarding agencies, the HHS awarding agency is strongly encouraged to amend the information in the system to incorporate the update in a timely way.
              (e) HHS awarding agencies shall not post any information that will be made publicly available in the non-public segment of the designated integrity and performance system that is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of Information Act. If the recipient asserts within seven calendar days to the HHS awarding agency that posted the information that some or all of the information made publicly available is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of Information Act, the HHS awarding agency that posted the information must remove the posting within seven calendar days of receiving the assertion. Prior to reposting the releasable information, the HHS awarding agency must resolve the issue in accordance with the agency's Freedom of Information Act procedures.
              [81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.213
              Suspension and debarment.
              Non-federal entities are subject to the non-procurement debarment and suspension regulations implementing Executive Orders 12549 and 12689, 2 CFR parts 180 and 376. These regulations restrict awards, subawards and contracts with certain parties that are debarred, suspended or otherwise excluded from or ineligible for participation in Federal assistance programs or activities.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014. Redesignated and amended at 81 FR 3015, 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.214
              Metric system of measurement.

              The Metric Conversion Act, as amended by the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act, 15 U.S.C. 205, declares that the metric system is the preferred measurement system for United States trade and commerce. HHS awarding agencies will follow the provisions of Executive Order 12770.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014. Redesignated at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.215
              Disclosure of lobbying activities.
              Recipients are subject to the restrictions on lobbying as set forth in 45 CFR part 93.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014. Redesignated at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.216
              Special provisions for awards to commercial organizations as recipients.
              (a) This section contains provisions that apply to awards to commercial organizations. These provisions are in addition to other applicable provisions of this part, or they make exceptions from other provisions of this part for awards to commercial organizations.
              (b) Prohibition against profit. Except for awards under the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) programs (15 U.S.C. 638), no HHS funds may be paid as profit to any recipient even if the recipient is a commercial organization. Profit is any amount in excess of allowable direct and indirect costs.
              (c) Program income. Except for grants for research, program income earned by a commercial organization may not be used to further eligible project or program objectives except in the SBIR and STTR programs.
              (d)(1) Commercial organizations that receive awards (including for-profit hospitals) have two options regarding audits:
              (i) A financial related audit of a particular award in accordance with Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, in those cases where the commercial organization receives awards under only one HHS program; or, if awards are received under multiple HHS programs, a financial related audit of all awards in accordance with Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; or
              (ii) An audit that meets the requirements contained in subpart F.
              (2) Commercial organizations that receive annual awards totaling less than the audit requirement threshold in subpart F are exempt from HHS audit requirements for that year, but records must be available for review by appropriate officials of Federal agencies or the Government Accountability Office. (See § 75.501).
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014. Redesignated at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.217
              Special provisions for awards to Federal agencies.
              (a) In order for an HHS awarding agency to make a Federal award to a Federal agency, the HHS awarding agency must have statutory authority that makes such Federal agency explicitly eligible for a Federal award.
              (b) All provisions of this part and other HHS regulations apply to Federal entities receiving Federal awards, except for the following:
              (1) Except for grants for research, any program income earned by a Federal institution must be used under the deduction alternative. Any program income earned after the end of grant support should be returned to the United States Treasury.
              (2) No salary or fringe benefit payments may be made from HHS awarding agency grant funds to support career, career-conditional, or other Federal employees (civilian or uniformed services) without permanent appointments at a Federal institution receiving a grant. While the level of effort required for the project must be allowed by the recipient as part of each individual's official duties, salary costs associated with an individual participating in an official capacity as a Federal employee under a grant to that Federal institution are not allowable costs under an HHS awarding agency grant.
              (3) Federal agencies may not be reimbursed for indirect costs under Federal awards.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014. Redesignated at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 75.218
              Participation by faith-based organizations.

              The funds provided under this part must be administered in compliance with the standards set forth in 45 CFR part 87.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014. Redesignated at 81 FR 3015, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Post Federal Award Requirements
            
              Standards for Financial and Program Management
              
                § 75.300
                Statutory and national policy requirements.
                (a) The Federal awarding agency must manage and administer the Federal award in a manner so as to ensure that Federal funding is expended and associated programs are implemented in full accordance with U.S. statutory and public policy requirements: Including, but not limited to, those protecting public welfare, the environment, and prohibiting discrimination. The Federal awarding agency must communicate to the non-Federal entity all relevant public policy requirements, including those in general appropriations provisions, and incorporate them either directly or by reference in the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (b) The non-Federal entity is responsible for complying with all requirements of the Federal award. For all Federal awards, this includes the provisions of FFATA, which includes requirements on executive compensation, and also requirements implementing the Act for the non-Federal entity at 2 CFR part 25 and 2 CFR part 170. See also statutory requirements for whistleblower protections at 10 U.S.C. 2324 and 2409, and 41 U.S.C. 4304, 4310, and 4712.
                (c) It is a public policy requirement of HHS that no person otherwise eligible will be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination in the administration of HHS programs and services based on non-merit factors such as age, disability, sex, race, color, national origin, religion, gender identity, or sexual orientation. Recipients must comply with this public policy requirement in the administration of programs supported by HHS awards.

                (d) In accordance with the Supreme Court decisions in United States v. Windsor and in Obergefell v. Hodges, all recipients must treat as valid the marriages of same-sex couples. This does not apply to registered domestic partnerships, civil unions or similar formal relationships recognized under state law as something other than a marriage.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 89395, Dec. 12, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.301
                Performance measurement.

                The HHS awarding agency must require the recipient to use OMB approved standard information collections when providing financial and performance information. As appropriate and in accordance with above mentioned information collections, the HHS awarding agency must require the recipient to relate financial data to performance accomplishments of the Federal award. Also, in accordance with above mentioned standard information collections, and when applicable, recipients must also provide cost information to demonstrate cost effective practices (e.g., through unit cost data). The recipient's performance should be measured in a way that will help the HHS awarding agency and other non-Federal entities to improve program outcomes, share lessons learned, and spread the adoption of promising practices. The HHS awarding agency should provide recipients with clear performance goals, indicators, and milestones as described in § 75.210. Performance reporting frequency and content should be established to not only allow the HHS awarding agency to understand the recipient progress but also to facilitate identification of promising practices among recipients and build the evidence upon which the HHS awarding agency's program and performance decisions are made.
              
              
                § 75.302
                Financial management and standards for financial management systems.

                (a) Each state must expend and account for the Federal award in accordance with state laws and procedures for expending and accounting for the state's own funds. In addition, the state's and the other non- Federal entity's financial management systems, including records documenting compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award, must be sufficient to permit the preparation of reports required by general and program-specific terms and conditions; and the tracing of funds to a level of expenditures adequate to establish that such funds have been used according to the Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. See also § 75.450.
                (b) The financial management system of each non-Federal entity must provide for the following (see also §§ 75.361, 75.362, 75.363, 75.364, and 75.365):
                (1) Identification, in its accounts, of all Federal awards received and expended and the Federal programs under which they were received. Federal program and Federal award identification must include, as applicable, the CFDA title and number, Federal award identification number and year, name of the HHS awarding agency, and name of the pass-through entity, if any.
                (2) Accurate, current, and complete disclosure of the financial results of each Federal award or program in accordance with the reporting requirements set forth in §§ 75.341 and 75.342. If an HHS awarding agency requires reporting on an accrual basis from a recipient that maintains its records on other than an accrual basis, the recipient must not be required to establish an accrual accounting system. This recipient may develop accrual data for its reports on the basis of an analysis of the documentation on hand. Similarly, a pass-through entity must not require a subrecipient to establish an accrual accounting system and must allow the subrecipient to develop accrual data for its reports on the basis of an analysis of the documentation on hand.
                (3) Records that identify adequately the source and application of funds for federally-funded activities. These records must contain information pertaining to Federal awards, authorizations, obligations, unobligated balances, assets, expenditures, income and interest and be supported by source documentation.
                (4) Effective control over, and accountability for, all funds, property, and other assets. The non-Federal entity must adequately safeguard all assets and assure that they are used solely for authorized purposes. See § 75.303.
                (5) Comparison of expenditures with budget amounts for each Federal award.
                (6) Written procedures to implement the requirements of § 75.305.
                (7) Written procedures for determining the allowability of costs in accordance with subpart E of this part and the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
              
              
                § 75.303
                Internal controls.
                The non-Federal entity must:
                (a) Establish and maintain effective internal control over the Federal award that provides reasonable assurance that the non-Federal entity is managing the Federal award in compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. These internal controls should be in compliance with guidance in “Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government,” issued by the Comptroller General of the United States or the “Internal Control Integrated Framework,” issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
                (b) Comply with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal awards.
                (c) Evaluate and monitor the non-Federal entity's compliance with statutes, regulations and the terms and conditions of Federal awards.
                (d) Take prompt action when instances of noncompliance are identified including noncompliance identified in audit findings.
                (e) Take reasonable measures to safeguard protected personally identifiable information and other information the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity designates as sensitive or the non-Federal entity considers sensitive consistent with applicable Federal, state, local, and tribal laws regarding privacy and obligations of confidentiality.
              
              
                
                § 75.304
                Bonds.
                The HHS awarding agency may include a provision on bonding, insurance, or both in the following circumstances:
                (a) Where the Federal Government guarantees or insures the repayment of money borrowed by the recipient, the HHS awarding agency, at its discretion, may require adequate bonding and insurance if the bonding and insurance requirements of the non-Federal entity are not deemed adequate to protect the interest of the Federal Government.
                (b) The HHS awarding agency may require adequate fidelity bond coverage where the non-Federal entity lacks sufficient coverage to protect the Federal Government's interest.
                (c) Where bonds are required in the situations described above, the bonds must be obtained from companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties, as prescribed in 31 CFR part 223.
              
              
                § 75.305
                Payment.
                (a)(1) For states, payments are governed by Treasury-State CMIA agreements and default procedures codified at 31 CFR part 205 and TFM 4A-2000 Overall Disbursing Rules for All Federal Agencies.
                (2) To the extent that Treasury-State CMIA agreements and default procedures do not address expenditure of program income, rebates, refunds, contract settlements, audit recoveries and interest earned on such funds, such funds must be expended before requesting additional cash payments.
                (b) For non-Federal entities other than states, payments methods must minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds from the United States Treasury or the pass-through entity and the disbursement by the non-Federal entity whether the payment is made by electronic funds transfer, or issuance or redemption of checks, warrants, or payment by other means. See also § 75.302(b)(6). Except as noted elsewhere in this part, HHS awarding agencies must require recipients to use only OMB-approved standard governmentwide information collection requests to request payment.
                (1) The non-Federal entity must be paid in advance, provided it maintains or demonstrates the willingness to maintain both written procedures that minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds and disbursement by the non-Federal entity, and financial management systems that meet the standards for fund control and accountability as established in this part. Advance payments to a non-Federal entity must be limited to the minimum amounts needed and be timed to be in accordance with the actual, immediate cash requirements of the non-Federal entity in carrying out the purpose of the approved program or project. The timing and amount of advance payments must be as close as is administratively feasible to the actual disbursements by the non-Federal entity for direct program or project costs and the proportionate share of any allowable indirect costs. The non-Federal entity must make timely payment to contractors in accordance with the contract provisions.
                (2) Whenever possible, advance payments must be consolidated to cover anticipated cash needs for all Federal awards made by the HHS awarding agency to the recipient.
                (i) Advance payment mechanisms include, but are not limited to, Treasury check and electronic funds transfer and must comply with applicable guidance in 31 CFR part 208.
                (ii) Non-Federal entities must be authorized to submit requests for advance payments and reimbursements at least monthly when electronic fund transfers are not used, and as often as they like when electronic transfers are used, in accordance with the provisions of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693-1693r).

                (3) Reimbursement is the preferred method when the requirements in paragraph (b) cannot be met, when the HHS awarding agency sets a specific condition per § 75.207, or when the non-Federal entity requests payment by reimbursement. This method may be used on any Federal award for construction, or if the major portion of the construction project is accomplished through private market financing or Federal loans, and the Federal award constitutes a minor portion of the project. When the reimbursement method is used, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must make payment within 30 calendar days after receipt of the billing, unless the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity reasonably believes the request to be improper.
                (4) If the non-Federal entity cannot meet the criteria for advance payments and the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity has determined that reimbursement is not feasible because the non-Federal entity lacks sufficient working capital, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may provide cash on a working capital advance basis. Under this procedure, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must advance cash payments to the non-Federal entity to cover its estimated disbursement needs for an initial period generally geared to the non-Federal entity's disbursing cycle. Thereafter, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must reimburse the non-Federal entity for its actual cash disbursements. Use of the working capital advance method of payment requires that the pass-through entity provide timely advance payments to any subrecipients in order to meet the subrecipient's actual cash disbursements. The working capital advance method of payment must not be used by the pass-through entity if the reason for using this method is the unwillingness or inability of the pass-through entity to provide timely advance payments to the subrecipient to meet the subrecipient's actual cash disbursements.
                (5) Use of resources before requesting cash advance payments. To the extent available, the non-Federal entity must disburse funds available from program income (including repayments to a revolving fund), rebates, refunds, contract settlements, audit recoveries, and interest earned on such funds before requesting additional cash payments.
                (6) Unless otherwise required by Federal statutes, payments for allowable costs by non-Federal entities must not be withheld at any time during the period of performance unless the conditions of §§ 75.207, subpart D of this part, 75.371, or one or more of the following applies:
                (i) The non-Federal entity has failed to comply with the project objectives, Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (ii) The non-Federal entity is delinquent in a debt to the United States as defined in OMB Guidance A-129 “Policies for Federal Credit Programs and Non-Tax Receivables.”
                (iii) A payment withheld for failure to comply with Federal award conditions, but without suspension of the Federal award, must be released to the non-Federal entity upon subsequent compliance. When a Federal award is suspended, payment adjustments will be made in accordance with § 75.375.
                (iv) A payment must not be made to a non-Federal entity for amounts that are withheld by the non-Federal entity from payment to contractors to assure satisfactory completion of work. A payment must be made when the non-Federal entity actually disburses the withheld funds to the contractors or to escrow accounts established to assure satisfactory completion of work.
                (7) Standards governing the use of banks and other institutions as depositories of advance payments under Federal awards are as follows:
                (i) The HHS awarding agency and pass-through entity must not require separate depository accounts for funds provided to a non-Federal entity or establish any eligibility requirements for depositories for funds provided to the non-Federal entity. However, the non-Federal entity must be able to account for the receipt, obligation and expenditure of funds.
                (ii) Advance payments of Federal funds must be deposited and maintained in insured accounts whenever possible.
                (8) The non-Federal entity must maintain advance payments of Federal awards in interest-bearing accounts, unless the following apply:
                (i) The non-Federal entity receives less than $120,000 in Federal awards per year.
                (ii) The best reasonably available interest-bearing account would not be expected to earn interest in excess of $500 per year on Federal cash balances.

                (iii) The depository would require an average or minimum balance so high that it would not be feasible within the expected Federal and non-Federal cash resources.
                (iv) A foreign government or banking system prohibits or precludes interest bearing accounts.

                (9) Interest earned amounts up to $500 per year may be retained by the non-Federal entity for administrative expense. Any additional interest earned on Federal advance payments deposited in interest-bearing accounts must be remitted annually to the Department of Health and Human Services Payment Management System (PMS) through an electronic medium using either Automated Clearing House (ACH) network or a Fedwire Funds Service payment. Remittances must include pertinent information of the payee and nature of the payment in the memo area (often referred to as “addenda records” by Financial Institutions) as that will assist in the timely posting of interest earned on federal funds. Pertinent details include the Payee Account Number (PAN) if the payment originated from PMS, or Agency information, if the payment originated from ASAP, NSF or another federal agency payment system. The remittance must be submitted as follows:
                
                
                  For ACH Returns:
                  Routing Number: 051036706
                  Account number: 303000
                  Bank Name and Location: Credit Gateway—ACH Receiver St. Paul, MN
                  
                  For Fedwire Returns*:
                  Routing Number: 021030004
                  Account number: 75010501
                  Bank Name and Location: Federal Reserve Bank Treas NYC/Funds Transfer Division New York, NY
                  (* Please note organization initiating payment is likely to incur a charge from your Financial Institution for this type of payment)
                  
                  For International ACH Returns:
                  Beneficiary Account: Federal Reserve Bank of New York/ITS (FRBNY/ITS)
                  Bank: Citibank N.A. (New York)
                  Swift Code: CITIUS33
                  Account Number: 36838868
                  Bank Address: 388 Greenwich Street, New York, NY 10013 USA
                  Payment Details (Line 70): Agency Name (abbreviated when possible) and ALC Agency POC: Michelle Haney, (301) 492-5065
                  

                  For recipients that do not have electronic remittance capability, please make check** payable to:
                  
                  “The Department of Health and Human Services”
                  
                  Mail Check to Treasury approved lockbox:
                  HHS Program Support Center
                  P.O. Box 530231
                  Atlanta, GA 30353-0231
                  (** Please allow 4-6 weeks for processing of a payment by check to be applied to the appropriate PMS account)

                  Any additional information/instructions may be found on the PMS Web site at http://www.dpm.psc.gov/.
                
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 89395, Dec. 12, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.306
                Cost sharing or matching.
                (a) Under Federal research proposals, voluntary committed cost sharing is not expected. It cannot be used as a factor during the merit review of applications or proposals, but may be considered if it is both in accordance with HHS awarding agency regulations and specified in a notice of funding opportunity. Criteria for considering voluntary committed cost sharing and any other program policy factors that may be used to determine who may receive a Federal award must be explicitly described in the notice of funding opportunity. Furthermore, only mandatory cost sharing or cost sharing specifically committed in the project budget must be included in the organized research base for computing the indirect (F&A) cost rate or reflected in any allocation of indirect costs. See also §§ 75.414, 75.203, and appendix I to this part.
                (b) For all Federal awards, any shared costs or matching funds and all contributions, including cash and third party in-kind contributions, must be accepted as part of the non-Federal entity's cost sharing or matching when such contributions meet all of the following criteria:
                (1) Are verifiable from the non-Federal entity's records;
                (2) Are not included as contributions for any other Federal award;
                (3) Are necessary and reasonable for accomplishment of project or program objectives;
                (4) Are allowable under subpart E of this part;

                (5) Are not paid by the Federal Government under another Federal award, except where the Federal statute authorizing a program specifically provides that Federal funds made available for such program can be applied to matching or cost sharing requirements of other Federal programs;
                (6) Are provided for in the approved budget when required by the HHS awarding agency; and
                (7) Conform to other provisions of this part, as applicable.
                (c) Unrecovered indirect costs, including indirect costs on cost sharing or matching may be included as part of cost sharing or matching only with prior approval of the HHS awarding agency. Unrecovered indirect cost means the difference between the amount charged to the Federal award and the amount which could have been charged to the Federal award under the non-Federal entity's approved negotiated indirect cost rate.
                (d) Values for non-Federal entity contributions of services and property must be established in accordance with the cost principles in subpart E. If an HHS awarding agency authorizes the non-Federal entity to donate buildings or land for construction/facilities acquisition projects or long-term use, the value of the donated property for cost sharing or matching must be the lesser of paragraphs (d)(1) or (2) of this section.
                (1) The value of the remaining life of the property recorded in the non-Federal entity's accounting records at the time of donation.
                (2) The current fair market value. However, when there is sufficient justification, the HHS awarding agency may approve the use of the current fair market value of the donated property, even if it exceeds the value described in paragraph (1) of this section at the time of donation.
                (e) Volunteer services furnished by third-party professional and technical personnel, consultants, and other skilled and unskilled labor may be counted as cost sharing or matching if the service is an integral and necessary part of an approved project or program. Rates for third-party volunteer services must be consistent with those paid for similar work by the non-Federal entity. In those instances in which the required skills are not found in the non-Federal entity, rates must be consistent with those paid for similar work in the labor market in which the non-Federal entity competes for the kind of services involved. In either case, paid fringe benefits that are reasonable, necessary, allocable, and otherwise allowable may be included in the valuation.
                (f) When a third-party organization furnishes the services of an employee, these services must be valued at the employee's regular rate of pay plus an amount of fringe benefits that is reasonable, necessary, allocable, and otherwise allowable, and indirect costs at either the third-party organization's approved federally negotiated indirect cost rate or, a rate in accordance with § 75.414(f), provided these services employ the same skill(s) for which the employee is normally paid. Where donated services are treated as indirect costs, indirect cost rates will separate the value of the donated services so that reimbursement for the donated services will not be made.
                (g) Donated property from third parties may include such items as equipment, office supplies, laboratory supplies, or workshop and classroom supplies. Value assessed to donated property included in the cost sharing or matching share must not exceed the fair market value of the property at the time of the donation.
                (h) The method used for determining cost sharing or matching for third-party-donated equipment, buildings and land for which title passes to the non-Federal entity may differ according to the purpose of the Federal award, if paragraph (h)(1) or (2) of this section applies.
                (1) If the purpose of the Federal award is to assist the non-Federal entity in the acquisition of equipment, buildings or land, the aggregate value of the donated property may be claimed as cost sharing or matching.

                (2) If the purpose of the Federal award is to support activities that require the use of equipment, buildings or land, normally only depreciation charges for equipment and buildings may be made. However, the fair market value of equipment or other capital assets and fair rental charges for land may be allowed, provided that the HHS awarding agency has approved the charges. See also § 75.420.
                (i) The value of donated property must be determined in accordance with the usual accounting policies of the non-Federal entity, with the following qualifications:

                (1) The value of donated land and buildings must not exceed its fair market value at the time of donation to the non-Federal entity as established by an independent appraiser (e.g., certified real property appraiser or General Services Administration representative) and certified by a responsible official of the non-Federal entity as required by the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 4601-4655) (Uniform Act) except as provided in the implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24.
                (2) The value of donated equipment must not exceed the fair market value of equipment of the same age and condition at the time of donation.
                (3) The value of donated space must not exceed the fair rental value of comparable space as established by an independent appraisal of comparable space and facilities in a privately-owned building in the same locality.
                (4) The value of loaned equipment must not exceed its fair rental value.
                (j) For third-party in-kind contributions, the fair market value of goods and services must be documented and to the extent feasible supported by the same methods used internally by the non-Federal entity.
                (k) For IHEs, see also OMB memorandum M-01-06, dated January 5, 2001, Clarification of OMB A-21 Treatment of Voluntary Uncommitted Cost Sharing and Tuition Remission Costs.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.307
                Program income.
                (a) General. Non-Federal entities are encouraged to earn income to defray program costs where appropriate.
                (b) Cost of generating program income. If authorized by Federal regulations or the Federal award, costs incidental to the generation of program income may be deducted from gross income to determine program income, provided these costs have not been charged to the Federal award.
                (c) Governmental revenues. Taxes, special assessments, levies, fines, and other such revenues raised by a non-Federal entity are not program income unless the revenues are specifically identified in the Federal award or HHS awarding agency regulations as program income.
                (1) The Patent and Trademark Laws Amendments, 34 U.S.C. 200-212, apply to inventions made under an award for performance of experimental, developmental, or research work.
                (2) Unless the terms and conditions for the Federal award provide otherwise, recipients shall have no obligation to HHS with respect to program income earned from license fees and royalties for copyrighted material, patents, patent applications, trademarks, and inventions made under a Federal award. However, no scholarship, fellowship, training grant, or other funding agreement made primarily to a recipient for educational purposes will contain any provision giving the HHS awarding agency rights to inventions made by the recipient.
                (d) Property. Proceeds from the sale of real property, equipment, or supplies, are not program income; such proceeds will be handled in accordance with the requirements of subpart D of this part, §§ 75.318, 75.320, and 75.321, or as specifically identified in Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (e) Use of program income. If the HHS awarding agency does not specify in its regulations or the terms and conditions of the Federal award, or give prior approval for how program income is to be used, paragraph (e)(1) of this section must apply. For Federal awards made to IHEs and nonprofit research institutions, if the HHS awarding agency does not specify in its regulations or the terms and conditions of the Federal award how program income is to be used, paragraph (e)(2) of this section must apply unless the recipient is subject to conditions under § 75.207 or § 75.216. In specifying alternatives to paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this section, the HHS awarding agency may distinguish between income earned by the recipient and income earned by subrecipients and between the sources, kinds, or amounts of income. When the HHS awarding agency authorizes the approaches in paragraphs (e)(2) and (3) of this section, program income in excess of any amounts specified must also be deducted from expenditures.
                (1) Deduction. Ordinarily program income must be deducted from total allowable costs to determine the net allowable costs. Program income must be used for current costs unless the HHS awarding agency authorizes otherwise. Program income that the non-Federal entity did not anticipate at the time of the Federal award must be used to reduce the Federal award and non-Federal entity contributions rather than to increase the funds committed to the project.
                (2) Addition. With prior approval of the HHS awarding agency (except for IHEs and nonprofit research institutions, as described in paragraph (e) of this section), program income may be added to the Federal award by the Federal agency and the non-Federal entity. The program income must be used for the purposes and under the conditions of the Federal award.
                (3) Cost sharing or matching. With prior approval of the HHS awarding agency, program income may be used to meet the cost sharing or matching requirement of the Federal award. The amount of the Federal award remains the same.
                (f) Income after the period of performance. There are no Federal requirements governing the disposition of income earned after the end of the period of performance for the Federal award, unless the HHS awarding agency regulations or the terms and conditions of the award provide otherwise. The HHS awarding agency may negotiate agreements with recipients regarding appropriate uses of income earned after the period of performance as part of the grant closeout process. See also § 75.381.
                (g) Unless the Federal statute, regulations, or terms and conditions for the Federal award provide otherwise, the non-Federal entity has no obligation to the HHS awarding agency with respect to program income earned from license fees and royalties for copyrighted material, patents, patent applications, trademarks, and inventions made under a Federal award to which 37 CFR part 401, “Rights to Inventions Made by Nonprofit Organizations and Small Business Firms under Government Awards, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements” is applicable.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.308
                Revision of budget and program plans.

                (a) The approved budget for the Federal award summarizes the financial aspects of the project or program as approved during the Federal award process. It may include either the Federal and non-Federal share (see § 75.2 Federal share) or only the Federal share, depending upon HHS awarding agency requirements. It must be related to performance for program evaluation purposes whenever appropriate.
                (b) Recipients are required to report deviations from budget or project scope or objective, and request prior approvals from HHS awarding agencies for budget and program plan revisions, in accordance with this section.
                (c)(1) For non-construction Federal awards, recipients must request prior approvals from HHS awarding agencies for one or more of the following program or budget-related reasons:
                (i) Change in the scope or the objective of the project or program (even if there is no associated budget revision requiring prior written approval).
                (ii) Change in a key person specified in the application or the Federal award.
                (iii) The disengagement from the project for more than three months, or a 25 percent reduction in time devoted to the project, by the approved project director or principal investigator.
                (iv) The inclusion, unless waived by the HHS awarding agency, of costs that require prior approval in accordance with subpart E of this part, or appendix IX of this part, or 48 CFR part 31, as applicable.

                (v) The transfer of funds budgeted for participant support costs as defined in § 75.2 to other categories of expense.
                
                (vi) Unless described in the application and funded in the approved Federal awards, the subawarding, transferring or contracting out of any work under a Federal award, including fixed amount subawards as described in § 75.353. This provision does not apply to the acquisition of supplies, material, equipment or general support services.
                (vii) Changes in the approved cost-sharing or matching provided by the non-Federal entity.
                (viii) The need arises for additional Federal funds to complete the project.
                (ix) The inclusion of research patient care costs in research awards made for the performance of research work.
                (x) The provision of subawards by a pass-through entity on fixed amounts up to the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, provided that the subawards meet the requirements for fixed amount awards in § 75.201. See § 75.353.
                (xi) The recipient wishes to dispose of, replace, or encumber title to real property, equipment, or intangible property that are acquired or improved with a Federal award. See §§ 75.318, 75.320, 75.322, and 75.323.
                (2) No other prior approval requirements for specific items may be imposed unless an exception has been approved by OMB. See also §§ 75.102 and 75.407.
                (d) Except for requirements listed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the HHS awarding agencies are authorized, at their option, to waive prior written approvals required by paragraph (c) this section. Such waivers may include authorizing recipients to do any one or more of the following:

                (1) Incur project costs 90 calendar days before the HHS awarding agency makes the Federal award. Expenses more than 90 calendar days pre-award require prior approval of the HHS awarding agency. All costs incurred before the HHS awarding agency makes the Federal award are at the recipient's risk (i.e., the HHS awarding agency is under no obligation to reimburse such costs if for any reason the recipient does not receive a Federal award or if the Federal award is less than anticipated and inadequate to cover such costs). See also § 75.458.
                (2) Initiate a one-time extension of the period of performance by up to 12 months unless one or more of the conditions outlined in paragraphs (d)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section apply. For one-time extensions, the recipient must notify the HHS awarding agency in writing with the supporting reasons and revised period of performance at least 10 calendar days before the end of the period of performance specified in the Federal award. This one-time extension may not be exercised merely for the purpose of using unobligated balances. Extensions require explicit prior HHS awarding agency approval when:
                (i) The terms and conditions of the Federal award prohibit the extension.
                (ii) The extension requires additional Federal funds.
                (iii) The extension involves any change in the approved objectives or scope of the project.
                (3) Carry forward unobligated balances to subsequent periods of performance.

                (4) For Federal awards that support research, unless the HHS awarding agency provides otherwise in the Federal award or in the HHS awarding agency's regulations, the prior approval requirements described in paragraph (d) are automatically waived (i.e., recipients need not obtain such prior approvals) unless one of the conditions included in paragraph (d)(2) applies.
                (e) The HHS awarding agency may, at its option, restrict the transfer of funds among direct cost categories or programs, functions and activities for Federal awards in which the Federal share of the project exceeds the Simplified Acquisition Threshold and the cumulative amount of such transfers exceeds or is expected to exceed 10 percent of the total budget as last approved by the HHS awarding agency. The HHS awarding agency cannot permit a transfer that would cause any Federal appropriation to be used for purposes other than those consistent with the appropriation.

                (f) All other changes to non-construction budgets, except for the changes described in paragraph (c) of this section, do not require prior approval (see also § 75.407).
                
                (g) For construction Federal awards, the recipient must request prior written approval promptly from the HHS awarding agency for budget revisions whenever paragraph (g)(1), (2), or (3) of this section applies.
                (1) The revision results from changes in the scope or the objective of the project or program.
                (2) The need arises for additional Federal funds to complete the project.
                (3) A revision is desired which involves specific costs for which prior written approval requirements may be imposed consistent with applicable OMB cost principles listed in subpart E of this part.
                (4) No other prior approval requirements for budget revisions may be imposed unless an exception has been approved by OMB.
                (5) When an HHS awarding agency makes a Federal award that provides support for construction and non-construction work, the HHS awarding agency may require the recipient to obtain prior approval from the HHS awarding agency before making any fund or budget transfers between the two types of work supported.
                (h) When requesting approval for budget revisions, the recipient must use the same format for budget information that was used in the application, unless the HHS awarding agency indicates a letter of request suffices.
                (i) Within 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the request for budget revisions, the HHS awarding agency must review the request and notify the recipient whether the budget revisions have been approved. If the revision is still under consideration at the end of 30 calendar days, the HHS awarding agency must inform the recipient in writing of the date when the recipient may expect the decision.
                (j) All approvals granted in keeping with the provisions of this section shall not be valid unless they are in writing, and signed by at least one of the following HHS officials:
                (1) The Head of the HHS awarding agency that made the award or subordinate official with proper delegated authority from the Head, including the Head of the Regional Office of the HHS awarding agency that made the award; or
                (2) The responsible Grants Officer of the HHS awarding agency that made the award or an individual duly authorized by the Grants Officer.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.309
                Period of performance and availability of funds.
                (a) A non-Federal entity may charge to the Federal award only allowable costs incurred during the period of performance (except as described in § 75.461) and any costs incurred before the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity made the Federal award that were authorized by the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity. Funds available to pay allowable costs during the period of performance include both Federal funds awarded and carryover balances.
                (b) A non-Federal entity must liquidate all obligations incurred under the award not later than 90 days after the end of the funding period (or as specified in a program regulation) to coincide with the submission of the final Federal Financial Report (FFR). This deadline may be extended with prior written approval from the HHS awarding agency.
              
              
                §§ 75.310-75.315
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Property Standards
              
                § 75.316
                Purpose of property standards.
                Sections 75.317 through 75.323 set forth uniform standards governing management and disposition of property furnished by HHS or whose cost was charged directly to a project supported by an HHS award. The HHS awarding agency may not impose additional requirements, unless specifically required to do so by Federal statute. The recipient may use its own property management standards and procedures provided they meet the provisions of these sections.
              
              
                § 75.317
                Insurance coverage.

                The non-Federal entity must, at a minimum, provide the equivalent insurance coverage for real property and equipment acquired or improved with Federal funds as provided to other property owned by the non-Federal entity. Federally-owned property need not be insured unless required by the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
              
              
                § 75.318
                Real property.
                (a) Title. Subject to the obligations and conditions set forth in this section, title to real property acquired or improved under a Federal award will vest upon acquisition in the non-Federal entity.
                (b) Use. (1) Except as otherwise provided by Federal statutes or by the HHS awarding agency, real property will be used for the originally authorized purpose as long as needed for that purpose, during which time the non-Federal entity must not dispose of or encumber its title or other interests.

                (2) The non-Federal entity shall obtain written approval from the HHS awarding agency for the use of real property in other federally-sponsored projects when the recipient determines that the property is no longer needed for the purpose of the original project. Use in other projects shall be limited to those under federally-sponsored projects (i.e., awards) or programs that have purpose consistent with those authorized for support by the HHS awarding agency.
                (c) Disposition. When real property is no longer needed as provided in subsection (b), the non-Federal entity must obtain disposition instructions from the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity. The instructions must provide for one of the following alternatives:
                (1) Retain title after compensating the HHS awarding agency. The amount paid to the HHS awarding agency will be computed by applying the HHS awarding agency's percentage of participation in the cost of the original purchase (and costs of any improvements) to the fair market value of the property. However, in those situations where the non-Federal entity is disposing of real property acquired or improved with a Federal award and acquiring replacement real property under the same Federal award, the net proceeds from the disposition may be used as an offset to the cost of the replacement property.
                (2) Sell the property and compensate the HHS awarding agency. The amount due to the HHS awarding agency will be calculated by applying the HHS awarding agency's percentage of participation in the cost of the original purchase (and cost of any improvements) to the proceeds of the sale after deduction of any actual and reasonable selling and fixing-up expenses. If the Federal award has not been closed out, the net proceeds from sale may be offset against the original cost of the property. When the non-Federal entity is directed to sell property, sales procedures must be followed that provide for competition to the extent practicable and result in the highest possible return.
                (3) Transfer title to the HHS awarding agency or to a third party designated/approved by the HHS awarding agency. The non-Federal entity is entitled to be paid an amount calculated by applying the non-Federal entity's percentage of participation in the purchase of the real property (and cost of any improvements) to the current fair market value of the property.
              
              
                § 75.319
                Federally-owned and exempt property.
                (a) Title to Federally-owned property remains vested in the Federal Government. The non-Federal entity must submit annually an inventory listing of Federally-owned property in its custody to the HHS awarding agency. Upon completion of the Federal award or when the property is no longer needed, the non-Federal entity must report the property to the HHS awarding agency for further Federal agency utilization.

                (b) If the HHS awarding agency has no further need for the property, it must declare the property excess and report it for disposal to the appropriate Federal disposal authority, unless the HHS awarding agency has statutory authority to dispose of the property by alternative methods (e.g., the authority provided by the Federal Technology Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 3710 (i)) to donate research equipment to educational and non-profit organizations in accordance with Executive Order 12999). The HHS awarding agency must issue appropriate instructions to the non-Federal entity.
                (c) Exempt Federally-owned property means property acquired under a Federal award where the HHS awarding agency has chosen to vest title to the property to the non-Federal entity without further obligation to the Federal Government, based upon the explicit terms and conditions of the Federal award. The HHS awarding agency may exercise this option when statutory authority exists. Absent statutory authority and specific terms and conditions of the Federal award, title to exempt Federally-owned property acquired under the Federal award remains with the Federal Government.
              
              
                § 75.320
                Equipment.
                See also § 75.439.
                (a) Title. Subject to the obligations and conditions set forth in this section, title to equipment acquired under a Federal award will vest upon acquisition in the non-Federal entity. Unless a statute specifically authorizes the Federal agency to vest title in the non-Federal entity without further obligation to the Federal Government, and the Federal agency elects to do so, the title must be a conditional title. Title must vest in the non-Federal entity subject to the following conditions:
                (1) Use the equipment for the authorized purposes of the project during the period of performance, or until the property is no longer needed for the purposes of the project.
                (2) Not encumber the property without approval of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity.
                (3) Use and dispose of the property in accordance with paragraphs (b), (c) and (e) of this section.
                (b) A state must use, manage and dispose of equipment acquired under a Federal award by the state in accordance with state laws and procedures. Other non-Federal entities must follow paragraphs (c) through (e) of this section.
                (c) Use. (1) Equipment must be used by the non-Federal entity in the program or project for which it was acquired as long as needed, whether or not the project or program continues to be supported by the Federal award, and the non-Federal entity must not encumber the property without prior approval of the HHS awarding agency. When no longer needed for the original program or project, the equipment may be used in other activities supported by the HHS awarding agency, in the following order of priority:
                (i) Activities under a Federal award from the HHS awarding agency which funded the original program or project, then
                (ii) Activities under Federal awards from other HHS awarding agencies. This includes consolidated equipment for information technology systems.
                (2) During the time that equipment is used on the project or program for which it was acquired, the non-Federal entity must also make the equipment available for use on other projects or programs currently or previously supported by the Federal Government, provided that such use will not interfere with the work on the projects or program for which it was originally acquired. First preference for other use must be given to other programs or projects supported by the HHS awarding agency that financed the equipment and second preference must be given to programs or projects under Federal awards from other Federal awarding agencies. Use for non-federally-funded programs or projects is also permissible. User fees should be considered if appropriate.
                (3) Notwithstanding the encouragement in § 75.307 to earn program income, the non-Federal entity must not use equipment acquired with the Federal award to provide services for a fee that is less than private companies charge for equivalent services unless specifically authorized by Federal statute for as long as the Federal Government retains an interest in the equipment.
                (4) When acquiring replacement equipment, the non-Federal entity may use the equipment to be replaced as a trade-in or sell the property and use the proceeds to offset the cost of the replacement property subject to the approval of the HHS awarding agency.
                (d) Management requirements. Procedures for managing equipment (including replacement equipment), whether acquired in whole or in part under a Federal award, until disposition takes place will, as a minimum, meet the following requirements:
                (1) Property records must be maintained that include a description of the property, a serial number or other identification number, the source of funding for the property (including the FAIN), who holds title, the acquisition date, and cost of the property, percentage of Federal participation in the project costs for the Federal award under which the property was acquired, the location, use and condition of the property, and any ultimate disposition data including the date of disposal and sale price of the property.
                (2) A physical inventory of the property must be taken and the results reconciled with the property records at least once every two years.
                (3) A control system must be developed to ensure adequate safeguards to prevent loss, damage, or theft of the property. Any loss, damage, or theft must be investigated.
                (4) Adequate maintenance procedures must be developed to keep the property in good condition.
                (5) If the non-Federal entity is authorized or required to sell the property, proper sales procedures must be established to ensure the highest possible return.
                (e) Disposition. When original or replacement equipment acquired under a Federal award is no longer needed for the original project or program or for other activities currently or previously supported by a HHS awarding agency, except as otherwise provided in Federal statutes, regulations, or HHS awarding agency disposition instructions, the non-Federal entity must request disposition instructions from the HHS awarding agency if required by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. Disposition of the equipment will be made as follows, in accordance with HHS awarding agency disposition instructions:
                (1) Items of equipment with a current per unit fair market value of $5,000 or less may be retained, sold or otherwise disposed of with no further obligation to the HHS awarding agency.
                (2) Except as provided in § 75.319(b), or if the HHS awarding agency fails to provide requested disposition instructions within 120 days, items of equipment with a current per-unit fair-market value in excess of $5,000 may be retained by the non-Federal entity or sold. The HHS awarding agency is entitled to an amount calculated by multiplying the current market value or proceeds from sale by the HHS awarding agency's percentage of participation in the cost of the original purchase. If the equipment is sold, the HHS awarding agency may permit the non-Federal entity to deduct and retain from the Federal share $500 or ten percent of the proceeds, whichever is less, for its selling and handling expenses.
                (3) The non-Federal entity may transfer title to the property to the Federal Government or to an eligible third party provided that, in such cases, the non-Federal entity must be entitled to compensation for its attributable percentage of the current fair market value of the property.
                (4) In cases where a non-Federal entity fails to take appropriate disposition actions, the HHS awarding agency may direct the non-Federal entity to take disposition actions.
              
              
                § 75.321
                Supplies.
                See also § 75.453.
                (a) Title to supplies will vest in the non-Federal entity upon acquisition. If there is a residual inventory of unused supplies exceeding $5,000 in total aggregate value upon termination or completion of the project or program and the supplies are not needed for any other Federal award, the non-Federal entity must retain the supplies for use on other activities or sell them, but must, in either case, compensate the Federal Government for its share. The amount of compensation must be computed in the same manner as for equipment. See § 75.320(e)(2) for the calculation methodology.
                (b) As long as the Federal Government retains an interest in the supplies, the non-Federal entity must not use supplies acquired under a Federal award to provide services to other organizations for a fee that is less than private companies charge for equivalent services, unless specifically authorized by Federal statute.
              
              
                
                § 75.322
                Intangible property and copyrights.
                (a) Title to intangible property (see § 75.2 Intangible property) acquired under a Federal award vests upon acquisition in the non-Federal entity. The non-Federal entity must use that property for the originally-authorized purpose, and must not encumber the property without approval of the HHS awarding agency. When no longer needed for the originally authorized purpose, disposition of the intangible property must occur in accordance with the provisions in § 75.320(e).
                (b) The non-Federal entity may copyright any work that is subject to copyright and was developed, or for which ownership was acquired, under a Federal award. The HHS awarding agency reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the work for Federal purposes, and to authorize others to do so.
                (c) The non-Federal entity is subject to applicable regulations governing patents and inventions, including government-wide regulations issued by the Department of Commerce at 37 CFR part 401.
                (d) The Federal Government has the right to:
                (1) Obtain, reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the data produced under a Federal award; and
                (2) Authorize others to receive, reproduce, publish, or otherwise use such data for Federal purposes
                (e) Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). (1) In response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request for research data relating to published research findings produced under a Federal award that were used by the Federal Government in developing an agency action that has the force and effect of law, the HHS awarding agency must request, and the non-Federal entity must provide, within a reasonable time, the research data so that they can be made available to the public through the procedures established under the FOIA. If the HHS awarding agency obtains the research data solely in response to a FOIA request, the HHS awarding agency may charge the requester a reasonable fee equaling the full incremental cost of obtaining the research data. This fee should reflect costs incurred by the Federal agency and the non-Federal entity. This fee is in addition to any fees the HHS awarding agency may assess under the FOIA (5 U.S.C. 552(a)(4)(A)).
                (2) Published research findings means when:
                (i) Research findings are published in a peer-reviewed scientific or technical journal; or
                (ii) A Federal agency publicly and officially cites the research findings in support of an agency action that has the force and effect of law. “Used by the Federal Government in developing an agency action that has the force and effect of law” is defined as when an agency publicly and officially cites the research findings in support of an agency action that has the force and effect of law.

                (3) Research data means the recorded factual material commonly accepted in the scientific community as necessary to validate research findings, but not any of the following: Preliminary analyses, drafts of scientific papers, plans for future research, peer reviews, or communications with colleagues. This “recorded” material excludes physical objects (e.g., laboratory samples). Research data also do not include:
                (i) Trade secrets, commercial information, materials necessary to be held confidential by a researcher until they are published, or similar information which is protected under law; and
                (ii) Personnel and medical information and similar information the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, such as information that could be used to identify a particular person in a research study.
                (f) The requirements set forth in paragraph (e)(1) of this section do not apply to commercial organizations
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.323
                Property trust relationship.

                Real property, equipment, and intangible property, that are acquired or improved with a Federal award must be held in trust by the non-Federal entity as trustee for the beneficiaries of the project or program under which the property was acquired or improved. The HHS awarding agency may require the non-Federal entity to record liens or other appropriate notices of record to indicate that personal or real property has been acquired or improved with a Federal award and that use and disposition conditions apply to the property.
              
              
                §§ 75.324-75.325
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Procurement Standards
              
                § 75.326
                Procurements by states.
                When procuring property and services under a Federal award, a state must follow the same policies and procedures it uses for procurements from its non-Federal funds. The state will comply with § 75.331 and ensure that every purchase order or other contract includes any clauses required by § 75.335. All other non-Federal entities, including subrecipients of a state, will follow §§ 75.327 through 75.335.
              
              
                § 75.327
                General procurement standards.
                (a) The non-Federal entity must use its own documented procurement procedures which reflect applicable State, local, and tribal laws and regulations, provided that the procurements conform to applicable Federal law and the standards identified in this part.
                (b) Non-Federal entities must maintain oversight to ensure that contractors perform in accordance with the terms, conditions, and specifications of their contracts or purchase orders.
                (c)(1) The non-Federal entity must maintain written standards of conduct covering conflicts of interest and governing the actions of its employees engaged in the selection, award and administration of contracts. No employee, officer, or agent may participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract supported by a Federal award if he or she has a real or apparent conflict of interest. Such a conflict of interest would arise when the employee, officer, or agent, any member of his or her immediate family, his or her partner, or an organization which employs or is about to employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial or other interest in or a tangible personal benefit from a firm considered for a contract. The officers, employees, and agents of the non-Federal entity may neither solicit nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors or parties to subcontracts. However, non-Federal entities may set standards for situations in which the financial interest is not substantial or the gift is an unsolicited item of nominal value. The standards of conduct must provide for disciplinary actions to be applied for violations of such standards by officers, employees, or agents of the non-Federal entity.
                (2) If the non-Federal entity has a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary organization that is not a state, local government, or Indian tribe, the non-Federal entity must also maintain written standards of conduct covering organizational conflicts of interest. Organizational conflicts of interest means that because of relationships with a parent company, affiliate, or subsidiary organization, the non-Federal entity is unable or appears to be unable to be impartial in conducting a procurement action involving a related organization.
                (d) The non-Federal entity's procedures must avoid acquisition of unnecessary or duplicative items. Consideration should be given to consolidating or breaking out procurements to obtain a more economical purchase. Where appropriate, an analysis will be made of lease versus purchase alternatives, and any other appropriate analysis to determine the most economical approach.
                (e) To foster greater economy and efficiency, and in accordance with efforts to promote cost-effective use of shared services across the Federal Government, the non-Federal entity is encouraged to enter into state and local intergovernmental agreements or inter-entity agreements where appropriate for procurement or use of common or shared goods and services.
                (f) The non-Federal entity is encouraged to use Federal excess and surplus property in lieu of purchasing new equipment and property whenever such use is feasible and reduces project costs.

                (g) The non-Federal entity is encouraged to use value engineering clauses in contracts for construction projects of sufficient size to offer reasonable opportunities for cost reductions. Value engineering is a systematic and creative analysis of each contract item or task to ensure that its essential function is provided at the overall lower cost.
                (h) The non-Federal entity must award contracts only to responsible contractors possessing the ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of a proposed procurement. Consideration will be given to such matters as contractor integrity, compliance with public policy, record of past performance, and financial and technical resources. See also § 75.213.
                (i) The non-Federal entity must maintain records sufficient to detail the history of procurement. These records will include, but are not necessarily limited to the following: rationale for the method of procurement, selection of contract type, contractor selection or rejection, and the basis for the contract price.
                (j)(1) The non-Federal entity may use a time and materials type contract only after a determination that no other contract is suitable and if the contract includes a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Time and materials type contract means a contract whose cost to a non-Federal entity is the sum of:
                (i) The actual cost of materials; and
                (ii) Direct labor hours charged at fixed hourly rates that reflect wages, general and administrative expenses, and profit.
                (2) Since this formula generates an open-ended contract price, a time-and-materials contract provides no positive profit incentive to the contractor for cost control or labor efficiency. Therefore, each contract must set a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Further, the non-Federal entity awarding such a contract must assert a high degree of oversight in order to obtain reasonable assurance that the contractor is using efficient methods and effective cost controls.
                (k) The non-Federal entity alone must be responsible, in accordance with good administrative practice and sound business judgment, for the settlement of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements. These issues include, but are not limited to, source evaluation, protests, disputes, and claims. These standards do not relieve the non-Federal entity of any contractual responsibilities under its contracts. The HHS awarding agency will not substitute its judgment for that of the non-Federal entity unless the matter is primarily a Federal concern. Violations of law will be referred to the local, tribal, state, or Federal authority having proper jurisdiction.
                (l) The type of procuring instruments used must be determined by the recipient but shall be appropriate for the particular procurement and for promoting the best interest of the program or project involved.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.328
                Competition.
                (a) All procurement transactions must be conducted in a manner providing full and open competition consistent with the standards of this section. In order to ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive advantage, contractors that develop or draft specifications, requirements, statements of work, or invitations for bids or requests for proposals must be excluded from competing for such procurements. Some of the situations considered to be restrictive of competition include but are not limited to:
                (1) Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to qualify to do business;
                (2) Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding;
                (3) Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between affiliated companies;
                (4) Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer contracts;
                (5) Organizational conflicts of interest;
                (6) Specifying only a “brand name” product instead of allowing “an equal” product to be offered and describing the performance or other relevant requirements of the procurement; and
                (7) Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.

                (b) The non-Federal entity must conduct procurements in a manner that prohibits the use of statutorily or administratively imposed state, local, or tribal geographical preferences in the evaluation of bids or proposals, except in those cases where applicable Federal statutes expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference. Nothing in this section preempts state licensing laws. When contracting for architectural and engineering (A/E) services, geographic location may be a selection criterion provided its application leaves an appropriate number of qualified firms, given the nature and size of the project, to compete for the contract.
                (c) The non-Federal entity must have written procedures for procurement transactions. These procedures must ensure that all solicitations:
                (1) Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the material, product, or service to be procured. Such description must not, in competitive procurements, contain features which unduly restrict competition. The description may include a statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be procured and, when necessary, must set forth those minimum essential characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product specifications should be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to make a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements, a “brand name or equivalent” description may be used as a means to define the performance or other salient requirements of procurement. The specific features of the named brand which must be met by offers must be clearly stated; and
                (2) Identify all requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.
                (d) The non-Federal entity must ensure that all prequalified lists of persons, firms, or products which are used in acquiring goods and services are current and include enough qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free competition. Also, the non-Federal entity must not preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the solicitation period.
              
              
                § 75.329
                Procurement procedures.
                The non-Federal entity must use one of the following methods of procurement.
                (a) Procurement by micro-purchases. Procurement by micro-purchase is the acquisition of supplies or services, the aggregate dollar amount of which does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold (See micro-purchase). To the extent practicable, the non-Federal entity must distribute micro-purchases equitably among qualified suppliers. Micro-purchases may be awarded without soliciting competitive quotations if the non-Federal entity considers the price to be reasonable.
                (b) Procurement by small purchase procedures. Small purchase procedures are those relatively simple and informal procurement methods for securing services, supplies, or other property that do not cost more than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold. If small purchase procedures are used, price or rate quotations must be obtained from an adequate number of qualified sources.
                (c) Procurement by sealed bids (formal advertising). Bids are publicly solicited and a firm fixed price contract (lump sum or unit price) is awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid, conforming with all the material terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, is the lowest in price. The sealed bid method is the preferred method for procuring construction, if the conditions in paragraph (c)(1) of this section apply.
                (1) In order for sealed bidding to be feasible, the following conditions should be present:
                (i) A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or purchase description is available;
                (ii) Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able to compete effectively for the business; and
                (iii) The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed price contract and the selection of the successful bidder can be made principally on the basis of price.
                (2) If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply:

                (i) Bids must be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers, providing them sufficient response time prior to the date set for opening the bids, for local, and tribal governments, the invitation for bids must be publicly advertised;
                (ii) The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications and pertinent attachments, must define the items or services in order for the bidder to properly respond;
                (iii) All bids will be opened at the time and place prescribed in the invitation for bids, for local, and tribal governments, the bids must be opened publicly;
                (iv) A firm fixed price contract award will be made in writing to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding documents, factors such as discounts, transportation cost, and life cycle costs must be considered in determining which bid is lowest. Payment discounts will only be used to determine the low bid when prior experience indicates that such discounts are usually taken advantage of; and
                (v) Any or all bids may be rejected if there is a sound documented reason.
                (d) Procurement by competitive proposals. The technique of competitive proposals is normally conducted with more than one source submitting an offer, and either a fixed price or cost-reimbursement type contract is awarded. It is generally used when conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids. If this method is used, the following requirements apply:
                (1) Requests for proposals must be publicized and identify all evaluation factors and their relative importance. Any response to publicized requests for proposals must be considered to the maximum extent practical;
                (2) Proposals must be solicited from an adequate number of qualified sources;
                (3) The non-Federal entity must have a written method for conducting technical evaluations of the proposals received and for selecting recipients;
                (4) Contracts must be awarded to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the program, with price and other factors considered; and
                (5) The non-Federal entity may use competitive proposal procedures for qualifications-based procurement of architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services whereby competitors' qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. The method, where price is not used as a selection factor, can only be used in procurement of A/E professional services. It cannot be used to purchase other types of services though A/E firms are a potential source to perform the proposed effort.
                (e) [Reserved]
                (f) Procurement by noncompetitive proposals. Procurement by noncompetitive proposals is procurement through solicitation of a proposal from only one source and may be used only when one or more of the following circumstances apply:
                (1) The item is available only from a single source;
                (2) The public exigency or emergency for the requirement will not permit a delay resulting from competitive solicitation;
                (3) The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes noncompetitive proposals in response to a written request from the non-Federal entity; or
                (4) After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.330
                Contracting with small and minority businesses, women's business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms.
                (a) The non-Federal entity must take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that minority businesses, women's business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms are used when possible.
                (b) Affirmative steps must include:
                (1) Placing qualified small and minority businesses and women's business enterprises on solicitation lists;
                (2) Assuring that small and minority businesses, and women's business enterprises are solicited whenever they are potential sources;

                (3) Dividing total requirements, when economically feasible, into smaller tasks or quantities to permit maximum participation by small and minority businesses, and women's business enterprises;
                (4) Establishing delivery schedules, where the requirement permits, which encourage participation by small and minority businesses, and women's business enterprises;
                (5) Using the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such organizations as the Small Business Administration and the Minority Business Development Agency of the Department of Commerce; and
                (6) Requiring the prime contractor, if subcontracts are to be let, to take the affirmative steps listed in paragraphs (b)(1) through (5) of this section.
              
              
                § 75.331
                Procurement of recovered materials.
                A non-Federal entity that is a state agency or agency of a political subdivision of a state and its contractors must comply with section 6002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The requirements of Section 6002 include procuring only items designated in guidelines of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR part 247 that contain the highest percentage of recovered materials practicable, consistent with maintaining a satisfactory level of competition, where the purchase price of the item exceeds $10,000 or the value of the quantity acquired during the preceding fiscal year exceeded $10,000; procuring solid waste management services in a manner that maximizes energy and resource recovery; and establishing an affirmative procurement program for procurement of recovered materials identified in the EPA guidelines.
              
              
                § 75.332
                Contract cost and price.
                (a) The non-Federal entity must perform a cost or price analysis in connection with every procurement action in excess of the Simplified Acquisition Threshold including contract modifications. The method and degree of analysis is dependent on the facts surrounding the particular procurement situation, but as a starting point, the non-Federal entity must make independent estimates before receiving bids or proposals.
                (b) The non-Federal entity must negotiate profit as a separate element of the price for each contract in which there is no price competition and in all cases where cost analysis is performed. To establish a fair and reasonable profit, consideration must be given to the complexity of the work to be performed, the risk borne by the contractor, the contractor's investment, the amount of subcontracting, the quality of its record of past performance, and industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for similar work.
                (c) Costs or prices based on estimated costs for contracts under the Federal award are allowable only to the extent that costs incurred or cost estimates included in negotiated prices would be allowable for the non-Federal entity under subpart E of this part. The non-Federal entity may reference its own cost principles that comply with the Federal cost principles.
                (d) The cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of construction cost methods of contracting must not be used.
              
              
                § 75.333
                HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity review.
                (a) The non-Federal entity must make available, upon request of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity, technical specifications on proposed procurements where the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity believes such review is needed to ensure that the item or service specified is the one being proposed for acquisition. This review generally will take place prior to the time the specification is incorporated into a solicitation document. However, if the non-Federal entity desires to have the review accomplished after a solicitation has been developed, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may still review the specifications, with such review usually limited to the technical aspects of the proposed purchase.

                (b) The non-Federal entity must make available upon request, for the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity pre-procurement review, procurement documents, such as requests for proposals or invitations for bids, or independent cost estimates, when:
                (1) The non-Federal entity's procurement procedures or operation fails to comply with the procurement standards in this part;
                (2) The procurement is expected to exceed the Simplified Acquisition Threshold and is to be awarded without competition or only one bid or offer is received in response to a solicitation;
                (3) The procurement, which is expected to exceed the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, specifies a “brand name” product;
                (4) The proposed contract is more than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold and is to be awarded to other than the apparent low bidder under a sealed bid procurement; or
                (5) A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract or increases the contract amount by more than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold.
                (c) The non-Federal entity is exempt from the pre-procurement review in paragraph (b) of this section if the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity determines that its procurement systems comply with the standards of this part.
                (1) The non-Federal entity may request that its procurement system be reviewed by the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity to determine whether its system meets these standards in order for its system to be certified. Generally, these reviews must occur where there is continuous high-dollar funding, and third party contracts are awarded on a regular basis;
                (2) The non-Federal entity may self-certify its procurement system. Such self-certification must not limit the HHS awarding agency's right to survey the system. Under a self-certification procedure, the HHS awarding agency may rely on written assurances from the non-Federal entity that it is complying with these standards. The non-Federal entity must cite specific policies, procedures, regulations, or standards as being in compliance with these requirements and have its system available for review.
              
              
                § 75.334
                Bonding requirements.
                For construction or facility improvement contracts or subcontracts exceeding the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may accept the bonding policy and requirements of the non-Federal entity provided that the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity has made a determination that the Federal interest is adequately protected. If such a determination has not been made, the minimum requirements must be as follows:
                (a) A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of the bid price. The “bid guarantee” must consist of a firm commitment such as a bid bond, certified check, or other negotiable instrument accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder will, upon acceptance of the bid, execute such contractual documents as may be required within the time specified.
                (b) A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price. A “performance bond” is one executed in connection with a contract to secure fulfillment of all the contractor's obligations under such contract.
                (c) A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price. A “payment bond” is one executed in connection with a contract to assure payment as required by law of all persons supplying labor and material in the execution of the work provided for in the contract.
                (d) Where bonds are required in the situations described herein, the bonds shall be obtained from companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties pursuant to 31 CFR part 223.
              
              
                § 75.335
                Contract provisions.
                The non-Federal entity's contracts must contain the applicable provisions described in appendix II to this part.
              
              
                §§ 75.336-75.340
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Performance and Financial Monitoring and Reporting
              
                § 75.341
                Financial reporting.

                Unless otherwise approved by OMB, the HHS awarding agency may solicit only the standard, OMB-approved government-wide data elements for collection of financial information (at time of publication the Federal Financial Report or such future collections as may be approved by OMB and listed on the OMB Web site). This information must be collected with the frequency required by the terms and conditions of the Federal award, but no less frequently than annually nor more frequently than quarterly except in unusual circumstances, for example where more frequent reporting is necessary for the effective monitoring of the Federal award or could significantly affect program outcomes, and preferably in coordination with performance reporting.
              
              
                § 75.342
                Monitoring and reporting program performance.
                (a) Monitoring by the non-Federal entity. The non-Federal entity is responsible for oversight of the operations of the Federal award supported activities. The non-Federal entity must monitor its activities under Federal awards to assure compliance with applicable Federal requirements and performance expectations are being achieved. Monitoring by the non-Federal entity must cover each program, function or activity. See also § 75.352.
                (b) Non-construction performance reports. The HHS awarding agency must use standard, OMB-approved data elements for collection of performance information (including performance progress reports, Research Performance Progress Report, or such future collections as may be approved by OMB and listed on the OMB Web site).
                (1) The non-Federal entity must submit performance reports at the interval required by the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity to best inform improvements in program outcomes and productivity. Intervals must be no less frequent than annually nor more frequent than quarterly except in unusual circumstances, for example where more frequent reporting is necessary for the effective monitoring of the Federal award or could significantly affect program outcomes. Annual reports must be due 90 calendar days after the reporting period; quarterly or semiannual reports must be due 30 calendar days after the reporting period. Alternatively, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may require annual reports before the anniversary dates of multiple year Federal awards. The final performance report will be due 90 calendar days after the period of performance end date. If a justified request is submitted by a non-Federal entity, the HHS awarding agency may extend the due date for any performance report.
                (2) The non-Federal entity must submit performance reports using OMB-approved government-wide standard information collections when providing performance information. As appropriate in accordance with the above-mentioned information collections, these reports will contain, for each Federal award, brief information on the following unless other collections are approved by OMB:
                (i) A comparison of actual accomplishments to the objectives of the Federal award established for the period. Where the accomplishments of the Federal award can be quantified, a computation of the cost (for example, related to units of accomplishment) may be required if that information will be useful. Where performance trend data and analysis would be informative to the HHS awarding agency program, the HHS awarding agency should include this as a performance reporting requirement.
                (ii) The reasons why established goals were not met, if appropriate.
                (iii) Additional pertinent information including, when appropriate, analysis and explanation of cost overruns or high unit costs.
                (c) Construction performance reports. For the most part, onsite technical inspections and certified percentage of completion data are relied on heavily by HHS awarding agencies and pass-through entities to monitor progress under Federal awards and subawards for construction. The HHS awarding agency may require additional performance reports only when considered necessary.
                (d) Significant developments. Events may occur between the scheduled performance reporting dates that have significant impact upon the supported activity. In such cases, the non-Federal entity must inform the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity as soon as the following types of conditions become known:
                (1) Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will materially impair the ability to meet the objective of the Federal award. This disclosure must include a statement of the action taken, or contemplated, and any assistance needed to resolve the situation.
                (2) Favorable developments which enable meeting time schedules and objectives sooner or at less cost than anticipated or producing more or different beneficial results than originally planned.
                (e) The HHS awarding agency may make site visits as warranted by program needs.
                (f) The HHS awarding agency may waive any performance report required by this part if not needed.
              
              
                § 75.343
                Reporting on real property.

                The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must require a non-Federal entity to submit reports at least annually on the status of real property in which the Federal Government retains an interest, unless the Federal interest in the real property extends 15 years or longer. In those instances where the Federal interest attached is for a period of 15 years or more, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity, at its option, may require the non-Federal entity to report at various multi-year frequencies (e.g., every two years or every three years, not to exceed a five-year reporting period; or an HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may require annual reporting for the first three years of a Federal award and thereafter require reporting every five years).
              
              
                §§ 75.344-75.350
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Subrecipient Monitoring and Management
              
                § 75.351
                Subrecipient and contractor determinations.
                The non-Federal entity may concurrently receive Federal awards as a recipient, a subrecipient, and a contractor, depending on the substance of its agreements with HHS awarding agencies and pass-through entities. Therefore, a pass-through entity must make case-by-case determinations whether each agreement it makes for the disbursement of Federal program funds casts the party receiving the funds in the role of a subrecipient or a contractor. The HHS awarding agency may supply and require recipients to comply with additional guidance to support these determinations provided such guidance does not conflict with this section.
                (a) Subrecipients. A subaward is for the purpose of carrying out a portion of a Federal award and creates a Federal assistance relationship with the subrecipient. See § 75.2 Subaward. Characteristics which support the classification of the non-Federal entity as a subrecipient include when the non-Federal entity:
                (1) Determines who is eligible to receive what Federal assistance;
                (2) Has its performance measured in relation to whether objectives of a Federal program were met;
                (3) Has responsibility for programmatic decision making;
                (4) Is responsible for adherence to applicable Federal program requirements specified in the Federal award; and
                (5) In accordance with its agreement, uses the Federal funds to carry out a program for a public purpose specified in authorizing statute, as opposed to providing goods or services for the benefit of the pass-through entity.
                (b) Contractors. A contract is for the purpose of obtaining goods and services for the non-Federal entity's own use and creates a procurement relationship with the contractor. See § 75.2 Contract. Characteristics indicative of a procurement relationship between the non-Federal entity and a contractor are when the contractor:
                (1) Provides the goods and services within normal business operations;
                (2) Provides similar goods or services to many different purchasers;
                (3) Normally operates in a competitive environment;
                (4) Provides goods or services that are ancillary to the operation of the Federal program; and

                (5) Is not subject to compliance requirements of the Federal program as a result of the agreement, though similar requirements may apply for other reasons.
                (c) Use of judgment in making determination. In determining whether an agreement between a pass-through entity and another non-Federal entity casts the latter as a subrecipient or a contractor, the substance of the relationship is more important than the form of the agreement. All of the characteristics listed above may not be present in all cases, and the pass-through entity must use judgment in classifying each agreement as a subaward or a procurement contract.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.352
                Requirements for pass-through entities.
                All pass-through entities must:
                (a) Ensure that every subaward is clearly identified to the subrecipient as a subaward and includes the following information at the time of the subaward and if any of these data elements change, include the changes in subsequent subaward modification. When some of this information is not available, the pass-through entity must provide the best information available to describe the Federal award and subaward. Required information includes:
                (1) Federal Award Identification.
                (i) Subrecipient name (which must match the name associated with its unique entity identifier;
                (ii) Subrecipient's unique entity identifier;
                (iii) Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN);
                (iv) Federal Award Date (see § 75.2 Federal award date) of award to the recipient by the HHS awarding agency;
                (v) Subaward Period of Performance Start and End Date;
                (vi) Amount of Federal Funds Obligated by this action by the pass-through entity to the subrecipient;
                (vii) Total Amount of Federal Funds Obligated to the subrecipient by the pass-through entity including the current obligation;
                (viii) Total Amount of the Federal Award committed to the subrecipient by the pass-through entity;
                (ix) Federal award project description, as required to be responsive to the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act (FFATA);
                (x) Name of HHS awarding agency, pass-through entity, and contract information for awarding official of the pass-through entity;
                (xi) CFDA Number and Name; the pass-through entity must identify the dollar amount made available under each Federal award and the CFDA number at time of disbursement;
                (xii) Identification of whether the award is R&D; and
                (xiii) Indirect cost rate for the Federal award (including if the de minimis rate is charged per § 75.414).
                (2) All requirements imposed by the pass-through entity on the subrecipient so that the Federal award is used in accordance with Federal statutes, regulations and the terms and conditions of the Federal award;
                (3) Any additional requirements that the pass-through entity imposes on the subrecipient in order for the pass-through entity to meet its own responsibility to the HHS awarding agency including identification of any required financial and performance reports;
                (4) An approved federally recognized indirect cost rate negotiated between the subrecipient and the Federal Government or, if no such rate exists, either a rate negotiated between the pass-through entity and the subrecipient (in compliance with this part), or a de minimis indirect cost rate as defined in § 75.414(f);
                (5) A requirement that the subrecipient permit the pass-through entity and auditors to have access to the subrecipient's records and financial statements as necessary for the pass-through entity to meet the requirements of this part; and
                (6) Appropriate terms and conditions concerning closeout of the subaward.
                (b) Evaluate each subrecipient's risk of noncompliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the subaward for purposes of determining the appropriate subrecipient monitoring described in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, which may include consideration of such factors as:

                (1) The subrecipient's prior experience with the same or similar subawards;
                
                (2) The results of previous audits including whether or not the subrecipient receives a Single Audit in accordance with subpart F, and the extent to which the same or similar subaward has been audited as a major program;
                (3) Whether the subrecipient has new personnel or new or substantially changed systems; and

                (4) The extent and results of HHS awarding agency monitoring (e.g., if the subrecipient also receives Federal awards directly from a HHS awarding agency).
                (c) Consider imposing specific subaward conditions upon a subrecipient if appropriate as described in § 75.207.
                (d) Monitor the activities of the subrecipient as necessary to ensure that the subaward is used for authorized purposes, in compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the subaward; and that subaward performance goals are achieved. Pass-through entity monitoring of the subrecipient must include:
                (1) Reviewing financial and performance reports required by the pass-through entity.
                (2) Following-up and ensuring that the subrecipient takes timely and appropriate action on all deficiencies pertaining to the Federal award provided to the subrecipient from the pass-through entity detected through audits, on-site reviews, and other means.
                (3) Issuing a management decision for audit findings pertaining to the Federal award provided to the subrecipient from the pass-through entity as required by § 75.521.
                (e) Depending upon the pass-through entity's assessment of risk posed by the subrecipient (as described in paragraph (b) of this section), the following monitoring tools may be useful for the pass-through entity to ensure proper accountability and compliance with program requirements and achievement of performance goals:
                (1) Providing subrecipients with training and technical assistance on program-related matters; and
                (2) Performing on-site reviews of the subrecipient's program operations;
                (3) Arranging for agreed-upon-procedures engagements as described in § 75.425.
                (f) Verify that every subrecipient is audited as required by subpart F of this part when it is expected that the subrecipient's Federal awards expended during the respective fiscal year equaled or exceeded the threshold set forth in § 75.501.
                (g) Consider whether the results of the subrecipient's audits, on-site reviews, or other monitoring indicate conditions that necessitate adjustments to the pass-through entity's own records.
                (h) Consider taking enforcement action against noncompliant subrecipients as described in § 75.371 and in program regulations.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3016, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.353
                Fixed amount subawards.
                With prior written approval from the HHS awarding agency, a pass-through entity may provide subawards based on fixed amounts up to the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, provided that the subawards meet the requirements for fixed amount awards in § 75.201.
              
              
                §§ 75.354-75.360
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Record Retention and Access
              
                § 75.361
                Retention requirements for records.
                Financial records, supporting documents, statistical records, and all other non-Federal entity records pertinent to a Federal award must be retained for a period of three years from the date of submission of the final expenditure report or, for Federal awards that are renewed quarterly or annually, from the date of the submission of the quarterly or annual financial report, respectively, as reported to the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity in the case of a subrecipient. HHS awarding agencies and pass-through entities must not impose any other record retention requirements upon non-Federal entities. The only exceptions are the following:

                (a) If any litigation, claim, or audit is started before the expiration of the 3-year period, the records must be retained until all litigation, claims, or audit findings involving the records have been resolved and final action taken.
                (b) When the non-Federal entity is notified in writing by the HHS awarding agency, cognizant agency for audit, oversight agency for audit, cognizant agency for indirect costs, or pass-through entity to extend the retention period.
                (c) Records for real property and equipment acquired with Federal funds must be retained for 3 years after final disposition.
                (d) When records are transferred to or maintained by the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity, the 3-year retention requirement is not applicable to the non-Federal entity.
                (e) Records for program income transactions after the period of performance. In some cases, recipients must report program income after the period of performance. Where there is such a requirement, the retention period for the records pertaining to the earning of the program income starts from the end of the non-Federal entity's fiscal year in which the program income is earned.
                (f) Indirect cost rate proposals and cost allocations plans. This paragraph applies to the following types of documents and their supporting records: Indirect cost rate computations or proposals, cost allocation plans, and any similar accounting computations of the rate at which a particular group of costs is chargeable (such as computer usage chargeback rates or composite fringe benefit rates).
                (1) If submitted for negotiation. If the proposal, plan, or other computation is required to be submitted to the Federal Government (or to the pass-through entity) to form the basis for negotiation of the rate, then the 3-year retention period for its supporting records starts from the date of such submission.
                (2) If not submitted for negotiation. If the proposal, plan, or other computation is not required to be submitted to the Federal Government (or to the pass-through entity) for negotiation purposes, then the 3-year retention period for the proposal, plan, or computation and its supporting records starts from the end of the fiscal year (or other accounting period) covered by the proposal, plan, or other computation.
              
              
                § 75.362
                Requests for transfer or records.
                The HHS awarding agency must request transfer of certain records to its custody from the non-Federal entity when it determines that the records possess long-term retention value. However, in order to avoid duplicate recordkeeping, the HHS awarding agency may make arrangements for the non-Federal entity to retain any records that are continuously needed for joint use.
              
              
                § 75.363
                Methods for collection, transmission and storage of information.
                In accordance with the May 2013 Executive Order on Making Open and Machine readable the New Default for Government Information, the HHS awarding agency and the non-Federal entity should, whenever practicable, collect, transmit, and store Federal award-related information in open and machine readable formats rather than in closed formats or on paper.
                [81 FR 3017, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.364
                Access to records.
                (a) Records of non-Federal entities. The HHS awarding agency, Inspectors General, the Comptroller General of the United States, and the pass-through entity, or any of their authorized representatives, must have the right of access to any documents, papers, or other records of the non-Federal entity which are pertinent to the Federal award, in order to make audits, examinations, excerpts, and transcripts. The right also includes timely and reasonable access to the non-Federal entity's personnel for the purpose of interview and discussion related to such documents.

                (b) Only under extraordinary and rare circumstances would such access include review of the true name of victims of a crime. Routine monitoring cannot be considered extraordinary and rare circumstances that would necessitate access to this information. When access to the true name of victims of a crime is necessary, appropriate steps to protect this sensitive information must be taken by both the non-Federal entity and the HHS awarding agency. Any such access, other than under a court order or subpoena pursuant to a bona fide confidential investigation, must be approved by the head of the HHS awarding agency or delegate.
                (c) Expiration of right of access. The rights of access in this section are not limited to the required retention period but last as long as the records are retained. HHS awarding agencies and pass-through entities must not impose any other access requirements upon non-Federal entities.
              
              
                § 75.365
                Restrictions on public access to records.
                Consistent with § 75.322, HHS awarding agencies may require recipients to permit public access to manuscripts, publications, and data produced under an award. However, no HHS awarding agency may place restrictions on the non-Federal entity that limit public access to the records of the non-Federal entity pertinent to a Federal award identified in §§ 75.361 through 75.364, except for protected personally identifiable information (PII) or when the HHS awarding agency can demonstrate that such records will be kept confidential and would have been exempted from disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) or controlled unclassified information pursuant to Executive Order 13556 if the records had belonged to the HHS awarding agency. The Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) (FOIA) does not apply to those records that remain under a non-Federal entity's control except as required under § 75.322. Unless required by Federal, state, local, or tribal statute, non-Federal entities are not required to permit public access to their records identified in §§ 75.361 through 75.364. The non-Federal entity's records provided to a Federal agency generally will be subject to FOIA and applicable exemptions.
                [81 FR 89395, Dec. 12, 2016]
              
              
                §§ 75.366-75.370
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Remedies for Noncompliance
              
                § 75.371
                Remedies for noncompliance.
                If a non-Federal entity fails to comply with Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of a Federal award, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may impose additional conditions, as described in § 75.207. If the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity determines that noncompliance cannot be remedied by imposing additional conditions, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may take one or more of the following actions, as appropriate in the circumstances:
                (a) Temporarily withhold cash payments pending correction of the deficiency by the non-Federal entity or more severe enforcement action by the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity.
                (b) Disallow (that is, deny both use of funds and any applicable matching credit for) all or part of the cost of the activity or action not in compliance.
                (c) Wholly or partly suspend (suspension of award activities) or terminate the Federal award.
                (d) Initiate suspension or debarment proceedings as authorized under 2 CFR part 180 and HHS awarding agency regulations at 2 CFR part 376 (or in the case of a pass-through entity, recommend such a proceeding be initiated by a HHS awarding agency).
                (e) Withhold further Federal awards for the project or program.
                (f) Take other remedies that may be legally available.
              
              
                § 75.372
                Termination.
                (a) The Federal award may be terminated in whole or in part as follows:
                (1) By the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity, if the non-Federal entity fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the award;
                (2) By the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity for cause;

                (3) By the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity with the consent of the non-Federal entity, in which case the two parties must agree upon the termination conditions, including the effective date and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated; or
                (4) By the non-Federal entity upon sending to the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity written notification setting forth the reasons for such termination, the effective date, and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. However, if the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity determines in the case of partial termination that the reduced or modified portion of the Federal award or subaward will not accomplish the purposes for which the Federal award was made, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may terminate the Federal award in its entirety.
                (b) When an HHS awarding agency terminates a Federal award prior to the end of the period of performance due to the non-Federal entity's material failure to comply with the Federal award terms and conditions, the HHS awarding agency must report the termination to the OMB-designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM (currently FAPIIS).
                (1) The information required under this paragraph (b) is not to be reported to the designated integrity and performance system until after the non-Federal entity either—
                (i) Has exhausted its opportunities to object or challenge the decision, see § 75.374; or
                (ii) Has not, within 30 calendar days after being notified of the termination, informed the HHS awarding agency that it intends to appeal the HHS awarding agency's decision to terminate.
                (2) If an HHS awarding agency, after entering information into the designated integrity and performance system about a termination, subsequently:
                (i) Learns that any of the information is erroneous, the HHS awarding agency must correct the information in the system within three business days;
                (ii) Obtains an update to that information that could be helpful to other Federal awarding agencies, the HHS awarding agency is strongly encouraged to amend the information in the system to incorporate the update in a timely way;
                (3) HHS awarding agencies shall not post any information that will be made publicly available in the non-public segment of the designated integrity and performance system that is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of Information Act. If the non-Federal entity asserts within seven calendar days to the HHS awarding agency who posted the information, that some of the information made publicly available is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of Information Act, the HHS awarding agency who posted the information must remove the posting within seven calendar days of receiving the assertion. Prior to reposting the releasable information, the HHS agency must resolve the issue in accordance with the agency's Freedom of Information Act procedures.
                (c) When a Federal award is terminated or partially terminated, both the HHS awarding agency or pass-through agency and the non-Federal entity remain responsible for compliance with the requirements of §§ 75.381 through 75.390.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3017, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.373
                Notification of termination requirement.
                (a) The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must provide to the non-Federal entity a notice of termination.
                (b) If the Federal award is terminated for the non-Federal entity's material failure to comply with the Federal statutes, regulations, or terms and conditions of the Federal award, the notification must state that—
                (1) The termination decision will be reported to the OMB-designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM (currently FAPIIS);
                (2) The information will be available in the OMB-designated integrity and performance system for a period of five years from the date of the termination, then archived;

                (3) HHS awarding agencies that consider making a Federal award to the non-Federal entity during that five year period must consider that information in judging whether the non-Federal entity is qualified to receive the Federal award, when the Federal share of the Federal award is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold over the period of performance;
                (4) The non-Federal entity may comment on any information the OMB-designated integrity and performance system contains about the non-Federal entity for future consideration by HHS awarding agencies. The non-Federal entity may submit comments to the awardee integrity and performance portal accessible through SAM (currently CPARS).
                (5) Federal awarding agencies will consider non-Federal entity comments when determining whether the non-Federal entity is qualified for a future Federal award.
                (c) Upon termination of a Federal award, the HHS awarding agency must provide the information required under FFATA to the Federal Web site established to fulfill the requirements of FFATA, and update or notify any other relevant government-wide systems or entities of any indications of poor performance as required by 41 U.S.C. 417b and 31 U.S.C. 3321 and implementing guidance at 2 CFR part 77 (forthcoming at time of publication). See also the requirements for Suspension and Debarment at 2 CFR part 180.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3017, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.374
                Opportunities to object, hearings, and appeals.
                (a) Upon taking any remedy for non-compliance, the HHS awarding agency must provide the non-Federal entity an opportunity to object and provide information and documentation challenging the suspension or termination action, in accordance with written processes and procedures published by the HHS awarding agency. The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must comply with any requirements for hearings, appeals or other administrative proceedings to which the non-Federal entity is entitled under any statute or regulation applicable to the action involved.
                (b) See also:
                (1) 42 CFR part 50, subpart D for the Public Health Service Appeals Procedures,
                (2) 45 CFR part 16 for the Procedures of the Departmental Appeals Board, and
                (3) 45 CFR part 95, subpart A for the time limits for states to file claims.
                (4) 45 CFR part 95, subpart E for the State cost allocation plan disapprovals.
              
              
                § 75.375
                Effects of suspension and termination.
                Costs to the non-Federal entity resulting from obligations incurred by the non-Federal entity during a suspension or after termination of a Federal award or subaward are not allowable unless the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes them in the notice of suspension or termination or subsequently. However, costs during suspension or after termination are allowable if:
                (a) The costs result from obligations which were properly incurred by the non-Federal entity before the effective date of suspension or termination, are not in anticipation of it; and
                (b) The costs would be allowable if the Federal award was not suspended or expired normally at the end of the period of performance in which the termination takes effect.
              
              
                §§ 75.376-75.380
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Closeout
              
                § 75.381
                Closeout.
                The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity will close-out the Federal award when it determines that all applicable administrative actions and all required work of the Federal award have been completed by the non-Federal entity. This section specifies the actions the non-Federal entity and HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must take to complete this process at the end of the period of performance.

                (a) The non-Federal entity must submit, no later than 90 calendar days after the end date of the period of performance, all financial, performance, and other reports as required by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity may approve extensions when requested by the non-Federal entity.
                
                (b) Unless the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity authorizes an extension, a non-Federal entity must liquidate all obligations incurred under the Federal award not later than 90 calendar days after the end date of the period of performance as specified in the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (c) The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must make prompt payments to the non-Federal entity for allowable reimbursable costs under the Federal award being closed out.
                (d) The non-Federal entity must promptly refund any balances of unobligated cash that the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity paid in advance or paid and that are not authorized to be retained by the non-Federal entity for use in other projects. See OMB Circular A-129 and see § 75.391 for requirements regarding unreturned amounts that become delinquent debts.
                (e) Consistent with the terms and conditions of the Federal award, the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must make a settlement for any upward or downward adjustments to the Federal share of costs after closeout reports are received.
                (f) The non-Federal entity must account for any real and personal property acquired with Federal funds or received from the Federal Government in accordance with §§ 75.317 through 75.323 and 75.343.
                (g) The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity should complete all closeout actions for Federal awards no later than 180 calendar days after receipt and acceptance of all required final reports.
              
              
                §§ 75.382-75.385
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Post-Closeout Adjustments and Continuing Responsibilities
              
                § 75.386
                Post-closeout adjustments and continuing responsibilities.
                (a) The closeout of a Federal award does not affect any of the following:
                (1) The right of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity to disallow costs and recover funds on the basis of a later audit or other review. The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity must make any cost disallowance determination and notify the non-Federal entity within the record retention period.
                (2) The obligation of the non-Federal entity to return any funds due as a result of later refunds, corrections, or other transactions including final indirect cost rate adjustments.
                (3) Audit requirements in subpart F of this part.
                (4) Property management and disposition requirements in §§ 75.317 through 75.323.
                (5) Records retention as required in §§ 75.361 through 75.365.
                (b) After closeout of the Federal award, a relationship created under the Federal award may be modified or ended in whole or in part with the consent of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity and the non-Federal entity, provided the responsibilities of the non-Federal entity referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, including those for property management as applicable, are considered and provisions made for continuing responsibilities of the non-Federal entity, as appropriate.
              
              
                §§ 75.387-75.390
                [Reserved]
              
            
            
              Collection of Amounts Due
              
                § 75.391
                Collection of amounts due.
                (a) Any funds paid to the non-Federal entity in excess of the amount to which the non-Federal entity is finally determined to be entitled under the terms of the Federal award constitute a debt to the Federal Government. If not paid within 90 calendar days after demand, the HHS awarding agency may reduce the debt by:
                (1) Making an administrative offset against other requests for reimbursements;
                (2) Withholding advance payments otherwise due to the non-Federal entity; or
                (3) Other action permitted by Federal statute.

                (b) Except where otherwise provided by statutes or regulations, the HHS awarding agency will charge interest on an overdue debt in accordance with the Federal Claims Collection Standards (31 CFR parts 900 through 999). The date from which interest is computed is not extended by litigation or the filing of any form of appeal. (See also HHS Claims Collection regulations at 45 CFR part 30.)
              
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Cost Principles
            
              General Provisions
              
                § 75.400
                Policy guide.
                The application of these cost principles is based on the fundamental premises that:
                (a) The non-Federal entity is responsible for the efficient and effective administration of the Federal award through the application of sound management practices.
                (b) The non-Federal entity assumes responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (c) The non-Federal entity, in recognition of its own unique combination of staff, facilities, and experience, has the primary responsibility for employing whatever form of sound organization and management techniques may be necessary in order to assure proper and efficient administration of the Federal-award.
                (d) The application of these cost principles should require no significant changes in the internal accounting policies and practices of the non-Federal entity. However, the accounting practices of the non-Federal entity must be consistent with these cost principles and support the accumulation of costs as required by the principles, and must provide for adequate documentation to support costs charged to the Federal award.

                (e) In reviewing, negotiating and approving cost allocation plans or indirect cost proposals, the cognizant agency for indirect costs should generally assure that the non-Federal entity is applying these cost accounting principles on a consistent basis during their review and negotiation of indirect cost proposals. Where wide variations exist in the treatment of a given cost item by the non-Federal entity, the reasonableness and equity of such treatments should be fully considered. See § 75.2 Indirect (facilities & administrative (F&A)) costs.
                
                (f) For non-Federal entities that educate and engage students in research, the dual role of students as both trainees and employees (including pre- and post-doctoral staff) contributing to the completion of Federal awards for research must be recognized in the application of these principles.
                (g) The non-Federal entity may not earn or keep any profit resulting from Federal financial assistance, unless explicitly authorized by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. See also § 75.307.
              
              
                § 75.401
                Application.
                (a) General. These principles must be used in determining the allowable costs of work performed by the non-Federal entity under Federal awards. These principles also must be used by the non-Federal entity as a guide in the pricing of fixed-price contracts and subcontracts where costs are used in determining the appropriate price. The principles do not apply to:
                (1) Arrangements under which Federal financing is in the form of loans, scholarships, fellowships, traineeships, or other fixed amounts based on such items as education allowance or published tuition rates and fees.
                (2) For IHEs, capitation awards, which are awards based on case counts or number of beneficiaries according to the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (3) Fixed amount awards. See also §§ 75.2 Fixed amount awards and 75.201.
                (4) Federal awards to hospitals (see appendix IX to part 75).
                (5) Other awards under which the non-Federal entity is not required to account to the Federal Government for actual costs incurred.
                (b) Federal Contract. Where a Federal contract awarded to a non-Federal entity is subject to the Cost Accounting Standards (CAS), it incorporates the applicable CAS clauses, Standards, and CAS administration requirements per the 48 CFR Chapter 99 and 48 CFR part 30 (FAR part 30). CAS applies directly to the CAS-covered contract and the Cost Accounting Standards at 48 CFR parts 9904 or 9905 takes precedence over the cost principles in this subpart E with respect to the allocation of costs. When a contract with a non-Federal entity is subject to full CAS coverage, the allowability of certain costs under the cost principles will be affected by the allocation provisions of the Cost Accounting Standards (e.g., CAS 414-48 CFR 9904.414, and CAS 417-48 CFR 9904.417), apply rather the allowability provisions of § 75.449. In complying with those requirements, the non-Federal entity's application of cost accounting practices for estimating, accumulating, and reporting costs for other Federal awards and other cost objectives under the CAS-covered contract still must be consistent with its cost accounting practices for the CAS-covered contracts. In all cases, only one set of accounting records needs to be maintained for the allocation of costs by the non-Federal entity.
                (c) Exemptions. Some nonprofit organizations, because of their size and nature of operations, can be considered to be similar to for-profit entities for purpose of applicability of cost principles. Such nonprofit organizations must operate under Federal cost principles applicable to for-profit entities located at 48 CFR 31.2. A listing of these organizations is contained in appendix VIII to part 75. Other organizations, as approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs, may be added from time to time.
              
            
            
              Basic Considerations
              
                § 75.402
                Composition of costs.
                
                  Total cost. The total cost of a Federal award is the sum of the allowable direct and allocable indirect costs less any applicable credits.
              
              
                § 75.403
                Factors affecting allowability of costs.
                Except where otherwise authorized by statute, costs must meet the following general criteria in order to be allowable under Federal awards:
                (a) Be necessary and reasonable for the performance of the Federal award and be allocable thereto under these principles.
                (b) Conform to any limitations or exclusions set forth in these principles or in the Federal award as to types or amount of cost items.
                (c) Be consistent with policies and procedures that apply uniformly to both federally-financed and other activities of the non-Federal entity.
                (d) Be accorded consistent treatment. A cost may not be assigned to a Federal award as a direct cost if any other cost incurred for the same purpose in like circumstances has been allocated to the Federal award as an indirect cost.
                (e) Be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), except, for state and local governments and Indian tribes only, as otherwise provided for in this part.
                (f) Not be included as a cost or used to meet cost sharing or matching requirements of any other federally-financed program in either the current or a prior period. See also § 75.306(b).
                (g) Be adequately documented. See also §§ 75.300 through 75.309.
              
              
                § 75.404
                Reasonable costs.
                A cost is reasonable if, in its nature and amount, it does not exceed that which would be incurred by a prudent person under the circumstances prevailing at the time the decision was made to incur the cost. The question of reasonableness is particularly important when the non-Federal entity is predominantly federally-funded. In determining reasonableness of a given cost, consideration must be given to:
                (a) Whether the cost is of a type generally recognized as ordinary and necessary for the operation of the non-Federal entity or the proper and efficient performance of the Federal award.
                (b) The restraints or requirements imposed by such factors as: Sound business practices; arm's-length bargaining; Federal, state, local, tribal, and other laws and regulations; and terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (c) Market prices for comparable goods or services for the geographic area.

                (d) Whether the individuals concerned acted with prudence in the circumstances considering their responsibilities to the non-Federal entity, its employees, where applicable its students or membership, the public at large, and the Federal Government.
                
                (e) Whether the non-Federal entity significantly deviates from its established practices and policies regarding the incurrence of costs, which may unjustifiably increase the Federal award's cost.
              
              
                § 75.405
                Allocable costs.
                (a) A cost is allocable to a particular Federal award or other cost objective if the goods or services involved are chargeable or assignable to that Federal award or cost objective in accordance with relative benefits received. This standard is met if the cost:
                (1) Is incurred specifically for the Federal award;
                (2) Benefits both the Federal award and other work of the non-Federal entity and can be distributed in proportions that may be approximated using reasonable methods; and
                (3) Is necessary to the overall operation of the non-Federal entity and is assignable in part to the Federal award in accordance with the principles in this subpart.
                (b) All activities which benefit from the non-Federal entity's indirect (F&A) cost, including unallowable activities and donated services by the non-Federal entity or third parties, will receive an appropriate allocation of indirect costs.
                (c) Any cost allocable to a particular Federal award under the principles provided for in this part may not be charged to other Federal awards to overcome fund deficiencies, to avoid restrictions imposed by Federal statutes, regulations, or terms and conditions of the Federal awards, or for other reasons. However, this prohibition would not preclude the non-Federal entity from shifting costs that are allowable under two or more Federal awards in accordance with existing Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal awards.
                (d) Direct cost allocation principles. If a cost benefits two or more projects or activities in proportions that can be determined without undue effort or cost, the cost must be allocated to the projects based on the proportional benefit. If a cost benefits two or more projects or activities in proportions that cannot be determined because of the interrelationship of the work involved, then, notwithstanding paragraph (c) of this section, the costs may be allocated or transferred to benefitted projects on any reasonable documented basis. Where the purchase of equipment or other capital asset is specifically authorized under a Federal award, the costs are assignable to the Federal award regardless of the use that may be made of the equipment or other capital asset involved when no longer needed for the purpose for which it was originally required. See also §§ 75.317 through 75.323 and 75.439.
                (e) If the contract is subject to CAS, costs must be allocated to the contract pursuant to the Cost Accounting Standards. To the extent that CAS is applicable, the allocation of costs in accordance with CAS takes precedence over the allocation provisions in this part.
              
              
                § 75.406
                Applicable credits.
                (a) Applicable credits refer to those receipts or reduction-of-expenditure-type transactions that offset or reduce expense items allocable to the Federal award as direct or indirect (F&A) costs. Examples of such transactions are: Purchase discounts, rebates or allowances, recoveries or indemnities on losses, insurance refunds or rebates, and adjustments of overpayments or erroneous charges. To the extent that such credits accruing to or received by the non-Federal entity relate to allowable costs, they must be credited to the Federal award either as a cost reduction or cash refund, as appropriate.
                (b) In some instances, the amounts received from the Federal Government to finance activities or service operations of the non-Federal entity should be treated as applicable credits. Specifically, the concept of netting such credit items (including any amounts used to meet cost sharing or matching requirements) must be recognized in determining the rates or amounts to be charged to the Federal award. (See §§ 75.436 and 75.468, for areas of potential application in the matter of Federal financing of activities.)
              
              
                § 75.407
                Prior written approval (prior approval).

                (a) Under any given Federal award, the reasonableness and allocability of certain items of costs may be difficult to determine. In order to avoid subsequent disallowance or dispute based on unreasonableness or non-allocability, the non-Federal entity may seek the prior written approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs or the HHS awarding agency in advance of the incurrence of special or unusual costs. Prior written approval should include the timeframe or scope of the agreement. The absence of prior written approval on any element of cost will not, in itself, affect the reasonableness or allocability of that element, unless prior approval is specifically required for allowability as described under certain circumstances in the following sections of this part:
                (1) § 75.201 Use of grant agreements (including fixed amount awards), cooperative agreements, and contracts, paragraph (b)(5);
                (2) § 75.306 Cost sharing or matching;
                (3) § 75.307 Program income;
                (4) § 75.308 Revision of budget and program plans;
                (5) § 75.309 Period of performance and availability of funds;
                (6) § 75.318 Real property;
                (7) § 75.320 Equipment;
                (8) § 75.353 Fixed amount subawards;
                (9) § 75.413 Direct costs, paragraph (c);
                (10) § 75.430 Compensation—personal services, paragraph (h);
                (11) § 75.431 Compensation—fringe benefits;
                (12) § 75.438 Entertainment costs;
                (13) § 75.439 Equipment and other capital expenditures;
                (14) § 75.440 Exchange rates;
                (15) § 75.441 Fines, penalties, damages and other settlements;
                (16) § 75.442 Fund raising and investment management costs;
                (17) § 75.445 Goods or services for personal use;
                (18) § 75.447 Insurance and indemnification;
                (19) § 75.454 Memberships, subscriptions, and professional activity costs, paragraph (c);
                (20) § 75.455 Organization costs;
                (21) § 75.456 Participant support costs;
                (22) § 75.458 Pre-award costs;
                (23) § 75.462 Rearrangement and reconversion costs;
                (24) § 75.467 Selling and marketing costs;
                (25) § 75.470 Taxes (including Value Added Tax) paragraph (c); and
                (26) § 75.474 Travel costs.
                (b) A request by a subrecipient for prior approval will be addressed in writing to the recipient. The recipient will promptly review such request and shall approve or disapprove the request in writing. A recipient will not approve any budget or project revision which is inconsistent with the purpose or terms and conditions of the Federal-award to the recipient. If the revision, requested by the subrecipient would result in a change to the recipient's approved project which requires Federal prior approval, the recipient will obtain the HHS awarding agency's approval before approving the subrecipient's request.
                (c) For cost-reimbursement contracts under the FAR, the recipient shall obtain prior written approval in accordance with FAR 52.244-2.
              
              
                § 75.408
                Limitation on allowance of costs.
                The Federal award may be subject to statutory requirements that limit the allowability of costs. When the maximum amount allowable under a limitation is less than the total amount determined in accordance with the principles in this part, the amount not recoverable under the Federal award may not be charged to the Federal award.
              
              
                § 75.409
                Special considerations.
                In addition to the basic considerations regarding the allowability of costs highlighted in this subtitle, other subtitles in this part describe special considerations and requirements applicable to states, local governments, Indian tribes, and IHEs. In addition, certain provisions among the items of cost in this subpart are only applicable to certain types of non-Federal entities, as specified in the following sections:
                (a) Direct and Indirect (F&A) Costs (§§ 75.412 through 75.415);
                (b) Special Considerations for States, Local Governments and Indian Tribes (§§ 75.416 and 75.417); and
                (c) Special Considerations for Institutions of Higher Education (§§ 75.418 and 75.419).
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3017, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                
                § 75.410
                Collection of unallowable costs.
                Payments made for costs determined to be unallowable by either the HHS awarding agency, cognizant agency for indirect costs, or pass-through entity, either as direct or indirect costs, must be refunded (including interest) to the Federal Government in accordance with instructions from the Federal agency that determined the costs are unallowable unless Federal statute or regulation directs otherwise. See also subpart D of this part, §§ 75.300 through 75.309.
              
              
                § 75.411
                Adjustment of previously negotiated indirect (F&A) cost rates containing unallowable costs.
                (a) Negotiated indirect (F&A) cost rates based on a proposal later found to have included costs that:
                (1) Are unallowable as specified by Federal statutes, regulations or the terms and conditions of a Federal award; or
                (2) Are unallowable because they are not allocable to the Federal award(s), must be adjusted, or a refund must be made, in accordance with the requirements of this section. These adjustments or refunds are designed to correct the proposals used to establish the rates and do not constitute a reopening of the rate negotiation. The adjustments or refunds will be made regardless of the type of rate negotiated (predetermined, final, fixed, or provisional).
                (b) For rates covering a future fiscal year of the non-Federal entity, the unallowable costs will be removed from the indirect (F&A) cost pools and the rates appropriately adjusted.
                (c) For rates covering a past period, the Federal share of the unallowable costs will be computed for each year involved and a cash refund (including interest chargeable in accordance with applicable regulations) will be made to the Federal Government. If cash refunds are made for past periods covered by provisional or fixed rates, appropriate adjustments will be made when the rates are finalized to avoid duplicate recovery of the unallowable costs by the Federal Government.
                (d) For rates covering the current period, either a rate adjustment or a refund, as described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, must be required by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. The choice of method must be at the discretion of the cognizant agency for indirect costs, based on its judgment as to which method would be most practical.
                (e) The amount or proportion of unallowable costs included in each year's rate will be assumed to be the same as the amount or proportion of unallowable costs included in the base year proposal used to establish the rate.
              
            
            
              Direct and Indirect (F&A) Costs
              
                § 75.412
                Classification of costs.
                There is no universal rule for classifying certain costs as either direct or indirect (F&A) under every accounting system. A cost may be direct with respect to some specific service or function, but indirect with respect to the Federal award or other final cost objective. Therefore, it is essential that each item of cost incurred for the same purpose be treated consistently in like circumstances either as a direct or an indirect (F&A) cost in order to avoid possible double-charging of Federal awards. Guidelines for determining direct and indirect (F&A) costs charged to Federal awards are provided in this subpart.
              
              
                § 75.413
                Direct costs.
                (a) General. Direct costs are those costs that can be identified specifically with a particular final cost objective, such as a Federal award, or other internally or externally funded activity, or that can be directly assigned to such activities relatively easily with a high degree of accuracy. Costs incurred for the same purpose in like circumstances must be treated consistently as either direct or indirect (F&A) costs. See also § 75.405.
                (b) Application to Federal awards. Identification with the Federal award rather than the nature of the goods and services involved is the determining factor in distinguishing direct from indirect (F&A) costs of Federal awards. Typical costs charged directly to a Federal award are the compensation of employees who work on that award, their related fringe benefit costs, the costs of materials and other items of expense incurred for the Federal award. If directly related to a specific award, certain costs that otherwise would be treated as indirect costs may also include extraordinary utility consumption, the cost of materials supplied from stock or services rendered by specialized facilities or other institutional service operations.
                (c) The salaries of administrative and clerical staff should normally be treated as indirect (F&A) costs. Direct charging of these costs may be appropriate only if all of the following conditions are met:
                (1) Administrative or clerical services are integral to a project or activity;
                (2) Individuals involved can be specifically identified with the project or activity;
                (3) Such costs are explicitly included in the budget or have the prior written approval of the Federal awarding agency; and
                (4) The costs are not also recovered as indirect costs.
                (d) Minor items. Any direct cost of minor amount may be treated as an indirect (F&A) cost for reasons of practicality where such accounting treatment for that item of cost is consistently applied to all Federal and non-Federal cost objectives.
                (e) The costs of certain activities are not allowable as charges to Federal awards. However, even though these costs are unallowable for purposes of computing charges to Federal awards, they nonetheless must be treated as direct costs for purposes of determining indirect (F&A) cost rates and be allocated their equitable share of the non-Federal entity's indirect costs if they represent activities which:
                (1) Include the salaries of personnel,
                (2) Occupy space, and
                (3) Benefit from the non-Federal entity's indirect (F&A) costs.
                (f) For nonprofit organizations, the costs of activities performed by the non-Federal entity primarily as a service to members, clients, or the general public when significant and necessary to the non-Federal entity's mission must be treated as direct costs whether or not allowable, and be allocated an equitable share of indirect (F&A) costs. Some examples of these types of activities include:
                (1) Maintenance of membership rolls, subscriptions, publications, and related functions. See also § 75.454.
                (2) Providing services and information to members, legislative or administrative bodies, or the public. See also §§ 75.454 and 75.450.
                (3) Promotion, lobbying, and other forms of public relations. See also §§ 75.421 and 75.450.
                (4) Conferences except those held to conduct the general administration of the non-Federal entity. See also § 75.432.
                (5) Maintenance, protection, and investment of special funds not used in operation of the non-Federal entity. See also § 75.442.
                (6) Administration of group benefits on behalf of members or clients, including life and hospital insurance, annuity or retirement plans, and financial aid. See also § 75.431.
              
              
                § 75.414
                Indirect (F&A) costs.
                (a) Facilities and Administration Classification. For major IHEs and major nonprofit organizations, indirect (F&A) costs must be classified within two broad categories: “Facilities” and “Administration.” “Facilities” is defined as depreciation on buildings, equipment and capital improvement, interest on debt associated with certain buildings, equipment and capital improvements, and operations and maintenance expenses. “Administration” is defined as general administration and general expenses such as the director's office, accounting, personnel and all other types of expenditures not listed specifically under one of the subcategories of “Facilities” (including cross allocations from other pools, where applicable). For nonprofit organizations, library expenses are included in the “Administration” category; for institutions of higher education, they are included in the “Facilities” category. Major IHEs are defined as those required to use the Standard Format for Submission as noted in appendix III to part 75.C. 11. Major nonprofit organizations are those which receive more than $10 million dollars in direct Federal funding.
                
                (b) Diversity of nonprofit organizations. Because of the diverse characteristics and accounting practices of nonprofit organizations, it is not possible to specify the types of cost which may be classified as indirect (F&A) cost in all situations. Identification with a Federal award rather than the nature of the goods and services involved is the determining factor in distinguishing direct from indirect (F&A) costs of Federal awards. However, typical examples of indirect (F&A) cost for many nonprofit organizations may include depreciation on buildings and equipment, the costs of operating and maintaining facilities, and general administration and general expenses, such as the salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel administration, and accounting.
                (c) Federal Agency Acceptance of Negotiated Indirect Cost Rates. (See also § 75.306.)
                (1) The negotiated rates must be accepted by all Federal awarding agencies. An HHS awarding agency may use a rate different from the negotiated rate for a class of Federal awards or a single Federal award only when required by Federal statute or regulation, or when approved by a Federal awarding agency head or delegate based on documented justification as described in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
                (i) Indirect costs on training grants are limited to a fixed rate of eight percent of MTDC exclusive of tuition and related fees, direct expenditures for equipment, and subawards in excess of $25,000;
                (ii) Indirect costs on grants awarded to foreign organizations and foreign public entities and performed fully outside of the territorial limits of the U.S. may be paid to support the costs of compliance with federal requirements at a fixed rate of eight percent of MTDC exclusive of tuition and related fees, direct expenditures for equipment, and subawards in excess of $25,000; and,
                (iii) Negotiated indirect costs may be paid to the American University, Beirut, and the World Health Organization.
                (2) The HHS awarding agency head or delegate must notify OMB of any approved deviations.
                (3) The HHS awarding agency must implement, and make publicly available, the policies, procedures and general decision making criteria that their programs will follow to seek and justify deviations from negotiated rates.
                (4) As required under § 75.203(c), the HHS awarding agency must include in the notice of funding opportunity the policies relating to indirect cost rate reimbursement, matching, or cost share as approved. See also appendix I.C.2 and D.6 of this part. As appropriate, the HHS agency should incorporate discussion of these policies into their outreach activities with non-Federal entities prior to the posting of a notice of funding opportunity.
                (d) Pass-through entities are subject to the requirements in § 75.352(a)(4).
                (e) Requirements for development and submission of indirect (F&A) cost rate proposals and cost allocation plans are contained in appendices III-VII, and appendix IX as follows:
                (1) Appendix III to Part 75—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs);
                (2) Appendix IV to Part 75—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations;
                (3) Appendix V to Part 75—State/Local Governmentwide Central Service Cost Allocation Plans;
                (4) Appendix VI to Part 75—Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plans;
                (5) Appendix VII to Part 75—States and Local Government and Indian Tribe Indirect Cost Proposals; and
                (6) Appendix IX to Part 75—Principles for Determining Costs Applicable to Research and Development Under Grants and Contracts with Hospitals.

                (f) In addition to the procedures outlined in the appendices in paragraph (e) of this section, any non-Federal entity that has never received a negotiated indirect cost rate, except for those non-Federal entities described in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) and (ii) and section (D)(1)(b) of appendix VII to this part, may elect to charge a de minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) which may be used indefinitely. As described in § 75.403, costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate for a rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time.
                (g) Any non-Federal entity that has a current federally negotiated indirect cost rate may apply for a one-time extension of the rates in that agreement for a period of up to four years. This extension will be subject to the review and approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs. If an extension is granted the non-Federal entity may not request a rate review until the extension period ends. At the end of the 4-year extension, the non-Federal entity must re-apply to negotiate a rate. Subsequent one-time extensions (up to four years) are permitted if a renegotiation is completed between each extension request.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3017, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 89395, Dec. 12, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.415
                Required certifications.
                Required certifications include:
                (a) To assure that expenditures are proper and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Federal award and approved project budgets, the annual and final fiscal reports or vouchers requesting payment under the agreements must include a certification, signed by an official who is authorized to legally bind the non-Federal entity, which reads as follows: “By signing this report, I certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the report is true, complete, and accurate, and the expenditures, disbursements and cash receipts are for the purposes and objectives set forth in the terms and conditions of the Federal award. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information, or the omission of any material fact, may subject me to criminal, civil or administrative penalties for fraud, false statements, false claims or otherwise. (U.S. Code Title 18, Section 1001 and Title 31, Sections 3729-3730 and 3801-3812).”
                (b) Certification of cost allocation plan or indirect (F&A) cost rate proposal. Each cost allocation plan or indirect (F&A) cost rate proposal must comply with the following:
                (1) A proposal to establish a cost allocation plan or an indirect (F&A) cost rate, whether submitted to a Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs or maintained on file by the non-Federal entity, must be certified by the non-Federal entity using the Certificate of Cost Allocation Plan or Certificate of Indirect Costs as set forth in appendices III through VII, and appendix IX. The certificate must be signed on behalf of the non-Federal entity by an individual at a level no lower than vice president or chief financial officer of the non-Federal entity that submits the proposal.
                (2) Unless the non-Federal entity has elected the option under § 75.414(f), the Federal Government may either disallow all indirect (F&A) costs or unilaterally establish such a plan or rate when the non-Federal entity fails to submit a certified proposal for establishing such a plan or rate in accordance with the requirements. Such a plan or rate may be based upon audited historical data or such other data that have been furnished to the cognizant agency for indirect costs and for which it can be demonstrated that all unallowable costs have been excluded. When a cost allocation plan or indirect cost rate is unilaterally established by the Federal Government because the non-Federal entity failed to submit a certified proposal, the plan or rate established will be set to ensure that potentially unallowable costs will not be reimbursed.
                (c) Certifications by non-profit organizations as appropriate that they did not meet the definition of a major non-profit organization as defined in § 75.414(a).
                (d) See also § 75.450 for another required certification.
              
            
            
              
              Special Considerations for States, Local Governments and Indian Tribes
              
                § 75.416
                Cost allocation plans and indirect cost proposals.
                (a) For states, local governments and Indian tribes, certain services, such as motor pools, computer centers, purchasing, accounting, etc., are provided to operating agencies on a centralized basis. Since Federal awards are performed within the individual operating agencies, there needs to be a process whereby these central service costs can be identified and assigned to benefitted activities on a reasonable and consistent basis. The central service cost allocation plan provides that process.
                (b) Individual operating agencies (governmental department or agency), normally charge Federal awards for indirect costs through an indirect cost rate. A separate indirect cost rate(s) proposal for each operating agency is usually necessary to claim indirect costs under Federal-awards. Indirect costs include:
                (1) The indirect costs originating in each department or agency of the governmental unit carrying out Federal awards; and
                (2) The costs of central governmental services distributed through the central service cost allocation plan and not otherwise treated as direct costs.
                (c) The requirements for development and submission of cost allocation plans (for central service costs and public assistance programs) and indirect cost rate proposals are contained in appendices IV, V and VI to this part.
              
              
                § 75.417
                Interagency service.
                The cost of services provided by one agency to another within the governmental unit may include allowable direct costs of the service plus a pro-rated share of indirect costs. A standard indirect cost allowance equal to ten percent of the direct salary and wage cost of providing the service (excluding overtime, shift premiums, and fringe benefits) may be used in lieu of determining the actual indirect costs of the service. These services do not include centralized services included in central service cost allocation plans as described in appendix V to this part.
              
            
            
              Special Considerations for Institutions of Higher Education
              
                § 75.418
                Costs incurred by states and local governments.
                Costs incurred or paid by a state or local government on behalf of its IHEs for fringe benefit programs, such as pension costs and FICA and any other costs specifically incurred on behalf of, and in direct benefit to, the IHEs, are allowable costs of such IHEs whether or not these costs are recorded in the accounting records of the institutions, subject to the following:
                (a) The costs meet the requirements of §§ 75.402 through 75.411;
                (b) The costs are properly supported by approved cost allocation plans in accordance with applicable Federal cost accounting principles in this part; and
                (c) The costs are not otherwise borne directly or indirectly by the Federal Government.
              
              
                § 75.419
                Cost accounting standards and disclosure statement.
                (a) An IHE that receives aggregate Federal awards totaling $50 million or more in Federal awards subject to this part in its most recently completed fiscal year must comply with the Cost Accounting Standards Board's cost accounting standards located at 48 CFR 9905.501, 9905.502, 9905.505, and 9905.506. CAS-covered contracts awarded to the IHEs are subject to the CAS requirements at 48 CFR parts 9900 through 9999 and 48 CFR part 30 (FAR part 30).
                (b) Disclosure statement. An IHE that receives aggregate Federal awards totaling $50 million or more subject to this part during its most recently completed fiscal year must disclose their cost accounting practices by filing a Disclosure Statement (DS-2), which is reproduced in appendix III to part 75. With the approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs, an IHE may meet the DS-2 submission by submitting the DS-2 for each business unit that received $50 million or more in Federal awards.

                (1) The DS-2 must be submitted to the cognizant agency for indirect costs with a copy to the IHE's cognizant agency for audit.
                
                (2) An IHE is responsible for maintaining an accurate DS-2 and complying with disclosed cost accounting practices. An IHE must file amendments to the DS-2 to the cognizant agency for indirect costs six months in advance of a disclosed practice being changed to comply with a new or modified standard, or when a practice is changed for other reasons. An IHE may proceed with implementing the change only if it has not been notified by the Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs that either a longer period will be needed for review or there are concerns with the potential change within the six months period. Amendments of a DS-2 may be submitted at any time. Resubmission of a complete, updated DS-2 is discouraged except when there are extensive changes to disclosed practices.
                (3) Cost and funding adjustments. Cost adjustments must be made by the cognizant agency for indirect costs if an IHE fails to comply with the cost policies in this part or fails to consistently follow its established or disclosed cost accounting practices when estimating, accumulating or reporting the costs of Federal awards, and the aggregate cost impact on Federal awards is material. The cost adjustment must normally be made on an aggregate basis for all affected Federal awards through an adjustment of the IHE's future F&A costs rates or other means considered appropriate by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. Under the terms of CAS covered contracts, adjustments in the amount of funding provided may also be required when the estimated proposal costs were not determined in accordance with established cost accounting practices.
                (4) Overpayments. Excess amounts paid in the aggregate by the Federal Government under Federal awards due to a noncompliant cost accounting practice used to estimate, accumulate, or report costs must be credited or refunded, as deemed appropriate by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. Interest applicable to the excess amounts paid in the aggregate during the period of noncompliance must also be determined and collected in accordance with applicable HHS agency regulations.
                (5) Compliant cost accounting practice changes. Changes from one compliant cost accounting practice to another compliant practice that are approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs may require cost adjustments if the change has a material effect on Federal awards and the changes are deemed appropriate by the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
                (6) Responsibilities. The cognizant agency for indirect cost must:
                (i) Determine cost adjustments for all Federal awards in the aggregate on behalf of the Federal Government. Actions of the cognizant agency for indirect cost in making cost adjustment determinations must be coordinated with all affected HHS awarding agencies to the extent necessary.
                (ii) Prescribe guidelines and establish internal procedures to promptly determine on behalf of the Federal Government that a DS-2 adequately discloses the IHE's cost accounting practices and that the disclosed practices are compliant with applicable CAS and the requirements of this part.
                (iii) Distribute to all affected Federal awarding agencies any DS-2 determination of adequacy or noncompliance.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3017, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
            
            
              General Provisions for Selected Items of Cost
              
                § 75.420
                Considerations for selected items of cost.

                This section provides principles to be applied in establishing the allowability of certain items involved in determining cost, in addition to the requirements of §§ 75.402 through 75.411. These principles apply whether or not a particular item of cost is properly treated as direct cost or indirect (F&A) cost. Failure to mention a particular item of cost is not intended to imply that it is either allowable or unallowable; rather, determination as to allowability in each case should be based on the treatment provided for similar or related items of cost, and based on the principles described in §§ 75.402 through 75.411. In case of a discrepancy between the provisions of a specific Federal award and the provisions below, the Federal award governs. Criteria outlined in § 75.403 must be applied in determining allowability. See also § 75.102.
              
              
                § 75.421
                Advertising and public relations.
                (a) The term advertising costs means the costs of advertising media and corollary administrative costs. Advertising media include magazines, newspapers, radio and television, direct mail, exhibits, electronic or computer transmittals, and the like.
                (b) The only allowable advertising costs are those which are solely for:
                (1) The recruitment of personnel required by the non-Federal entity for performance of a Federal award (See also § 75.463);
                (2) The procurement of goods and services for the performance of a Federal award;
                (3) The disposal of scrap or surplus materials acquired in the performance of a Federal award except when non-Federal entities are reimbursed for disposal costs at a predetermined amount; or
                (4) Program outreach and other specific purposes necessary to meet the requirements of the Federal award.
                (c) The term “public relations” includes community relations and means those activities dedicated to maintaining the image of the non-Federal entity or maintaining or promoting understanding and favorable relations with the community or public at large or any segment of the public.
                (d) The only allowable public relations costs are:
                (1) Costs specifically required by the Federal award;
                (2) Costs of communicating with the public and press pertaining to specific activities or accomplishments which result from performance of the Federal award (these costs are considered necessary as part of the outreach effort for the Federal award); or
                (3) Costs of conducting general liaison with news media and government public relations officers, to the extent that such activities are limited to communication and liaison necessary to keep the public informed on matters of public concern, such as notices of funding opportunities, financial matters, etc.
                (e) Unallowable advertising and public relations costs include the following:
                (1) All advertising and public relations costs other than as specified in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section;
                (2) Costs of meetings, conventions, convocations, or other events related to other activities of the entity (see also § 75.432), including:
                (i) Costs of displays, demonstrations, and exhibits;
                (ii) Costs of meeting rooms, hospitality suites, and other special facilities used in conjunction with shows and other special events; and
                (iii) Salaries and wages of employees engaged in setting up and displaying exhibits, making demonstrations, and providing briefings;
                (3) Costs of promotional items and memorabilia, including models, gifts, and souvenirs;
                (4) Costs of advertising and public relations designed solely to promote the non-Federal entity.
              
              
                § 75.422
                Advisory councils.
                Costs incurred by advisory councils or committees are unallowable unless authorized by statute, the HHS awarding agency or as an indirect cost where allocable to Federal awards. See § 75.444, applicable to states, local governments and Indian tribes.
              
              
                § 75.423
                Alcoholic beverages.
                Costs of alcoholic beverages are unallowable.
              
              
                § 75.424
                Alumni/ae activities.
                Costs incurred by IHEs for, or in support of, alumni/ae activities are unallowable.
              
              
                § 75.425
                Audit services.
                (a) A reasonably proportionate share of the costs of audits required by, and performed in accordance with, the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507), as implemented by requirements of this part, are allowable. However, the following audit costs are unallowable:

                (1) Any costs when audits required by the Single Audit Act and subpart F of this part—have not been conducted or have been conducted but not in accordance therewith; and
                (2) Any costs of auditing a non-Federal entity that is exempted from having an audit conducted under the Single Audit Act and subpart F of this part because its expenditures under Federal awards are less than $750,000 during the non-Federal entity's fiscal year.
                (b) The costs of a financial statement audit of a non-Federal entity that does not currently have a Federal award may be included in the indirect cost pool for a cost allocation plan or indirect cost proposal.
                (c) Pass-through entities may charge Federal awards for the cost of agreed-upon-procedures engagements to monitor subrecipients (in accordance with subpart D of this part, §§ 75.351 through 75.353) which are exempted from the requirements of the Single Audit Act and subpart F of this part. This cost is allowable only if the agreed-upon-procedures engagements are:
                (1) Conducted in accordance with GAGAS attestation standards;
                (2) Paid for and arranged by the pass-through entity; and
                (3) Limited in scope to one or more of the following types of compliance requirements: activities allowed or unallowed; allowable costs/cost principles; eligibility; and reporting.
              
              
                § 75.426
                Bad debts.
                Bad debts (debts which have been determined to be uncollectable), including losses (whether actual or estimated) arising from uncollectable accounts and other claims, are unallowable. Related collection costs, and related legal costs, arising from such debts after they have been determined to be uncollectable are also unallowable. See also § 75.428.
              
              
                § 75.427
                Bonding costs.
                (a) Bonding costs arise when the HHS awarding agency requires assurance against financial loss to itself or others by reason of the act or default of the non-Federal entity. They arise also in instances where the non-Federal entity requires similar assurance, including: Bonds as bid, performance, payment, advance payment, infringement, and fidelity bonds for employees and officials.
                (b) Costs of bonding required pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Federal award are allowable.
                (c) Costs of bonding required by the non-Federal entity in the general conduct of its operations are allowable as an indirect cost to the extent that such bonding is in accordance with sound business practice and the rates and premiums are reasonable under the circumstances.
              
              
                § 75.428
                Collections of improper payments.
                The costs incurred by a non-Federal entity to recover improper payments are allowable as either direct or indirect costs, as appropriate. Amounts collected may be used by the non-Federal entity in accordance with cash management standards set forth in § 75.305.
              
              
                § 75.429
                Commencement and convocation costs.
                For IHEs, costs incurred for commencements and convocations are unallowable, except as provided for in appendix III.B.9, as student activity costs.
              
              
                § 75.430
                Compensation—personal services.
                (a) General. Compensation for personal services includes all remuneration, paid currently or accrued, for services of employees rendered during the period of performance under the Federal award, including but not necessarily limited to wages and salaries. Compensation for personal services may also include fringe benefits which are addressed in § 75.431. Costs of compensation are allowable to the extent that they satisfy the specific requirements of this part, and that the total compensation for individual employees:
                (1) Is reasonable for the services rendered and conforms to the established written policy of the non-Federal entity consistently applied to both Federal and non-Federal activities;

                (2) Follows an appointment made in accordance with a non-Federal entity's laws and/or rules or written policies and meets the requirements of Federal statute, where applicable; and
                (3) Is determined and supported as provided in paragraph (i) of this section, when applicable.
                (b) Reasonableness. Compensation for employees engaged in work on Federal awards will be considered reasonable to the extent that it is consistent with that paid for similar work in other activities of the non-Federal entity. In cases where the kinds of employees required for Federal awards are not found in the other activities of the non-Federal entity, compensation will be considered reasonable to the extent that it is comparable to that paid for similar work in the labor market in which the non-Federal entity competes for the kind of employees involved.
                (c) Professional activities outside the non-Federal entity. Unless an arrangement is specifically authorized by an HHS awarding agency, a non-Federal entity must follow its written non-Federal entity-wide policies and practices concerning the permissible extent of professional services that can be provided outside the non-Federal entity for non-organizational compensation. Where such non-Federal entity-wide written policies do not exist or do not adequately define the permissible extent of consulting or other non-organizational activities undertaken for extra outside pay, the Federal Government may require that the effort of professional staff working on Federal awards be allocated between:
                (1) Non-Federal entity activities, and
                (2) Non-organizational professional activities. If the HHS awarding agency considers the extent of non-organizational professional effort excessive or inconsistent with the conflicts-of-interest terms and conditions of the Federal award, appropriate arrangements governing compensation will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis.
                (d) Unallowable costs. (1) Costs which are unallowable under other sections of these principles must not be allowable under this section solely on the basis that they constitute personnel compensation.
                (2) The allowable compensation for certain employees is subject to a ceiling in accordance with statute. For the amount of the ceiling for cost-reimbursement contracts, the covered compensation subject to the ceiling, the covered employees, and other relevant provisions, see 10 U.S.C. 2324(e)(1)(P), and 41 U.S.C. 1127 and 4304(a)(16). For other types of Federal awards, other statutory ceilings may apply.
                (e) Special considerations. Special considerations in determining allowability of compensation will be given to any change in a non-Federal entity's compensation policy resulting in a substantial increase in its employees' level of compensation (particularly when the change was concurrent with an increase in the ratio of Federal awards to other activities) or any change in the treatment of allowability of specific types of compensation due to changes in Federal policy.
                (f) Incentive compensation. Incentive compensation to employees based on cost reduction, or efficient performance, suggestion awards, safety awards, etc., is allowable to the extent that the overall compensation is determined to be reasonable and such costs are paid or accrued pursuant to an agreement entered into in good faith between the non-Federal entity and the employees before the services were rendered, or pursuant to an established plan followed by the non-Federal entity so consistently as to imply, in effect, an agreement to make such payment.
                (g) Nonprofit organizations. For compensation to members of nonprofit organizations, trustees, directors, associates, officers, or the immediate families thereof, determination must be made that such compensation is reasonable for the actual personal services rendered rather than a distribution of earnings in excess of costs. This may include director's and executive committee member's fees, incentive awards, allowances for off-site pay, incentive pay, location allowances, hardship pay, and cost-of-living differentials.
                (h) Institutions of higher education (IHEs). (1) Certain conditions require special consideration and possible limitations in determining allowable personnel compensation costs under Federal awards. Among such conditions are the following:

                (i) Allowable activities. Charges to Federal awards may include reasonable amounts for activities contributing and directly related to work under an agreement, such as delivering special lectures about specific aspects of the ongoing activity, writing reports and articles, developing and maintaining protocols (human, animals, etc.), managing substances/chemicals, managing and securing project-specific data, coordinating research subjects, participating in appropriate seminars, consulting with colleagues and graduate students, and attending meetings and conferences.
                (ii) Incidental activities. Incidental activities for which supplemental compensation is allowable under written institutional policy (at a rate not to exceed institutional base salary) need not be included in the records described in paragraph (i) of this section to directly charge payments of incidental activities, such activities must either be specifically provided for in the Federal award budget or receive prior written approval by the HHS awarding agency.
                (2) Salary basis. Charges for work performed on Federal awards by faculty members during the academic year are allowable at the IBS rate. Except as noted in paragraph (h)(1)(ii) of this section, in no event will charges to Federal awards, irrespective of the basis of computation, exceed the proportionate share of the IBS for that period. This principle applies to all members of faculty at an institution. IBS is defined as the annual compensation paid by an IHE for an individual's appointment, whether that individual's time is spent on research, instruction, administration, or other activities. IBS excludes any income that an individual earns outside of duties performed for the IHE. Unless there is prior approval by the HHS awarding agency, charges of a faculty member's salary to a Federal award must not exceed the proportionate share of the IBS for the period during which the faculty member worked on the award.
                (3) Intra-Institution of Higher Education (IHE) consulting. Intra-IHE consulting by faculty is assumed to be undertaken as an IHE obligation requiring no compensation in addition to IBS. However, in unusual cases where consultation is across departmental lines or involves a separate or remote operation, and the work performed by the faculty member is in addition to his or her regular responsibilities, any charges for such work representing additional compensation above IBS are allowable provided that such consulting arrangements are specifically provided for in the Federal award or approved in writing by the HHS awarding agency.
                (4) Extra Service Pay normally represents overload compensation, subject to institutional compensation policies for services above and beyond IBS. Where extra service pay is a result of Intra-IHE consulting, it is subject to the same requirements of paragraph (b) above. It is allowable if all of the following conditions are met:
                (i) The non-Federal entity establishes consistent written policies which apply uniformly to all faculty members, not just those working on Federal awards.
                (ii) The non-Federal entity establishes a consistent written definition of work covered by IBS which is specific enough to determine conclusively when work beyond that level has occurred. This may be described in appointment letters or other documentations.
                (iii) The supplementation amount paid is commensurate with the IBS rate of pay and the amount of additional work performed. See paragraph (h)(2) of this section.
                (iv) The salaries, as supplemented, fall within the salary structure and pay ranges established by and documented in writing or otherwise applicable to the non-Federal entity.
                (v) The total salaries charged to Federal awards including extra service pay are subject to the Standards of Documentation as described in paragraph (i) of this section.
                (5) Periods outside the academic year. (i) Except as specified for teaching activity in paragraph (h)(5)(ii) of this section, charges for work performed by faculty members on Federal awards during periods not included in the base salary period will be at a rate not in excess of the IBS.

                (ii) Charges for teaching activities performed by faculty members on Federal awards during periods not included in IBS period will be based on the normal written policy of the IHE governing compensation to faculty members for teaching assignments during such periods.
                (6) Part-time faculty. Charges for work performed on Federal awards by faculty members having only part-time appointments will be determined at a rate not in excess of that regularly paid for part-time assignments.
                (7) Sabbatical leave costs. Rules for sabbatical leave are as follow:
                (i) Costs of leaves of absence by employees for performance of graduate work or sabbatical study, travel, or research are allowable provided the IHE has a uniform written policy on sabbatical leave for persons engaged in instruction and persons engaged in research. Such costs will be allocated on an equitable basis among all related activities of the IHE.
                (ii) Where sabbatical leave is included in fringe benefits for which a cost is determined for assessment as a direct charge, the aggregate amount of such assessments applicable to all work of the institution during the base period must be reasonable in relation to the IHE's actual experience under its sabbatical leave policy.
                (8) Salary rates for non-faculty members. Non-faculty full-time professional personnel may also earn “extra service pay” in accordance with the non-Federal entity's written policy and consistent with paragraph (h)(1)(i) of this section.
                (i) Standards for documentation of personnel expenses. (1) Charges to Federal awards for salaries and wages must be based on records that accurately reflect the work performed. These records must:
                (i) Be supported by a system of internal control which provides reasonable assurance that the charges are accurate, allowable, and properly allocated;
                (ii) Be incorporated into the official records of the non-Federal entity;
                (iii) Reasonably reflect the total activity for which the employee is compensated by the non-Federal entity, not exceeding 100% of compensated activities (for IHE, this per the IHE's definition of IBS);
                (iv) Encompass both federally assisted and all other activities compensated by the non-Federal entity on an integrated basis, but may include the use of subsidiary records as defined in the non-Federal entity's written policy;
                (v) Comply with the established accounting policies and practices of the non-Federal entity (See paragraph (h)(1)(ii) of this section for treatment of incidental work for IHEs.); and
                (vi) [Reserved]
                (vii) Support the distribution of the employee's salary or wages among specific activities or cost objectives if the employee works on more than one Federal award; a Federal award and non-Federal award; an indirect cost activity and a direct cost activity; two or more indirect activities which are allocated using different allocation bases; or an unallowable activity and a direct or indirect cost activity.
                (viii) Budget estimates (i.e., estimates determined before the services are performed) alone do not qualify as support for charges to Federal awards, but may be used for interim accounting purposes, provided that:
                (A) The system for establishing the estimates produces reasonable approximations of the activity actually performed;
                (B) Significant changes in the corresponding work activity (as defined by the non-Federal entity's written policies) are identified and entered into the records in a timely manner. Short term (such as one or two months) fluctuation between workload categories need not be considered as long as the distribution of salaries and wages is reasonable over the longer term; and
                (C) The non-Federal entity's system of internal controls includes processes to review after-the-fact interim charges made to a Federal awards based on budget estimates. All necessary adjustment must be made such that the final amount charged to the Federal award is accurate, allowable, and properly allocated.
                (ix) Because practices vary as to the activity constituting a full workload (for IHEs, IBS), records may reflect categories of activities expressed as a percentage distribution of total activities.

                (x) It is recognized that teaching, research, service, and administration are often inextricably intermingled in an academic setting. When recording salaries and wages charged to Federal awards for IHEs, a precise assessment of factors that contribute to costs is therefore not always feasible, nor is it expected.
                (2) For records which meet the standards required in paragraph (i)(1) of this section, the non-Federal entity will not be required to provide additional support or documentation for the work performed, other than that referenced in paragraph (i)(3) of this section.
                (3) In accordance with Department of Labor regulations implementing the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) (29 CFR part 516), charges for the salaries and wages of nonexempt employees, in addition to the supporting documentation described in this section, must also be supported by records indicating the total number of hours worked each day.
                (4) Salaries and wages of employees used in meeting cost sharing or matching requirements on Federal awards must be supported in the same manner as salaries and wages claimed for reimbursement from Federal awards.
                (5) For states, local governments and Indian tribes, substitute processes or systems for allocating salaries and wages to Federal awards may be used in place of or in addition to the records described in paragraph (i)(1) of this section if approved by the cognizant agency for indirect cost. Such systems may include, but are not limited to, random moment sampling, “rolling” time studies, case counts, or other quantifiable measures of work performed.
                (i) Substitute systems which use sampling methods (primarily for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Medicaid, and other public assistance programs) must meet acceptable statistical sampling standards including:
                (A) The sampling universe must include all of the employees whose salaries and wages are to be allocated based on sample results except as provided in paragraph (i)(5)(iii) of this section;
                (B) The entire time period involved must be covered by the sample; and
                (C) The results must be statistically valid and applied to the period being sampled.
                (ii) Allocating charges for the sampled employees' supervisors, clerical and support staffs, based on the results of the sampled employees, will be acceptable.
                (iii) Less than full compliance with the statistical sampling standards noted in paragraph (i)(5)(i) of this section may be accepted by the cognizant agency for indirect costs if it concludes that the amounts to be allocated to Federal awards will be minimal, or if it concludes that the system proposed by the non-Federal entity will result in lower costs to Federal awards than a system which complies with the standards.
                (6) Cognizant agencies for indirect costs are encouraged to approve alternative proposals based on outcomes and milestones for program performance where these are clearly documented. Where approved by the Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs, these plans are acceptable as an alternative to the requirements of paragraph (i)(1) of this section.
                (7) For Federal awards of similar purpose activity or instances of approved blended funding, a non-Federal entity may submit performance plans that incorporate funds from multiple Federal awards and account for their combined use based on performance-oriented metrics, provided that such plans are approved in advance by all involved HHS awarding agencies. In these instances, the non-Federal entity must submit a request for waiver of the requirements based on documentation that describes the method of charging costs, relates the charging of costs to the specific activity that is applicable to all fund sources, and is based on quantifiable measures of the activity in relation to time charged.
                (8) For a non-Federal entity where the records do not meet the standards described in this section, the Federal Government may require personnel activity reports, including prescribed certifications, or equivalent documentation that support the records as required in this section.
              
              
                
                § 75.431
                Compensation—fringe benefits.
                (a) Fringe benefits are allowances and services provided by employers to their employees as compensation in addition to regular salaries and wages. Fringe benefits include, but are not limited to, the costs of leave (vacation, family-related, sick or military), employee insurance, pensions, and unemployment benefit plans. Except as provided elsewhere in these principles, the costs of fringe benefits are allowable provided that the benefits are reasonable and are required by law, non-Federal entity-employee agreement, or an established policy of the non-Federal entity.
                (b) Leave. The cost of fringe benefits in the form of regular compensation paid to employees during periods of authorized absences from the job, such as for annual leave, family-related leave, sick leave, holidays, court leave, military leave, administrative leave, and other similar benefits, are allowable if all of the following criteria are met:
                (1) They are provided under established written leave policies;
                (2) The costs are equitably allocated to all related activities, including Federal awards; and,
                (3) The accounting basis (cash or accrual) selected for costing each type of leave is consistently followed by the non-Federal entity or specified grouping of employees.
                (i) When a non-Federal entity uses the cash basis of accounting, the cost of leave is recognized in the period that the leave is taken and paid for. Payments for unused leave when an employee retires or terminates employment are allowable in the year of payment.
                (ii) The accrual basis may be only used for those types of leave for which a liability as defined by GAAP exists when the leave is earned. When a non-Federal entity uses the accrual basis of accounting, allowable leave costs are the lesser of the amount accrued or funded.
                (c) The cost of fringe benefits in the form of employer contributions or expenses for social security; employee life, health, unemployment, and worker's compensation insurance (except as indicated in § 75.447); pension plan costs (see paragraph (i) of this section); and other similar benefits are allowable, provided such benefits are granted under established written policies. Such benefits, must be allocated to Federal awards and all other activities in a manner consistent with the pattern of benefits attributable to the individuals or group(s) of employees whose salaries and wages are chargeable to such Federal awards and other activities, and charged as direct or indirect costs in accordance with the non-Federal entity's accounting practices.
                (d) Fringe benefits may be assigned to cost objectives by identifying specific benefits to specific individual employees or by allocating on the basis of entity-wide salaries and wages of the employees receiving the benefits. When the allocation method is used, separate allocations must be made to selective groupings of employees, unless the non-Federal entity demonstrates that costs in relationship to salaries and wages do not differ significantly for different groups of employees.
                (e) Insurance. See also § 75.447(d)(1) and (2).
                (1) Provisions for a reserve under a self-insurance program for unemployment compensation or workers' compensation are allowable to the extent that the provisions represent reasonable estimates of the liabilities for such compensation, and the types of coverage, extent of coverage, and rates and premiums would have been allowable had insurance been purchased to cover the risks. However, provisions for self-insured liabilities which do not become payable for more than one year after the provision is made must not exceed the present value of the liability.
                (2) Costs of insurance on the lives of trustees, officers, or other employees holding positions of similar responsibility are allowable only to the extent that the insurance represents additional compensation. The costs of such insurance when the non-Federal entity is named as beneficiary are unallowable.

                (3) Actual claims paid to or on behalf of employees or former employees for workers' compensation, unemployment compensation, severance pay, and similar employee benefits (e.g., post-retirement health benefits), are allowable in the year of payment provided that the non-Federal entity follows a consistent costing policy.
                (f) Automobiles. That portion of automobile costs furnished by the entity that relates to personal use by employees (including transportation to and from work) is unallowable as fringe benefit or indirect (F&A) costs regardless of whether the cost is reported as taxable income to the employees.
                (g) Pension plan costs. Pension plan costs which are incurred in accordance with the established policies of the non-Federal entity are allowable, provided that:
                (1) Such policies meet the test of reasonableness.
                (2) The methods of cost allocation are not discriminatory.
                (3) For entities using accrual based accounting, the cost assigned to each fiscal year is determined in accordance with GAAP.
                (4) The costs assigned to a given fiscal year are funded for all plan participants within six months after the end of that year. However, increases to normal and past service pension costs caused by a delay in funding the actuarial liability beyond 30 calendar days after each quarter of the year to which such costs are assignable are unallowable. Non-Federal entity may elect to follow the “Cost Accounting Standard for Composition and Measurement of Pension Costs” (48 CFR 9904.412).
                (5) Pension plan termination insurance premiums paid pursuant to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1301-1461) are allowable. Late payment charges on such premiums are unallowable. Excise taxes on accumulated funding deficiencies and other penalties imposed under ERISA are unallowable.
                (6) Pension plan costs may be computed using a pay-as-you-go method or an acceptable actuarial cost method in accordance with established written policies of the non-Federal entity.
                (i) For pension plans financed on a pay-as-you-go method, allowable costs will be limited to those representing actual payments to retirees or their beneficiaries.
                (ii) Pension costs calculated using an actuarial cost-based method recognized by GAAP are allowable for a given fiscal year if they are funded for that year within six months after the end of that year. Costs funded after the six month period (or a later period agreed to by the cognizant agency for indirect costs) are allowable in the year funded. The cognizant agency for indirect costs may agree to an extension of the six month period if an appropriate adjustment is made to compensate for the timing of the charges to the Federal Government and related Federal reimbursement and the non-Federal entity's contribution to the pension fund. Adjustments may be made by cash refund or other equitable procedures to compensate the Federal Government for the time value of Federal reimbursements in excess of contributions to the pension fund.
                (iii) Amounts funded by the non-Federal entity in excess of the actuarially determined amount for a fiscal year may be used as the non-Federal entity's contribution in future periods.
                (iv) When a non-Federal entity converts to an acceptable actuarial cost method, as defined by GAAP, and funds pension costs in accordance with this method, the unfunded liability at the time of conversion is allowable if amortized over a period of years in accordance with GAAP.
                (v) The Federal Government must receive an equitable share of any previously allowed pension costs (including earnings thereon) which revert or inure to the non-Federal entity in the form of a refund, withdrawal, or other credit.
                (h) Post-retirement health. Post-retirement health plans (PRHP) refers to costs of health insurance or health services not included in a pension plan covered by paragraph (g) of this section for retirees and their spouses, dependents, and survivors. PRHP costs may be computed using a pay-as-you-go method or an acceptable actuarial cost method in accordance with established written policies of the non-Federal entity.

                (1) For PRHP financed on a pay-as-you-go method, allowable costs will be limited to those representing actual payments to retirees or their beneficiaries.
                (2) PRHP costs calculated using an actuarial cost method recognized by GAAP are allowable if they are funded for that year within six months after the end of that year. Costs funded after the six month period (or a later period agreed to by the cognizant agency) are allowable in the year funded. The Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs may agree to an extension of the six month period if an appropriate adjustment is made to compensate for the timing of the charges to the Federal Government and related Federal reimbursements and the non-Federal entity's contributions to the PRHP fund. Adjustments may be made by cash refund, reduction in current year's PRHP costs, or other equitable procedures to compensate the Federal Government for the time value of Federal reimbursements in excess of contributions to the PRHP fund.
                (3) Amounts funded in excess of the actuarially determined amount for a fiscal year may be used as the non-Federal entity contribution in a future period.
                (4) When a non-Federal entity converts to an acceptable actuarial cost method and funds PRHP costs in accordance with this method, the initial unfunded liability attributable to prior years is allowable if amortized over a period of years in accordance with GAAP, or, if no such GAAP period exists, over a period negotiated with the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
                (5) To be allowable in the current year, the PRHP costs must be paid either to:
                (i) An insurer or other benefit provider as current year costs or premiums, or
                (ii) An insurer or trustee to maintain a trust fund or reserve for the sole purpose of providing post-retirement benefits to retirees and other beneficiaries.
                (6) The Federal Government must receive an equitable share of any amounts of previously allowed post-retirement benefit costs (including earnings thereon) which revert or inure to the non-Federal entity in the form of a refund, withdrawal, or other credit.
                (i) Severance pay. (1) Severance pay, also commonly referred to as dismissal wages, is a payment in addition to regular salaries and wages, by non-Federal entities to workers whose employment is being terminated. Costs of severance pay are allowable only to the extent that in each case, it is required by:
                (i) Law;
                (ii) Employer-employee agreement;
                (iii) Established policy that constitutes, in effect, an implied agreement on the non-Federal entity's part; or
                (iv) Circumstances of the particular employment.
                (2) Costs of severance payments are divided into two categories as follows:
                (i) Actual normal turnover severance payments must be allocated to all activities; or, where the non-Federal entity provides for a reserve for normal severances, such method will be acceptable if the charge to current operations is reasonable in light of payments actually made for normal severances over a representative past period, and if amounts charged are allocated to all activities of the non-Federal entity.
                (ii) Measurement of costs of abnormal or mass severance pay by means of an accrual will not achieve equity to both parties. Thus, accruals for this purpose are not allowable. However, the Federal Government recognizes its obligation to participate, to the extent of its fair share, in any specific payment. Prior approval by the Federal awarding agency or cognizant agency for indirect cost, as appropriate, is required.
                (3) Costs incurred in certain severance pay packages which are in an amount in excess of the normal severance pay paid by the non-Federal entity to an employee upon termination of employment and are paid to the employee contingent upon a change in management control over, or ownership of, the non-Federal entity's assets, are unallowable.

                (4) Severance payments to foreign nationals employed by the non-Federal entity outside the United States, to the extent that the amount exceeds the customary or prevailing practices for the non-Federal entity in the United States, are unallowable, unless they are necessary for the performance of Federal programs and approved by the HHS awarding agency.
                (5) Severance payments to foreign nationals employed by the non-Federal entity outside the United States due to the termination of the foreign national as a result of the closing of, or curtailment of activities by, the non-Federal entity in that country, are unallowable, unless they are necessary for the performance of Federal programs and approved by the HHS awarding agency.
                (j) For IHEs only. (1) Fringe benefits in the form of undergraduate and graduate tuition or remission of tuition for individual employees are allowable, provided such benefits are granted in accordance with established non-federal entity policies, and are distributed to all non-Federal entity activities on an equitable basis. Tuition benefits for family members other than the employee are unallowable.
                (2) Fringe benefits in the form of tuition or remission of tuition for individual employees not employed by IHEs are limited to the tax-free amount allowed per section 127 of the Internal Revenue Code as amended.
                (3) IHEs may offer employees tuition waivers or tuition reductions, provided that the benefit does not discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees. Employees can exercise these benefits at other institutions according to institutional policy. See § 75.466 for treatment of tuition remission provided to students.
                (k) For IHEs whose costs are paid by state or local governments, fringe benefit programs (such as pension costs and FICA) and any other benefits costs specifically incurred on behalf of, and in direct benefit to, the non-Federal entity, are allowable costs of such non-Federal entities whether or not these costs are recorded in the accounting records of the non-Federal entities, subject to the following:
                (1) The costs meet the requirements of Basic Considerations in §§ 75.402 through 75.411;
                (2) The costs are properly supported by approved cost allocation plans in accordance with applicable Federal cost accounting principles; and
                (3) The costs are not otherwise borne directly or indirectly by the Federal Government.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3017, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.432
                Conferences.
                A conference is defined as a meeting, retreat, seminar, symposium, workshop or event whose primary purpose is the dissemination of technical information beyond the non-Federal entity and is necessary and reasonable for successful performance under the Federal award. Allowable conference costs paid by the non-Federal entity as a sponsor or host of the conference may include rental of facilities, speakers' fees, costs of meals and refreshments, local transportation, and other items incidental to such conferences unless further restricted by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. As needed, the costs of identifying, but not providing, locally available dependent-care resources are allowable. Conference hosts/sponsors must exercise discretion and judgment in ensuring that conference costs are appropriate, necessary and managed in a manner that minimizes costs to the Federal award. The HHS awarding agency may authorize exceptions where appropriate for programs including Indian tribes, children, and the elderly. See also §§ 75.438, 75.456, 75.474, and 75.475.
              
              
                § 75.433
                Contingency provisions.
                (a) Contingency is that part of a budget estimate of future costs (typically of large construction projects, IT systems, or other items as approved by the HHS awarding agency) which is associated with possible events or conditions arising from causes the precise outcome of which is indeterminable at the time of estimate, and that experience shows will likely result, in aggregate, in additional costs for the approved activity or project. Amounts for major project scope changes, unforeseen risks, or extraordinary events may not be included.

                (b) It is permissible for contingency amounts other than those excluded in paragraph (a) of this section to be explicitly included in budget estimates, to the extent they are necessary to improve the precision of those estimates. Amounts must be estimated using broadly-accepted cost estimating methodologies, specified in the budget documentation of the Federal award, and accepted by the HHS awarding agency. As such, contingency amounts are to be included in the Federal award. In order for actual costs incurred to be allowable, they must comply with the cost principles and other requirements in this part (see also §§ 75.300 through 75.309 of subpart D of this part and 75.403); be necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient accomplishment of project or program objectives, and be verifiable from the non-Federal entity's records.
                (c) Payments made by the HHS awarding agency to the non-Federal entity's “contingency reserve” or any similar payment made for events the occurrence of which cannot be foretold with certainty as to the time or intensity, or with an assurance of their happening, are unallowable, except as noted in §§ 75.431 and 75.447.
              
              
                § 75.434
                Contributions and donations.
                (a) Costs of contributions and donations, including cash, property, and services, from the non-Federal entity to other entities, are unallowable.
                (b) The value of services and property donated to the non-Federal entity may not be charged to the Federal award either as a direct or indirect (F&A) cost. The value of donated services and property may be used to meet cost sharing or matching requirements (see § 75.306). Depreciation on donated assets is permitted in accordance with § 75.436, as long as the donated property is not counted towards cost sharing or matching requirements.
                (c) Services donated or volunteered to the non-Federal entity may be furnished to a non-Federal entity by professional and technical personnel, consultants, and other skilled and unskilled labor. The value of these services may not be charged to the Federal award either as a direct or indirect cost. However, the value of donated services may be used to meet cost sharing or matching requirements in accordance with the provisions of § 75.306.
                (d) To the extent feasible, services donated to the non-Federal entity will be supported by the same methods used to support the allocability of regular personnel services.
                (e) The following provisions apply to nonprofit organizations. The value of services donated to the nonprofit organization utilized in the performance of a direct cost activity must be considered in the determination of the non-Federal entity's indirect cost rate(s) and, accordingly, must be allocated a proportionate share of applicable indirect costs when the following circumstances exist:
                (1) The aggregate value of the services is material;
                (2) The services are supported by a significant amount of the indirect costs incurred by the non-Federal entity;
                (i) In those instances where there is no basis for determining the fair market value of the services rendered, the non-Federal entity and the cognizant agency for indirect costs must negotiate an appropriate allocation of indirect cost to the services.
                (ii) Where donated services directly benefit a project supported by the Federal award, the indirect costs allocated to the services will be considered as a part of the total costs of the project. Such indirect costs may be reimbursed under the Federal award or used to meet cost sharing or matching requirements.
                (f) Fair market value of donated services must be computed as described in § 75.306.
                (g) Personal property and use of space. (1) Donated personal property and use of space may be furnished to a non-Federal entity. The value of the personal property and space may not be charged to the Federal award either as a direct or indirect cost.
                (2) The value of the donations may be used to meet cost sharing or matching share requirements under the conditions described in §§ 75.300 through 75.309 of subpart D of this part. The value of the donations must be determined in accordance with §§ 75.300 through 75.309. Where donations are treated as indirect costs, indirect cost rates will separate the value of the donations so that reimbursement will not be made.
              
              
                
                § 75.435
                Defense and prosecution of criminal and civil proceedings, claims, appeals, and patent infringements.
                (a) Definitions for the purposes of this section. (1) Conviction means a judgment or conviction of a criminal offense by any court of competent jurisdiction, whether entered upon verdict or a plea, including a conviction due to a plea of nolo contendere.
                (2) Costs include the services of in-house or private counsel, accountants, consultants, or others engaged to assist the non-Federal entity before, during, and after commencement of a judicial or administrative proceeding, that bear a direct relationship to the proceeding.
                (3) Fraud means:
                (i) Acts of fraud or corruption or attempts to defraud the Federal Government or to corrupt its agents,
                (ii) Acts that constitute a cause for debarment or suspension (as specified in agency regulations), and
                (iii) Acts which violate the False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 3729-3732) or the Anti-kickback Act (41 U.S.C. 1320a-7b(b)).
                (4) Penalty does not include restitution, reimbursement, or compensatory damages.
                (5) Proceeding includes an investigation.
                (b) Costs. (1) Except as otherwise described herein, costs incurred in connection with any criminal, civil or administrative proceeding (including filing of a false certification) commenced by the Federal Government, a state, local government, or foreign government, or joined by the Federal Government (including a proceeding under the False Claims Act), against the non-Federal entity, (or commenced by third parties or a current or former employee of the non-Federal entity who submits a whistleblower complaint of reprisal in accordance with 10 U.S.C. 2409 or 41 U.S.C. 4712), are not allowable if the proceeding:
                (i) Relates to a violation of, or failure to comply with, a Federal, state, local or foreign statute, regulation or the terms and conditions of the Federal award, by the non-Federal entity (including its agents and employees); and
                (ii) Results in any of the following dispositions:
                (A) In a criminal proceeding, a conviction.
                (B) In a civil or administrative proceeding involving an allegation of fraud or similar misconduct, a determination of non-Federal entity liability.
                (C) In the case of any civil or administrative proceeding, the disallowance of costs or the imposition of a monetary penalty, or an order issued by the HHS awarding agency head or delegate to the non-Federal entity to take corrective action under 10 U.S.C. 2409 or 41 U.S.C. 4712.
                (D) A final decision by an appropriate Federal official to debar or suspend the non-Federal entity, to rescind or void a Federal award, or to terminate a Federal award by reason of a violation or failure to comply with a statute, regulation, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.
                (E) A disposition by consent or compromise, if the action could have resulted in any of the dispositions described in paragraphs (b)(1)(ii)(A) through (D) of this section.
                (2) If more than one proceeding involves the same alleged misconduct, the costs of all such proceedings are unallowable if any results in one of the dispositions shown in paragraph (b) of this section.
                (c) If a proceeding referred to in paragraph (b) of this section is commenced by the Federal Government and is resolved by consent or compromise pursuant to an agreement by the non-Federal entity and the Federal Government, then the costs incurred may be allowed to the extent specifically provided in such agreement.
                (d) If a proceeding referred to in paragraph (b) of this section is commenced by a state, local or foreign government, the authorized Federal official may allow the costs incurred if such authorized official determines that the costs were incurred as a result of:
                (1) A specific term or condition of the Federal award, or
                (2) Specific written direction of an authorized official of the HHS awarding agency.

                (e) Costs incurred in connection with proceedings described in paragraph (b) of this section, which are not made unallowable by that subsection, may be allowed but only to the extent that:
                (1) The costs are reasonable and necessary in relation to the administration of the Federal award and activities required to deal with the proceeding and the underlying cause of action;
                (2) Payment of the reasonable, necessary, allocable and otherwise allowable costs incurred is not prohibited by any other provision(s) of the Federal award;
                (3) The costs are not recovered from the Federal Government or a third party, either directly as a result of the proceeding or otherwise; and,
                (4) An authorized Federal official must determine the percentage of costs allowed considering the complexity of litigation, generally accepted principles governing the award of legal fees in civil actions involving the United States, and such other factors as may be appropriate. Such percentage must not exceed 80 percent. However, if an agreement reached under paragraph (c) of this section has explicitly considered this 80 percent limitation and permitted a higher percentage, then the full amount of costs resulting from that agreement are allowable.
                (f) Costs incurred by the non-Federal entity in connection with the defense of suits brought by its employees or ex-employees under section 2 of the Major Fraud Act of 1988 (18 U.S.C. 1031), including the cost of all relief necessary to make such employee whole, where the non-Federal entity was found liable or settled, are unallowable.
                (g) Costs of prosecution of claims against the Federal Government, including appeals of final HHS agency decisions, are unallowable.
                (h) Costs of legal, accounting, and consultant services, and related costs, incurred in connection with patent infringement litigation, are unallowable unless otherwise provided for in the Federal award.
                (i) Costs which may be unallowable under this section, including directly associated costs, must be segregated and accounted for separately. During the pendency of any proceeding covered by paragraphs (b) and (f) of this section, the Federal Government must generally withhold payment of such costs. However, if in its best interests, the Federal Government may provide for conditional payment upon provision of adequate security, or other adequate assurance, and agreement to repay all unallowable costs, plus interest, if the costs are subsequently determined to be unallowable.
              
              
                § 75.436
                Depreciation.
                (a) Depreciation is the method for allocating the cost of fixed assets to periods benefitting from asset use. The non-Federal entity may be compensated for the use of its buildings, capital improvements, equipment, and software projects capitalized in accordance with GAAP, provided that they are used, needed in the non-Federal entity's activities, and properly allocated to Federal awards. Such compensation must be made by computing depreciation.
                (b) The allocation for depreciation must be made in accordance with appendices III through IX.
                (c) Depreciation is computed applying the following rules. The computation of depreciation must be based on the acquisition cost of the assets involved. For an asset donated to the non-Federal entity by a third party, its fair market value at the time of the donation must be considered as the acquisition cost. Such assets may be depreciated or claimed as matching but not both. For the purpose of computing depreciation, the acquisition cost will exclude:
                (1) The cost of land;
                (2) Any portion of the cost of buildings and equipment borne by or donated by the Federal Government, irrespective of where title was originally vested or where it is presently located;
                (3) Any portion of the cost of buildings and equipment contributed by or for the non-Federal entity, where law or agreement prohibits recovery; and
                (4) Any asset acquired solely for the performance of a non-Federal award.
                (d) When computing depreciation charges, the following must be observed:

                (1) The period of useful service or useful life established in each case for usable capital assets must take into consideration such factors as type of construction, nature of the equipment, technological developments in the particular area, historical data, and the renewal and replacement policies followed for the individual items or classes of assets involved.
                (2) The depreciation method used to charge the cost of an asset (or group of assets) to accounting periods must reflect the pattern of consumption of the asset during its useful life. In the absence of clear evidence indicating that the expected consumption of the asset will be significantly greater in the early portions than in the later portions of its useful life, the straight-line method must be presumed to be the appropriate method. Depreciation methods once used may not be changed unless approved in advance by the cognizant agency. The depreciation methods used to calculate the depreciation amounts for indirect (F&A) rate purposes must be the same methods used by the non-Federal entity for its financial statements.

                (3) The entire building, including the shell and all components, may be treated as a single asset and depreciated over a single useful life. A building may also be divided into multiple components. Each component item may then be depreciated over its estimated useful life. The building components must be grouped into three general components of a building: building shell (including construction and design costs), building services systems (e.g., elevators, HVAC, plumbing system and heating and air-conditioning system) and fixed equipment (e.g., sterilizers, casework, fume hoods, cold rooms and glassware/washers). In exceptional cases, a cognizant agency may authorize a non-Federal entity to use more than these three groupings. When a non-Federal entity elects to depreciate its buildings by its components, the same depreciation methods must be used for indirect (F&A) purposes and financial statements purposes, as described in paragraphs (d)(1) and (2) of this section.
                (4) No depreciation may be allowed on any assets that have outlived their depreciable lives.

                (5) Where the depreciation method is introduced to replace the use allowance method, depreciation must be computed as if the asset had been depreciated over its entire life (i.e., from the date the asset was acquired and ready for use to the date of disposal or withdrawal from service). The total amount of use allowance and depreciation for an asset (including imputed depreciation applicable to periods prior to the conversion from the use allowance method as well as depreciation after the conversion) may not exceed the total acquisition cost of the asset.
                (e) Charges for depreciation must be supported by adequate property records, and physical inventories must be taken at least once every two years to ensure that the assets exist and are usable, used, and needed. Statistical sampling techniques may be used in taking these inventories. In addition, adequate depreciation records showing the amount of depreciation taken each period must also be maintained.
              
              
                § 75.437
                Employee health and welfare costs.
                (a) Costs incurred in accordance with the non-Federal entity's documented policies for the improvement of working conditions, employer-employee relations, employee health, and employee performance are allowable.
                (b) Such costs will be equitably apportioned to all activities of the non-Federal entity. Income generated from any of these activities will be credited to the cost thereof unless such income has been irrevocably sent to employee welfare organizations.
                (c) Losses resulting from operating food services are allowable only if the non-Federal entity's objective is to operate such services on a break-even basis. Losses sustained because of operating objectives other than the above are allowable only:
                (1) Where the non-Federal entity can demonstrate unusual circumstances; and
                (2) With the approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              
              
                § 75.438
                Entertainment costs.

                Costs of entertainment, including amusement, diversion, and social activities and any associated costs are unallowable, except where specific costs that might otherwise be considered entertainment have a programmatic purpose and are authorized either in the approved budget for the Federal award or with prior written approval of the HHS awarding agency.
              
              
                § 75.439
                Equipment and other capital expenditures.
                (a) See § 75.2 for the definitions of Capital expenditures, Equipment, Special purpose equipment, General purpose equipment, Acquisition cost, and Capital assets.
                
                (b) The following rules of allowability must apply to equipment and other capital expenditures:
                (1) Capital expenditures for general purpose equipment, buildings, and land are unallowable as direct charges, except with the prior written approval of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity.
                (2) Capital expenditures for special purpose equipment are allowable as direct costs, provided that items with a unit cost of $5,000 or more have the prior written approval of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity.
                (3) Capital expenditures for improvements to land, buildings, or equipment which materially increase their value or useful life are unallowable as a direct cost except with the prior written approval of the HHS awarding agency, or pass-through entity. See § 75.436 for rules on the allowability of depreciation on buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. See also § 75.465.
                (4) When approved as a direct charge pursuant to paragraphs (b)(1) through (3) of this section, capital expenditures will be charged in the period in which the expenditure is incurred, or as otherwise determined appropriate and negotiated with the HHS awarding agency.
                (5) The unamortized portion of any equipment written off as a result of a change in capitalization levels may be recovered by continuing to claim the otherwise allowable depreciation on the equipment, or by amortizing the amount to be written off over a period of years negotiated with the Federal cognizant agency for indirect cost.
                (6) Cost of equipment disposal. If the non-Federal entity is instructed by the HHS awarding agency to otherwise dispose of or transfer the equipment the costs of such disposal or transfer are allowable.
                (7) Equipment and other capital expenditures are unallowable as indirect costs. See § 75.436.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.440
                Exchange rates.
                (a) Cost increases for fluctuations in exchange rates are allowable costs subject to the availability of funding. Prior approval of exchange rate fluctuations is required only when the change results in the need for additional Federal funding, or the increased costs result in the need to significantly reduce the scope of the project. The HHS awarding agency must however ensure that adequate funds are available to cover currency fluctuations in order to avoid a violation of the Anti-Deficiency Act.
                (b) The non-Federal entity is required to make reviews of local currency gains to determine the need for additional federal funding before the expiration date of the Federal award. Subsequent adjustments for currency increases may be allowable only when the non-Federal entity provides the HHS awarding agency with adequate source documentation from a commonly used source in effect at the time the expense was made, and to the extent that sufficient Federal funds are available.
              
              
                § 75.441
                Fines, penalties, damages and other settlements.
                Costs resulting from non-Federal entity violations of, alleged violations of, or failure to comply with, Federal, state, tribal, local or foreign laws and regulations are unallowable, except when incurred as a result of compliance with specific provisions of the Federal award, or with prior written approval of the HHS awarding agency. See also § 75.435.
              
              
                § 75.442
                Fund raising and investment management costs.

                (a) Costs of organized fund raising, including financial campaigns, endowment drives, solicitation of gifts and bequests, and similar expenses incurred to raise capital or obtain contributions are unallowable. Fund raising costs for the purposes of meeting the Federal program objectives are allowable with prior written approval from the Federal awarding agency. Proposal costs are covered in § 75.460.
                (b) Costs of investment counsel and staff and similar expenses incurred to enhance income from investments are unallowable except when associated with investments covering pension, self-insurance, or other funds which include Federal participation allowed by this part.
                (c) Costs related to the physical custody and control of monies and securities are allowable.
                (d) Both allowable and unallowable fund raising and investment activities must be allocated an appropriate share of indirect costs under the conditions described in § 75.413.
              
              
                § 75.443
                Gains and losses on disposition of depreciable assets.
                (a) Gains and losses on the sale, retirement, or other disposition of depreciable property must be included in the year in which they occur as credits or charges to the asset cost grouping(s) in which the property was included. The amount of the gain or loss to be included as a credit or charge to the appropriate asset cost grouping(s) is the difference between the amount realized on the property and the undepreciated basis of the property.
                (b) Gains and losses from the disposition of depreciable property must not be recognized as a separate credit or charge under the following conditions:
                (1) The gain or loss is processed through a depreciation account and is reflected in the depreciation allowable under §§ 75.436 and 75.439.
                (2) The property is given in exchange as part of the purchase price of a similar item and the gain or loss is taken into account in determining the depreciation cost basis of the new item.
                (3) A loss results from the failure to maintain permissible insurance, except as otherwise provided in § 75.447.
                (4) Compensation for the use of the property was provided through use allowances in lieu of depreciation.
                (5) Gains and losses arising from mass or extraordinary sales, retirements, or other dispositions must be considered on a case-by-case basis.

                (c) Gains or losses of any nature arising from the sale or exchange of property other than the property covered in paragraph (a) of this section, e.g., land, must be excluded in computing Federal award costs.
                (d) When assets acquired with Federal funds, in part or wholly, are disposed of, the distribution of the proceeds must be made in accordance with §§ 75.317 through 75.323.
              
              
                § 75.444
                General costs of government.
                (a) For states, local governments, and Indian Tribes, the general costs of government are unallowable (except as provided in § 75.474). Unallowable costs include:
                (1) Salaries and expenses of the Office of the Governor of a state or the chief executive of a local government or the chief executive of an Indian tribe;
                (2) Salaries and other expenses of a state legislature, tribal council, or similar local governmental body, such as a county supervisor, city council, school board, etc., whether incurred for purposes of legislation or executive direction;
                (3) Costs of the judicial branch of a government;
                (4) Costs of prosecutorial activities unless treated as a direct cost to a specific program if authorized by statute or regulation (however, this does not preclude the allowability of other legal activities of the Attorney General as described in § 75.435); and
                (5) Costs of other general types of government services normally provided to the general public, such as fire and police, unless provided for as a direct cost under a program statute or regulation.

                (b) For Indian tribes and Councils of Governments (COGs) (see § 75.2 Local government), up to 50% of salaries and expenses directly attributable to managing and operating Federal programs by the chief executive and his or her staff can be included in the indirect cost calculation without documentation.
              
              
                
                § 75.445
                Goods or services for personal use.
                (a) Costs of goods or services for personal use of the non-Federal entity's employees are unallowable regardless of whether the cost is reported as taxable income to the employees.
                (b) Costs of housing (e.g., depreciation, maintenance, utilities, furnishings, rent), housing allowances and personal living expenses are only allowable as direct costs regardless of whether reported as taxable income to the employees. In addition, to be allowable direct costs must be approved in advance by an HHS awarding agency.
              
              
                § 75.446
                Idle facilities and idle capacity.
                (a) As used in this section the following terms have the meanings set forth in this section:
                (1) Facilities means land and buildings or any portion thereof, equipment individually or collectively, or any other tangible capital asset, wherever located, and whether owned or leased by the non-Federal entity.
                (2) Idle facilities means completely unused facilities that are excess to the non-Federal entity's current needs.
                (3) Idle capacity means the unused capacity of partially used facilities. It is the difference between:
                (i) That which a facility could achieve under 100 percent operating time on a one-shift basis less operating interruptions resulting from time lost for repairs, setups, unsatisfactory materials, and other normal delays and;
                (ii) The extent to which the facility was actually used to meet demands during the accounting period. A multi-shift basis should be used if it can be shown that this amount of usage would normally be expected for the type of facility involved.

                (4) Cost of idle facilities or idle capacity means costs such as maintenance, repair, housing, rent, and other related costs, e.g., insurance, interest, and depreciation. These costs could include the costs of idle public safety emergency facilities, telecommunications, or information technology system capacity that is built to withstand major fluctuations in load, e.g., consolidated data centers.
                (b) The costs of idle facilities are unallowable except to the extent that:
                (1) They are necessary to meet workload requirements which may fluctuate and are allocated appropriately to all benefiting programs; or
                (2) Although not necessary to meet fluctuations in workload, they were necessary when acquired and are now idle because of changes in program requirements, efforts to achieve more economical operations, reorganization, termination, or other causes which could not have been reasonably foreseen. Under the exception stated in this subsection, costs of idle facilities are allowable for a reasonable period of time, ordinarily not to exceed one year, depending on the initiative taken to use, lease, or dispose of such facilities.
                (c) The costs of idle capacity are normal costs of doing business and are a factor in the normal fluctuations of usage or indirect cost rates from period to period. Such costs are allowable, provided that the capacity is reasonably anticipated to be necessary to carry out the purpose of the Federal award or was originally reasonable and is not subject to reduction or elimination by use on other Federal awards, subletting, renting, or sale, in accordance with sound business, economic, or security practices. Widespread idle capacity throughout an entire facility or among a group of assets having substantially the same function may be considered idle facilities.
              
              
                § 75.447
                Insurance and indemnification.
                (a) Costs of insurance required or approved and maintained, pursuant to the Federal award, are allowable.
                (b) Costs of other insurance in connection with the general conduct of activities are allowable subject to the following limitations:
                (1) Types and extent and cost of coverage are in accordance with the non-Federal entity's policy and sound business practice.

                (2) Costs of insurance or of contributions to any reserve covering the risk of loss of, or damage to, Federal Government property are unallowable except to the extent that the HHS awarding agency has specifically required or approved such costs.
                (3) Costs allowed for business interruption or other similar insurance must exclude coverage of management fees.
                (4) Costs of insurance on the lives of trustees, officers, or other employees holding positions of similar responsibilities are allowable only to the extent that the insurance represents additional compensation (see § 75.431). The cost of such insurance when the non-Federal entity is identified as the beneficiary is unallowable.
                (5) Insurance against defects. Costs of insurance with respect to any costs incurred to correct defects in the non-Federal entity's materials or workmanship are unallowable.
                (6) Medical liability (malpractice) insurance. Medical liability insurance is an allowable cost of Federal research programs only to the extent that the Federal research programs involve human subjects or training of participants in research techniques. Medical liability insurance costs must be treated as a direct cost and must be assigned to individual projects based on the manner in which the insurer allocates the risk to the population covered by the insurance.
                (c) Actual losses which could have been covered by permissible insurance (through a self-insurance program or otherwise) are unallowable, unless expressly provided for in the Federal award. However, costs incurred because of losses not covered under nominal deductible insurance coverage provided in keeping with sound management practice, and minor losses not covered by insurance, such as spoilage, breakage, and disappearance of small hand tools, which occur in the ordinary course of operations, are allowable.
                (d) Contributions to a reserve for certain self-insurance programs including workers' compensation, unemployment compensation, and severance pay are allowable subject to the following provisions:
                (1) The type of coverage and the extent of coverage and the rates and premiums would have been allowed had insurance (including reinsurance) been purchased to cover the risks. However, provision for known or reasonably estimated self-insured liabilities, which do not become payable for more than one year after the provision is made, must not exceed the discounted present value of the liability. The rate used for discounting the liability must be determined by giving consideration to such factors as the non-Federal entity's settlement rate for those liabilities and its investment rate of return.
                (2) Earnings or investment income on reserves must be credited to those reserves.
                (3)(i) Contributions to reserves must be based on sound actuarial principles using historical experience and reasonable assumptions. Reserve levels must be analyzed and updated at least biennially for each major risk being insured and take into account any reinsurance, coinsurance, etc. Reserve levels related to employee-related coverages will normally be limited to the value of claims:
                (A) Submitted and adjudicated but not paid;
                (B) Submitted but not adjudicated; and
                (C) Incurred but not submitted.
                (ii) Reserve levels in excess of the amounts based on the above must be identified and justified in the cost allocation plan or indirect cost rate proposal.
                (4) Accounting records, actuarial studies, and cost allocations (or billings) must recognize any significant differences due to types of insured risk and losses generated by the various insured activities or agencies of the non-Federal entity. If individual departments or agencies of the non-Federal entity experience significantly different levels of claims for a particular risk, those differences are to be recognized by the use of separate allocations or other techniques resulting in an equitable allocation.

                (5) Whenever funds are transferred from a self-insurance reserve to other accounts (e.g., general fund or unrestricted account), refunds must be made to the Federal Government for its share of funds transferred, including earned or imputed interest from the date of transfer and debt interest, if applicable, chargeable in accordance with applicable Federal cognizant agency for indirect cost, claims collection regulations.
                (e) Insurance refunds must be credited against insurance costs in the year the refund is received.
                (f) Indemnification includes securing the non-Federal entity against liabilities to third persons and other losses not compensated by insurance or otherwise. The Federal Government is obligated to indemnify the non-Federal entity only to the extent expressly provided for in the Federal award, except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section.
              
              
                § 75.448
                Intellectual property.
                (a) Patent costs. (1) The following costs related to securing patents and copyrights are allowable:
                (i) Costs of preparing disclosures, reports, and other documents required by the Federal award, and of searching the art to the extent necessary to make such disclosures;
                (ii) Costs of preparing documents and any other patent costs in connection with the filing and prosecution of a United States patent application where title or royalty-free license is required by the Federal Government to be conveyed to the Federal Government; and
                (iii) General counseling services relating to patent and copyright matters, such as advice on patent and copyright laws, regulations, clauses, and employee intellectual property agreements (See also § 75.459).
                (2) The following costs related to securing patents and copyrights are unallowable:
                (i) Costs of preparing disclosures, reports, and other documents, and of searching the art to make disclosures not required by the Federal award;
                (ii) Costs in connection with filing and prosecuting any foreign patent application, or any United States patent application, where the Federal award does not require conveying title or a royalty-free license to the Federal Government.
                (b) Royalties and other costs for use of patents and copyrights. (1) Royalties on a patent or copyright or amortization of the cost of acquiring by purchase a copyright, patent, or rights thereto, necessary for the proper performance of the Federal award are allowable unless:
                (i) The Federal Government already has a license or the right to free use of the patent or copyright.
                (ii) The patent or copyright has been adjudicated to be invalid, or has been administratively determined to be invalid.
                (iii) The patent or copyright is considered to be unenforceable.
                (iv) The patent or copyright is expired.
                (2) Special care should be exercised in determining reasonableness where the royalties may have been arrived at as a result of less-than-arm's-length bargaining, such as:
                (i) Royalties paid to persons, including corporations, affiliated with the non-Federal entity.
                (ii) Royalties paid to unaffiliated parties, including corporations, under an agreement entered into in contemplation that a Federal award would be made.
                (iii) Royalties paid under an agreement entered into after a Federal award is made to a non-Federal entity.
                (3) In any case involving a patent or copyright formerly owned by the non-Federal entity, the amount of royalty allowed must not exceed the cost which would have been allowed had the non-Federal entity retained title thereto.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.449
                Interest.
                (a) General. Costs incurred for interest on borrowed capital, temporary use of endowment funds, or the use of the non-Federal entity's own funds, however represented, are unallowable. Financing costs (including interest) to acquire, construct, or replace capital assets are allowable, subject to the conditions in this section.

                (b)(1) Capital assets is defined as noted in § 75.2 Capital assets. An asset cost includes (as applicable) acquisition costs, construction costs, and other costs capitalized in accordance with GAAP.

                (2) For non-Federal entity fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, intangible assets include patents and computer software. For software development projects, only interest attributable to the portion of the project costs capitalized in accordance with GAAP is allowable.
                (c) Conditions for all non-Federal entities. (1) The non-Federal entity uses the capital assets in support of Federal awards;
                (2) The allowable asset costs to acquire facilities and equipment are limited to a fair market value available to the non-Federal entity from an unrelated (arm's length) third party.
                (3) The non-Federal entity obtains the financing via an arm's-length transaction (that is, a transaction with an unrelated third party); or claims reimbursement of actual interest cost at a rate available via such a transaction.
                (4) The non-Federal entity limits claims for Federal reimbursement of interest costs to the least expensive alternative. For example, a capital lease may be determined less costly than purchasing through debt financing, in which case reimbursement must be limited to the amount of interest determined if leasing had been used.
                (5) The non-Federal entity expenses or capitalizes allowable interest cost in accordance with GAAP.
                (6) Earnings generated by the investment of borrowed funds pending their disbursement for the asset costs are used to offset the current period's allowable interest cost, whether that cost is expensed or capitalized. Earnings subject to being reported to the Federal Internal Revenue Service under arbitrage requirements are excludable.
                (7) The following conditions must apply to debt arrangements over $1 million to purchase or construct facilities, unless the non-Federal entity makes an initial equity contribution to the purchase of 25 percent or more. For this purpose, “initial equity contribution” means the amount or value of contributions made by the non-Federal entity for the acquisition of facilities prior to occupancy.
                (i) The non-Federal entity must reduce claims for reimbursement of interest cost by an amount equal to imputed interest earnings on excess cash flow attributable to the portion of the facility used for Federal awards.
                (ii) The non-Federal entity must impute interest on excess cash flow as follows:
                (A) Annually, the non-Federal entity must prepare a cumulative (from the inception of the project) report of monthly cash inflows and outflows, regardless of the funding source. For this purpose, inflows consist of Federal reimbursement for depreciation, amortization of capitalized construction interest, and annual interest cost. Outflows consist of initial equity contributions, debt principal payments (less the pro-rata share attributable to the cost of land), and interest payments.
                (B) To compute monthly cash inflows and outflows, the non-Federal entity must divide the annual amounts determined in step (i) by the number of months in the year (usually 12) that the building is in service.
                (C) For any month in which cumulative cash inflows exceed cumulative outflows, interest must be calculated on the excess inflows for that month and be treated as a reduction to allowable interest cost. The rate of interest to be used must be the three-month Treasury bill closing rate as of the last business day of that month.
                (8) Interest attributable to a fully depreciated asset is unallowable.
                (d) Additional conditions for states, local governments and Indian tribes. For costs to be allowable, the non-Federal entity must have incurred the interest costs for buildings after October 1, 1980, or for land and equipment after September 1, 1995.
                (1) The requirement to offset interest earned on borrowed funds against current allowable interest cost (paragraph (c)(5) of this section) also applies to earnings on debt service reserve funds.
                (2) The non-Federal entity will negotiate the amount of allowable interest cost related to the acquisition of facilities with asset costs of $1 million or more, as outlined in paragraph (c)(7) of this section. For this purpose, a non-Federal entity must consider only cash inflows and outflows attributable to that portion of the real property used for Federal awards.

                (e) Additional conditions for IHEs. For costs to be allowable, the IHE must have incurred the interest costs after July 1, 1982, in connection with acquisitions of capital assets that occurred after that date.
                (f) Additional condition for nonprofit organizations. For costs to be allowable, the nonprofit organization incurred the interest costs after September 29, 1995, in connection with acquisitions of capital assets that occurred after that date.
                (g) The interest allowability provisions of this section do not apply to a nonprofit organization subject to “full coverage” under the Cost Accounting Standards (CAS), as defined at 48 CFR 9903.201-2(a). The non-Federal entity's Federal awards are instead subject to CAS 414 (48 CFR 9904.414), and CAS 417 (48 CFR 9904.417).
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.450
                Lobbying.
                (a) The cost of certain influencing activities associated with obtaining grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, or loans is an unallowable cost. Lobbying with respect to certain grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, and loans is governed by relevant statutes, including among others, the provisions of 31 U.S.C. 1352, as well as the common rule, “New Restrictions on Lobbying” published at 55 FR 6736 (February 26, 1990), including definitions, and the Office of Management and Budget “Government-wide Guidance for New Restrictions on Lobbying” and notices published at 54 FR 52306 (December 20, 1989), 55 FR 24540 (June 15, 1990), 57 FR 1772 (January 15, 1992), and 61 FR 1412 (January 19, 1996).
                (b) Executive lobbying costs. Costs incurred in attempting to improperly influence either directly or indirectly, an employee or officer of the executive branch of the Federal Government to give consideration or to act regarding a Federal award or a regulatory matter are unallowable. Improper influence means any influence that induces or tends to induce a Federal employee or officer to give consideration or to act regarding a Federal award or regulatory matter on any basis other than the merits of the matter.
                (c) In addition to the above, the following restrictions are applicable to nonprofit organizations and IHEs:
                (1) Costs associated with the following activities are unallowable:
                (i) Attempts to influence the outcomes of any Federal, state, or local election, referendum, initiative, or similar procedure, through in-kind or cash contributions, endorsements, publicity, or similar activity;
                (ii) Establishing, administering, contributing to, or paying the expenses of a political party, campaign, political action committee, or other organization established for the purpose of influencing the outcomes of elections in the United States;
                (iii) Any attempt to influence:
                (A) The introduction of Federal or state legislation;
                (B) The enactment or modification of any pending Federal or state legislation through communication with any member or employee of the Congress or state legislature (including efforts to influence state or local officials to engage in similar lobbying activity);
                (C) The enactment or modification of any pending Federal or state legislation by preparing, distributing, or using publicity or propaganda, or by urging members of the general public, or any segment thereof, to contribute to or participate in any mass demonstration, march, rally, fund raising drive, lobbying campaign or letter writing or telephone campaign; or
                (D) Any government official or employee in connection with a decision to sign or veto enrolled legislation;
                (iv) Legislative liaison activities, including attendance at legislative sessions or committee hearings, gathering information regarding legislation, and analyzing the effect of legislation, when such activities are carried on in support of or in knowing preparation for an effort to engage in unallowable lobbying.
                (2) The following activities are excepted from the coverage of paragraph (c)(1) of this section:

                (i) Technical and factual presentations on topics directly related to the performance of a grant, contract, or other agreement (through hearing testimony, statements, or letters to the Congress or a state legislature, or subdivision, member, or cognizant staff member thereof), in response to a documented request (including a Congressional Record notice requesting testimony or statements for the record at a regularly scheduled hearing) made by the non-Federal entity's member of congress, legislative body or a subdivision, or a cognizant staff member thereof, provided such information is readily obtainable and can be readily put in deliverable form, and further provided that costs under this section for travel, lodging or meals are unallowable unless incurred to offer testimony at a regularly scheduled Congressional hearing pursuant to a written request for such presentation made by the Chairman or Ranking Minority Member of the Committee or Subcommittee conducting such hearings;
                (ii) Any lobbying made unallowable by paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section to influence state legislation in order to directly reduce the cost, or to avoid material impairment of the non-Federal entity's authority to perform the grant, contract, or other agreement; or
                (iii) Any activity specifically authorized by statute to be undertaken with funds from the Federal award.
                (iv) Any activity excepted from the definitions of “lobbying” or “influencing legislation” by the Internal Revenue Code provisions that require nonprofit organizations to limit their participation in direct and “grass roots” lobbying activities in order to retain their charitable deduction status and avoid punitive excise taxes, I.R.C. sections 501(c)(3), 501(h), 4911(a), including:
                (A) Nonpartisan analysis, study, or research reports;
                (B) Examinations and discussions of broad social, economic, and similar problems; and
                (C) Information provided upon request by a legislator for technical advice and assistance, as defined by IRC sec. 4911(d)(2) and 26 CFR 56.4911-2(c)(1)-(c)(3).
                (v) When a non-Federal entity seeks reimbursement for indirect (F&A) costs, total lobbying costs must be separately identified in the indirect (F&A) cost rate proposal, and thereafter treated as other unallowable activity costs in accordance with the procedures of § 75.413.
                (vi) The non-Federal entity must submit as part of its annual indirect (F&A) cost rate proposal a certification that the requirements and standards of this section have been complied with. (See also § 75.415.)
                (vii)(A) Time logs, calendars, or similar records are not required to be created for purposes of complying with the record keeping requirements in § 75.302 with respect to lobbying costs during any particular calendar month when:
                (1) The employee engages in lobbying (as defined in paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section) 25 percent or less of the employee's compensated hours of employment during that calendar month; and
                (2) Within the preceding five-year period, the non-Federal entity has not materially misstated allowable or unallowable costs of any nature, including legislative lobbying costs.
                (B) When conditions in paragraph (c)(2)(vii)(A)(1) and (2) of this section are met, non-Federal entities are not required to establish records to support the allowability of claimed costs in addition to records already required or maintained. Also, when conditions in paragraphs (c)(2)(vii)(A)(1) and (2) of this section are met, the absence of time logs, calendars, or similar records will not serve as a basis for disallowing costs by contesting estimates of lobbying time spent by employees during a calendar month.
                (viii) The HHS awarding agency must establish procedures for resolving in advance, in consultation with OMB, any significant questions or disagreements concerning the interpretation or application of this section. Any such advance resolutions must be binding in any subsequent settlements, audits, or investigations with respect to that grant or contract for purposes of interpretation of this part, provided, however, that this must not be construed to prevent a contractor or non-Federal entity from contesting the lawfulness of such a determination.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                
                § 75.451
                Losses on other awards or contracts.
                Any excess of costs over income under any other award or contract of any nature is unallowable. This includes, but is not limited to, the non-Federal entity's contributed portion by reason of cost-sharing agreements or any under-recoveries through negotiation of flat amounts for indirect (F&A) costs. Also, any excess of costs over authorized funding levels transferred from any award or contract to another award or contract is unallowable. All losses are not allowable indirect (F&A) costs and are required to be included in the appropriate indirect cost rate base for allocation of indirect costs.
              
              
                § 75.452
                Maintenance and repair costs.
                Costs incurred for utilities, insurance, security, necessary maintenance, janitorial services, repair, or upkeep of buildings and equipment (including Federal property unless otherwise provided for) which neither add to the permanent value of the property nor appreciably prolong its intended life, but keep it in an efficient operating condition, are allowable. Costs incurred for improvements which add to the permanent value of the buildings and equipment or appreciably prolong their intended life must be treated as capital expenditures (see § 75.439). These costs are only allowable to the extent not paid through rental or other agreements.
              
              
                § 75.453
                Materials and supplies costs, including costs of computing devices.
                (a) Costs incurred for materials, supplies, and fabricated parts necessary to carry out a Federal award are allowable.
                (b) Purchased materials and supplies must be charged at their actual prices, net of applicable credits. Withdrawals from general stores or stockrooms must be charged at their actual net cost under any recognized method of pricing inventory withdrawals, consistently applied. Incoming transportation charges are a proper part of materials and supplies costs.
                (c) Materials and supplies used for the performance of a Federal award may be charged as direct costs. In the specific case of computing devices, charging as direct costs is allowable for devices that are essential and allocable, but not solely dedicated, to the performance of a Federal award.
                (d) Where federally-donated or furnished materials are used in performing the Federal award, such materials will be used without charge.
              
              
                § 75.454
                Memberships, subscriptions, and professional activity costs.
                (a) Costs of the non-Federal entity's membership in business, technical, and professional organizations are allowable.
                (b) Costs of the non-Federal entity's subscriptions to business, professional, and technical periodicals are allowable.
                (c) Costs of membership in any civic or community organization are allowable with prior approval by the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity.
                (d) Costs of membership in any country club or social or dining club or organization are unallowable.
                (e) Costs of membership in organizations whose primary purpose is lobbying are unallowable. See also § 75.450.
              
              
                § 75.455
                Organization costs.
                Costs such as incorporation fees, brokers' fees, fees to promoters, organizers or management consultants, attorneys, accountants, or investment counselor, whether or not employees of the non-Federal entity in connection with establishment or reorganization of an organization, are unallowable except with prior approval of the HHS awarding agency.
              
              
                § 75.456
                Participant support costs.
                Participant support costs as defined in § 75.2 are allowable with the prior approval of the HHS awarding agency.
                [81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.457
                Plant and security costs.

                Necessary and reasonable expenses incurred for protection and security of facilities, personnel, and work products are allowable. Such costs include, but are not limited to, wages and uniforms of personnel engaged in security activities; equipment; barriers; protective (non-military) gear, devices, and equipment; contractual security services; and consultants. Capital expenditures for plant security purposes are subject to § 75.439.
              
              
                § 75.458
                Pre-award costs.
                Pre-award costs are those incurred prior to the effective date of the Federal award directly pursuant to the negotiation and in anticipation of the Federal award where such costs are necessary for efficient and timely performance of the scope of work. Such costs are allowable only to the extent that they would have been allowable if incurred after the date of the Federal award and only with the written approval of the HHS awarding agency.
              
              
                § 75.459
                Professional service costs.
                (a) Costs of professional and consultant services rendered by persons who are members of a particular profession or possess a special skill, and who are not officers or employees of the non-Federal entity, are allowable, subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section when reasonable in relation to the services rendered and when not contingent upon recovery of the costs from the Federal Government. In addition, legal and related services are limited under § 75.435.
                (b) In determining the allowability of costs in a particular case, no single factor or any special combination of factors is necessarily determinative. However, the following factors are relevant:
                (1) The nature and scope of the service rendered in relation to the service required.
                (2) The necessity of contracting for the service, considering the non-Federal entity's capability in the particular area.
                (3) The past pattern of such costs, particularly in the years prior to Federal awards.

                (4) The impact of Federal awards on the non-Federal entity's business (i.e., what new problems have arisen).
                (5) Whether the proportion of Federal work to the non-Federal entity's total business is such as to influence the non-Federal entity in favor of incurring the cost, particularly where the services rendered are not of a continuing nature and have little relationship to work under Federal awards.
                (6) Whether the service can be performed more economically by direct employment rather than contracting.
                (7) The qualifications of the individual or concern rendering the service and the customary fees charged, especially on non-federally funded activities.

                (8) Adequacy of the contractual agreement for the service (e.g., description of the service, estimate of time required, rate of compensation, and termination provisions).
                (c) In addition to the factors in paragraph (b) of this section, to be allowable, retainer fees must be supported by evidence of bona fide services available or rendered.
              
              
                § 75.460
                Proposal costs.
                Proposal costs are the costs of preparing bids, proposals, or applications on potential Federal and non-Federal awards or projects, including the development of data necessary to support the non-Federal entity's bids or proposals. Proposal costs of the current accounting period of both successful and unsuccessful bids and proposals normally should be treated as indirect (F&A) costs and allocated currently to all activities of the non-Federal entity. No proposal costs of past accounting periods will be allocable to the current period.
              
              
                § 75.461
                Publication and printing costs.
                (a) Publication costs for electronic and print media, including distribution, promotion, and general handling are allowable. If these costs are not identifiable with a particular cost objective, they should be allocated as indirect costs to all benefiting activities of the non-Federal entity.
                (b) Page charges for professional journal publications are allowable where:
                (1) The publications report work supported by the Federal Government; and

                (2) The charges are levied impartially on all items published by the journal, whether or not under a Federal award.
                
                (3) The non-Federal entity may charge the Federal award before closeout for the costs of publication or sharing of research results if the costs are not incurred during the period of performance of the Federal award.
                (c) The non-Federal entity may charge the Federal award before closeout for the costs of publication as prescribed in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section or sharing of research results if the costs are not incurred during the period of performance of the Federal award.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.462
                Rearrangement and reconversion costs.
                (a) Costs incurred for ordinary and normal rearrangement and alteration of facilities are allowable as indirect costs. Special arrangements and alterations costs incurred specifically for a Federal award are allowable as a direct cost with the prior approval of the HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity.
                (b) Costs incurred in the restoration or rehabilitation of the non-Federal entity's facilities to approximately the same condition existing immediately prior to commencement of Federal awards, less costs related to normal wear and tear, are allowable.
              
              
                § 75.463
                Recruiting costs.
                (a) Subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, and provided that the size of the staff recruited and maintained is in keeping with workload requirements, costs of “help wanted” advertising, operating costs of an employment office necessary to secure and maintain an adequate staff, costs of operating an aptitude and educational testing program, travel costs of employees while engaged in recruiting personnel, travel costs of applicants for interviews for prospective employment, and relocation costs incurred incident to recruitment of new employees, are allowable to the extent that such costs are incurred pursuant to the non-Federal entity's standard recruitment program. Where the non-Federal entity uses employment agencies, costs not in excess of standard commercial rates for such services are allowable.
                (b) Special emoluments, fringe benefits, and salary allowances incurred to attract professional personnel that do not meet the test of reasonableness or do not conform with the established practices of the non-Federal entity, are unallowable.
                (c) Where relocation costs incurred incident to recruitment of a new employee have been funded in whole or in part to a Federal award, and the newly hired employee resigns for reasons within the employee's control within 12 months after hire, the non-Federal entity will be required to refund or credit the Federal share of such relocation costs to the Federal Government. See also § 75.464.
                (d) Short-term, travel visa costs (as opposed to longer-term, immigration visas) are generally allowable expenses that may be proposed as a direct cost. Since short-term visas are issued for a specific period and purpose, they can be clearly identified as directly connected to work performed on a Federal award. For these costs to be directly charged to a Federal award, they must:
                (1) Be critical and necessary for the conduct of the project;
                (2) Be allowable under the applicable cost principles;
                (3) Be consistent with the non-Federal entity's cost accounting practices and non-Federal entity policy; and
                (4) Meet the definition of “direct cost” as described in the applicable cost principles.
              
              
                § 75.464
                Relocation costs of employees.
                (a) Relocation costs are costs incident to the permanent change of duty assignment (for an indefinite period or for a stated period of not less than 12 months) of an existing employee or upon recruitment of a new employee. Relocation costs are allowable, subject to the limitations described in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, provided that:
                (1) The move is for the benefit of the employer.

                (2) Reimbursement to the employee is in accordance with an established written policy consistently followed by the employer.
                
                (3) The reimbursement does not exceed the employee's actual (or reasonably estimated) expenses.
                (b) Allowable relocation costs for current employees are limited to the following:
                (1) The costs of transportation of the employee, members of his or her immediate family and his household, and personal effects to the new location.
                (2) The costs of finding a new home, such as advance trips by employees and spouses to locate living quarters and temporary lodging during the transition period, up to maximum period of 30 calendar days.
                (3) Closing costs, such as brokerage, legal, and appraisal fees, incident to the disposition of the employee's former home. These costs, together with those described in (4), are limited to 8 per cent of the sales price of the employee's former home.
                (4) The continuing costs of ownership (for up to six months) of the vacant former home after the settlement or lease date of the employee's new permanent home, such as maintenance of buildings and grounds (exclusive of fixing-up expenses), utilities, taxes, and property insurance.
                (5) Other necessary and reasonable expenses normally incident to relocation, such as the costs of canceling an unexpired lease, transportation of personal property, and purchasing insurance against loss of or damages to personal property. The cost of canceling an unexpired lease is limited to three times the monthly rental.
                (c) Allowable relocation costs for new employees are limited to those described in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section. When relocation costs incurred incident to the recruitment of new employees have been charged to a Federal award and the employee resigns for reasons within the employee's control within 12 months after hire, the non-Federal entity must refund or credit the Federal Government for its share of the cost. However, the costs of travel to an overseas location must be considered travel costs in accordance with § 75.474, and not § 75.464, for the purpose of this paragraph if dependents are not permitted at the location for any reason and the costs do not include costs of transporting household goods.
                (d) The following costs related to relocation are unallowable:
                (1) Fees and other costs associated with acquiring a new home.
                (2) A loss on the sale of a former home.
                (3) Continuing mortgage principal and interest payments on a home being sold.
                (4) Income taxes paid by an employee related to reimbursed relocation costs.
              
              
                § 75.465
                Rental costs of real property and equipment.
                (a) Subject to the limitations described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, rental costs are allowable to the extent that the rates are reasonable in light of such factors as: Rental costs of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. Rental arrangements should be reviewed periodically to determine if circumstances have changed and other options are available.
                (b) Rental costs under “sale and lease back” arrangements are allowable only up to the amount that would be allowed had the non-Federal entity continued to own the property. This amount would include expenses such as depreciation, maintenance, taxes, and insurance.
                (c) Rental costs under “less-than-arm's-length” leases are allowable only up to the amount as explained in paragraph (b) of this section. For this purpose, a less-than-arm's-length lease is one under which one party to the lease agreement is able to control or substantially influence the actions of the other. Such leases include, but are not limited to those between:
                (1) Divisions of the non-Federal entity;
                (2) The non-Federal entity under common control through common officers, directors, or members; and

                (3) The non-Federal entity and a director, trustee, officer, or key employee of the non-Federal entity or an immediate family member, either directly or through corporations, trusts, or similar arrangements in which they hold a controlling interest. For example, the non-Federal entity may establish a separate corporation for the sole purpose of owning property and leasing it back to the non-Federal entity.
                (4) Family members include one party with any of the following relationships to another party:
                (i) Spouse, and parents thereof;
                (ii) Children, and spouses thereof;
                (iii) Parents, and spouses thereof;
                (iv) Siblings, and spouses thereof;
                (v) Grandparents and grandchildren, and spouses thereof;
                (vi) Domestic partner and parents thereof, including domestic partners of any individual in 2 through 5 of this definition; and
                (vii) Any individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.
                (5) Rental costs under leases which are required to be treated as capital leases under GAAP are allowable only up to the amount (as explained in paragraph (b) of this section) that would be allowed had the non-Federal entity purchased the property on the date the lease agreement was executed. The provisions of GAAP must be used to determine whether a lease is a capital lease. Interest costs related to capital leases are allowable to the extent they meet the criteria in § 75.449. Unallowable costs include amounts paid for profit, management fees, and taxes that would not have been incurred had the non-Federal entity purchased the property.
                (6) The rental of any property owned by any individuals or entities affiliated with the non-Federal entity, to include commercial or residential real estate, for purposes such as the home office workspace is unallowable.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.466
                Scholarships and student aid costs.
                (a) Costs of scholarships, fellowships, and other programs of student aid at IHEs are allowable only when the purpose of the Federal award is to provide training to selected participants and the charge is approved by the HHS awarding agency. However, tuition remission and other forms of compensation paid as, or in lieu of, wages to students performing necessary work are allowable provided that:
                (1) The individual is conducting activities necessary to the Federal award;
                (2) Tuition remission and other support are provided in accordance with established policy of the IHE and consistently provided in a like manner to students in return for similar activities conducted under Federal awards as well as other activities; and
                (3) During the academic period, the student is enrolled in an advanced degree program at a non-Federal entity or affiliated institution and the activities of the student in relation to the Federal award are related to the degree program;
                (4) The tuition or other payments are reasonable compensation for the work performed and are conditioned explicitly upon the performance of necessary work; and
                (5) It is the IHE's practice to similarly compensate students under Federal awards as well as other activities.
                (b) Charges for tuition remission and other forms of compensation paid to students as, or in lieu of, salaries and wages must be subject to the reporting requirements in § 75.430, and must be treated as direct or indirect cost in accordance with the actual work being performed. Tuition remission may be charged on an average rate basis. See also § 75.431.
              
              
                § 75.467
                Selling and marketing costs.
                Costs of selling and marketing any products or services of the non-Federal entity (unless allowed under § 75.421) are unallowable, except as direct costs, with prior approval by the HHS awarding agency when necessary for the performance of the Federal award.
              
              
                § 75.468
                Specialized service facilities.
                (a) The costs of services provided by highly complex or specialized facilities operated by the non-Federal entity, such as computing facilities, wind tunnels, and reactors are allowable, provided the charges for the services meet the conditions of either paragraphs (b) or (c) of this section, and, in addition, take into account any items of income or Federal financing that qualify as applicable credits under § 75.406.

                (b) The costs of such services, when material, must be charged directly to applicable awards based on actual usage of the services on the basis of a schedule of rates or established methodology that:
                (1) Does not discriminate between activities under Federal awards and other activities of the non-Federal entity, including usage by the non-Federal entity for internal purposes, and
                (2) Is designed to recover only the aggregate costs of the services. The costs of each service must consist normally of both its direct costs and its allocable share of all indirect (F&A) costs. Rates must be adjusted at least biennially, and must take into consideration over/under applied costs of the previous period(s).
                (c) Where the costs incurred for a service are not material, they may be allocated as indirect (F&A) costs.
                (d) Under some extraordinary circumstances, where it is in the best interest of the Federal Government and the non-Federal entity to establish alternative costing arrangements, such arrangements may be worked out with the Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              
              
                § 75.469
                Student activity costs.
                Costs incurred for intramural activities, student publications, student clubs, and other student activities, are unallowable, unless specifically provided for in the Federal award.
              
              
                § 75.470
                Taxes (including Value Added Tax).
                (a) For states, local governments and Indian tribes:
                (1) Taxes that a governmental unit is legally required to pay are allowable, except for self-assessed taxes that disproportionately affect Federal programs or changes in tax policies that disproportionately affect Federal programs.
                (2) Gasoline taxes, motor vehicle fees, and other taxes that are in effect user fees for benefits provided to the Federal Government are allowable.
                (3) This provision does not restrict the authority of the HHS awarding agency to identify taxes where Federal participation is inappropriate. Where the identification of the amount of unallowable taxes would require an inordinate amount of effort, the cognizant agency for indirect costs may accept a reasonable approximation thereof.
                (b) For nonprofit organizations and IHEs:
                (1) In general, taxes which the non-Federal entity is required to pay and which are paid or accrued in accordance with GAAP, and payments made to local governments in lieu of taxes which are commensurate with the local government services received are allowable, except for:
                (i) Taxes from which exemptions are available to the non-Federal entity directly or which are available to the non-Federal entity based on an exemption afforded the Federal Government and, in the latter case, when the HHS awarding agency makes available the necessary exemption certificates,
                (ii) Special assessments on land which represent capital improvements, and
                (iii) Federal income taxes.
                (2) Any refund of taxes, and any payment to the non-Federal entity of interest thereon, which were allowed as Federal award costs, will be credited either as a cost reduction or cash refund, as appropriate, to the Federal Government. However, any interest actually paid or credited to an non-Federal entity incident to a refund of tax, interest, and penalty will be paid or credited to the Federal Government only to the extent that such interest accrued over the period during which the non-Federal entity has been reimbursed by the Federal Government for the taxes, interest, and penalties.

                (c) Value Added Tax (VAT) Foreign taxes charged for the purchase of goods or services that a non-Federal entity is legally required to pay in country is an allowable expense under Federal awards. Foreign tax refunds or applicable credits under Federal awards refer to receipts, or reduction of expenditures, which operate to offset or reduce expense items that are allocable to Federal awards as direct or indirect costs. To the extent that such credits accrued or received by the non-Federal entity relate to allowable cost, these costs must be credited to the HHS awarding agency either as costs or cash refunds. If the costs are credited back to the Federal award, the non-Federal entity may reduce the Federal share of costs by the amount of the foreign tax reimbursement, or where Federal award has not expired, use the foreign government tax refund for approved activities under the Federal award with prior approval of the HHS awarding agency.
              
              
                § 75.471
                Termination costs.
                Termination of a Federal award generally gives rise to the incurrence of costs, or the need for special treatment of costs, which would not have arisen had the Federal award not been terminated. Cost principles covering these items are set forth in this section. They are to be used in conjunction with the other provisions of this part in termination situations.
                (a) The cost of items reasonably usable on the non-Federal entity's other work must not be allowable unless the non-Federal entity submits evidence that it would not retain such items at cost without sustaining a loss. In deciding whether such items are reasonably usable on other work of the non-Federal entity, the HHS awarding agency should consider the non-Federal entity's plans and orders for current and scheduled activity. Contemporaneous purchases of common items by the non-Federal entity must be regarded as evidence that such items are reasonably usable on the non-Federal entity's other work. Any acceptance of common items as allocable to the terminated portion of the Federal award must be limited to the extent that the quantities of such items on hand, in transit, and on order are in excess of the reasonable quantitative requirements of other work.
                (b) If in a particular case, despite all reasonable efforts by the non-Federal entity, certain costs cannot be discontinued immediately after the effective date of termination, such costs are generally allowable within the limitations set forth in this part, except that any such costs continuing after termination due to the negligent or willful failure of the non-Federal entity to discontinue such costs must be unallowable.
                (c) Loss of useful value of special tooling, machinery, and equipment is generally allowable if:
                (1) Such special tooling, special machinery, or equipment is not reasonably capable of use in the other work of the non-Federal entity,
                (2) The interest of the Federal Government is protected by transfer of title or by other means deemed appropriate by the HHS awarding agency (see also § 75.320(d)), and
                (3) The loss of useful value for any one terminated Federal award is limited to that portion of the acquisition cost which bears the same ratio to the total acquisition cost as the terminated portion of the Federal award bears to the entire terminated Federal award and other Federal awards for which the special tooling, machinery, or equipment was acquired.
                (d) Rental costs under unexpired leases are generally allowable where clearly shown to have been reasonably necessary for the performance of the terminated Federal award less the residual value of such leases, if:
                (1) The amount of such rental claimed does not exceed the reasonable use value of the property leased for the period of the Federal award and such further period as may be reasonable, and
                (2) The non-Federal entity makes all reasonable efforts to terminate, assign, settle, or otherwise reduce the cost of such lease. There also may be included the cost of alterations of such leased property, provided such alterations were necessary for the performance of the Federal award, and of reasonable restoration required by the provisions of the lease.
                (e) Settlement expenses including the following are generally allowable:
                (1) Accounting, legal, clerical, and similar costs reasonably necessary for:
                (i) The preparation and presentation to the Federal awarding agency of settlement claims and supporting data with respect to the terminated portion of the Federal award, unless the termination is for cause (see subpart D of this part, §§ 75.371 through 75.375); and
                (ii) The termination and settlement of subawards.

                (2) Reasonable costs for the storage, transportation, protection, and disposition of property provided by the Federal Government or acquired or produced for the Federal award.
                
                (f) Claims under subawards, including the allocable portion of claims which are common to the Federal award and to other work of the non-Federal entity, are generally allowable. An appropriate share of the non-Federal entity's indirect costs may be allocated to the amount of settlements with contractors and/or subrecipients, provided that the amount allocated is otherwise consistent with the basic guidelines contained in § 75.414. The indirect costs so allocated must exclude the same and similar costs claimed directly or indirectly as settlement expenses.
              
              
                § 75.472
                Training and education costs.
                The cost of training and education provided for employee development is allowable.
              
              
                § 75.473
                Transportation costs.
                Costs incurred for freight, express, cartage, postage, and other transportation services relating either to goods purchased, in process, or delivered, are allowable. When such costs can readily be identified with the items involved, they may be charged directly as transportation costs or added to the cost of such items. Where identification with the materials received cannot readily be made, inbound transportation cost may be charged to the appropriate indirect (F&A) cost accounts if the non-Federal entity follows a consistent, equitable procedure in this respect. Outbound freight, if reimbursable under the terms and conditions of the Federal award, should be treated as a direct cost.
              
              
                § 75.474
                Travel costs.
                (a) General. Travel costs are the expenses for transportation, lodging, subsistence, and related items incurred by employees who are in travel status on official business of the non-Federal entity. Such costs may be charged on an actual cost basis, on a per diem or mileage basis in lieu of actual costs incurred, or on a combination of the two, provided the method used is applied to an entire trip and not to selected days of the trip, and results in charges consistent with those normally allowed in like circumstances in the non-Federal entity's non-federally-funded activities and in accordance with non-Federal entity's written travel reimbursement policies. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 75.444, travel costs of officials covered by that section are allowable with the prior written approval of the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity when they are specifically related to the Federal award.
                (b) Lodging and subsistence. Costs incurred by employees and officers for travel, including costs of lodging, other subsistence, and incidental expenses, must be considered reasonable and otherwise allowable only to the extent such costs do not exceed charges normally allowed by the non-Federal entity in its regular operations as the result of the non-Federal entity's written travel policy. In addition, if these costs are charged directly to the Federal award documentation must justify that:
                (1) Participation of the individual is necessary to the Federal award; and
                (2) The costs are reasonable and consistent with non-Federal entity's established travel policy.
                (c)(1) Temporary dependent care costs (as dependent is defined in 26 U.S.C. 152) above and beyond regular dependent care that directly results from travel to conferences is allowable provided that:
                (i) The costs are a direct result of the individual's travel for the Federal award;
                (ii) The costs are consistent with the non-Federal entity's documented travel policy for all entity travel; and
                (iii) Are only temporary during the travel period.
                (2) Travel costs for dependents are unallowable, except for travel of duration of six months or more with prior approval of the HHS awarding agency. See also § 75.432.

                (d) In the absence of an acceptable, written non-Federal entity policy regarding travel costs, the rates and amounts established under 5 U.S.C. 5701-11 (“Travel and Subsistence Expenses: Mileage Allowance”), or by the Administrator of General Services, or by the President (or his or her designee) pursuant to any provisions of such subchapter must apply to travel under Federal awards (48 CFR 31.205-46(a)).
                
                (e) Commercial air travel. (1) Airfare costs in excess of the basic least expensive unrestricted accommodations class offered by commercial airlines are unallowable except when such accommodations would:
                (i) Require circuitous routing;
                (ii) Require travel during unreasonable hours;
                (iii) Excessively prolong travel;
                (iv) Result in additional costs that would offset the transportation savings; or
                (v) Offer accommodations not reasonably adequate for the traveler's medical needs. The non-Federal entity must justify and document these conditions on a case-by-case basis in order for the use of first-class or business-class airfare to be allowable in such cases.
                (2) Unless a pattern of avoidance is detected, the Federal Government will generally not question a non-Federal entity's determinations that customary standard airfare or other discount airfare is unavailable for specific trips if the non-Federal entity can demonstrate that such airfare was not available in the specific case.
                (f) Air travel by other than commercial carrier. Costs of travel by non-Federal entity-owned, -leased, or -chartered aircraft include the cost of lease, charter, operation (including personnel costs), maintenance, depreciation, insurance, and other related costs. The portion of such costs that exceeds the cost of airfare as provided for in paragraph (d) of this section, is unallowable.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.475
                Trustees.
                Travel and subsistence costs of trustees (or directors) at IHEs and nonprofit organizations are allowable. See also § 75.474.
              
            
            
              HHS Selected Items of Cost
              
                § 75.476
                Independent research and development costs.
                Independent research and development is research and development which is conducted by an organization, and which is not sponsored by Federal or non-Federal awards, contracts, or other agreements. Independent research and development shall be allocated its proportionate share of indirect costs on the same basis as the allocation of indirect costs to sponsored research and development. The cost of independent research and development, including their proportionate share of indirect costs, are unallowable.
              
              
                § 75.477
                Shared responsibility payments.
                (a) Payments for failure to maintain minimum essential health coverage. Any payments or assessments imposed on an individual or individuals pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 5000A(b) as a result of any failure to maintain minimum essential coverage as required by 26 U.S.C. 5000A(a) are not allowable expenses under Federal awards from an HHS awarding agency.
                (b) Payments for failure to offer health coverage to employees. Any payments or assessments imposed on an employer pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 4980H as a result of the employer's failure to offer to its full-time employees (and their dependents) the opportunity to enroll in minimum essential coverage under an eligible employer-sponsored plan are not allowable expenses under Federal awards from an HHS awarding agency.
                [81 FR 89395, Dec. 12, 2016]
              
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Audit Requirements
            
              General
              
                § 75.500
                Purpose.
                This part sets forth standards for obtaining consistency and uniformity among HHS agencies for the audit of non-Federal entities expending Federal awards.
              
            
            
              Audits
              
                § 75.501
                Audit requirements.
                (a) Audit required. A non-Federal entity that expends $750,000 or more during the non-Federal entity's fiscal year in Federal awards must have a single or program-specific audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of this part.
                (b) Single audit. A non-Federal entity that expends $750,000 or more during the non-Federal entity's fiscal year in Federal awards must have a single audit conducted in accordance with § 75.514 except when it elects to have a program-specific audit conducted in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
                (c) Program-specific audit election. When an auditee expends Federal awards under only one Federal program (excluding R&D) and the Federal program's statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award do not require a financial statement audit of the auditee, the auditee may elect to have a program-specific audit conducted in accordance with § 75.507. A program-specific audit may not be elected for R&D unless all of the Federal awards expended were received from the same Federal agency, or the same Federal agency and the same pass-through entity, and that Federal agency, or pass-through entity in the case of a subrecipient, approves in advance a program-specific audit.
                (d) Exemption when Federal awards expended are less than $750,000. A non-Federal entity that expends less than $750,000 during the non-Federal entity's fiscal year in Federal awards is exempt from Federal audit requirements for that year, except as noted in § 75.503, but records must be available for review or audit by appropriate officials of the Federal agency, pass-through entity, and Government Accountability Office (GAO).
                (e) Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDC). Management of an auditee that owns or operates a FFRDC may elect to treat the FFRDC as a separate entity for purposes of this part.
                (f) Subrecipients and contractors. An auditee may simultaneously be a recipient, a subrecipient, and a contractor. Federal awards expended as a recipient or a subrecipient are subject to audit under this part. The payments received for goods or services provided as a contractor are not Federal awards. Section 75.351 sets forth the considerations in determining whether payments constitute a Federal award or a payment for goods or services provided as a contractor.
                (g) Compliance responsibility for contractors. In most cases, the auditee's compliance responsibility for contractors is only to ensure that the procurement, receipt, and payment for goods and services comply with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards. Federal award compliance requirements normally do not pass through to contractors. However, the auditee is responsible for ensuring compliance for procurement transactions which are structured such that the contractor is responsible for program compliance or the contractor's records must be reviewed to determine program compliance. Also, when these procurement transactions relate to a major program, the scope of the audit must include determining whether these transactions are in compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards.
                (h) For-profit subrecipient. Since this part does not apply to for-profit subrecipients, the pass-through entity is responsible for establishing requirements, as necessary, to ensure compliance by for-profit subrecipients. The agreement with the for-profit subrecipient must describe applicable compliance requirements and the for-profit subrecipient's compliance responsibility. Methods to ensure compliance for Federal awards made to for-profit subrecipients may include pre-award audits, monitoring during the agreement, and post-award audits. See also § 75.352.
                (i) Recipients and subrecipients that are commercial organizations (including for-profit hospitals) have two options regarding audits:
                (1) A financial related audit (as defined in the Government Auditing Standards, GPO Stock #020-000-00-265-4) of a particular award in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, in those cases where the recipient receives awards under only one HHS program; or, if awards are received under multiple HHS programs, a financial related audit of all HHS awards in accordance with Government Auditing Standards; or
                (2) An audit that meets the requirements contained in this subpart.

                (j) Commercial organizations that receive annual HHS awards totaling less than $750,000 are exempt from requirements for a non-Federal audit for that year, but records must be available for review by appropriate officials of Federal agencies.
                (k) See also § 75.216.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.502
                Basis for determining Federal awards expended.
                (a) Determining Federal awards expended. The determination of when a Federal award is expended must be based on when the activity related to the Federal award occurs. Generally, the activity pertains to events that require the non-Federal entity to comply with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards, such as: expenditure/expense transactions associated with awards including grants, cost-reimbursement contracts under the FAR, compacts with Indian Tribes, cooperative agreements, and direct appropriations; the disbursement of funds to subrecipients; the use of loan proceeds under loan and loan guarantee programs; the receipt of property; the receipt of surplus property; the receipt or use of program income; the distribution or use of food commodities; the disbursement of amounts entitling the non-Federal entity to an interest subsidy; and the period when insurance is in force.
                (b) Loan and loan guarantees (loans). Since the Federal Government is at risk for loans until the debt is repaid, the following guidelines must be used to calculate the value of Federal awards expended under loan programs, except as noted in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section:
                (1) Value of new loans made or received during the audit period; plus
                (2) Beginning of the audit period balance of loans from previous years for which the Federal Government imposes continuing compliance requirements; plus
                (3) Any interest subsidy, cash, or administrative cost allowance received.
                (c) Loan and loan guarantees (loans) at IHEs. When loans are made to students of an IHE but the IHE does not make the loans, then only the value of loans made during the audit period must be considered Federal awards expended in that audit period. The balance of loans for previous audit periods is not included as Federal awards expended because the lender accounts for the prior balances.
                (d) Prior loan and loan guarantees (loans). Loans, the proceeds of which were received and expended in prior years, are not considered Federal awards expended under this part when the Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards pertaining to such loans impose no continuing compliance requirements other than to repay the loans.
                (e) Endowment funds. The cumulative balance of Federal awards for endowment funds that are federally restricted are considered Federal awards expended in each audit period in which the funds are still restricted.
                (f) Free rent. Free rent received by itself is not considered a Federal award expended under this part. However, free rent received as part of a Federal award to carry out a Federal program must be included in determining Federal awards expended and subject to audit under this part.
                (g) Valuing non-cash assistance. Federal non-cash assistance, such as free rent, food commodities, donated property, or donated surplus property, must be valued at fair market value at the time of receipt or the assessed value provided by the HHS agency.
                (h) Medicare. Medicare payments to a non-Federal entity for providing patient care services to Medicare-eligible individuals are not considered Federal awards expended under this part.
                (i) Medicaid. Medicaid payments to a subrecipient for providing patient care services to Medicaid-eligible individuals are not considered Federal awards expended under this part unless a state requires the funds to be treated as Federal awards expended because reimbursement is on a cost-reimbursement basis.
                (j) Certain loans provided by the National Credit Union Administration. For purposes of this part, loans made from the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund and the Central Liquidity Facility that are funded by contributions from insured non-Federal entities are not considered Federal awards expended.
              
              
                
                § 75.503
                Relation to other audit requirements.
                (a) An audit conducted in accordance with this part must be in lieu of any financial audit of Federal awards which a non-Federal entity is required to undergo under any other Federal statute or regulation. To the extent that such audit provides a Federal agency with the information it requires to carry out its responsibilities under Federal statute or regulation, a Federal agency must rely upon and use that information.
                (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, a Federal agency, Inspectors General, or GAO may conduct or arrange for additional audits which are necessary to carry out its responsibilities under Federal statute or regulation. The provisions of this part do not authorize any non-Federal entity to constrain, in any manner, such Federal agency from carrying out or arranging for such additional audits, except that the Federal agency must plan such audits to not be duplicative of other audits of Federal awards. Prior to commencing such an audit, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must review the FAC for recent audits submitted by the non-Federal entity, and to the extent such audits meet a Federal agency or pass-through entity's needs, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must rely upon and use such audits. Any additional audits must be planned and performed in such a way as to build upon work performed, including the audit documentation, sampling, and testing already performed, by other auditors.
                (c) The provisions of this part do not limit the authority of Federal agencies to conduct, or arrange for the conduct of, audits and evaluations of Federal awards, nor limit the authority of any Federal agency Inspector General or other Federal official. For example, requirements that may be applicable under the FAR or CAS and the terms and conditions of a cost-reimbursement contract may include additional applicable audits to be conducted or arranged for by Federal agencies.
                (d) Federal agency to pay for additional audits. A Federal agency that conducts or arranges for additional audits must, consistent with other applicable Federal statutes and regulations, arrange for funding the full cost of such additional audits.
                (e) Request for a program to be audited as a major program. An HHS awarding agency may request that an auditee have a particular Federal program audited as a major program in lieu of the HHS awarding agency conducting or arranging for the additional audits. To allow for planning, such requests should be made at least 180 calendar days prior to the end of the fiscal year to be audited. The auditee, after consultation with its auditor, should promptly respond to such a request by informing the HHS awarding agency whether the program would otherwise be audited as a major program using the risk-based audit approach described in § 75.518 and, if not, the estimated incremental cost. The HHS awarding agency must then promptly confirm to the auditee whether it wants the program audited as a major program. If the program is to be audited as a major program based upon this HHS awarding agency request, and the HHS awarding agency agrees to pay the full incremental costs, then the auditee must have the program audited as a major program. A pass-through entity may use the provisions of this paragraph for a subrecipient.
              
              
                § 75.504
                Frequency of audits.
                Except for the provisions for biennial audits provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, audits required by this part must be performed annually. Any biennial audit must cover both years within the biennial period.
                (a) A state, local government, or Indian tribe that is required by constitution or statute, in effect on January 1, 1987, to undergo its audits less frequently than annually, is permitted to undergo its audits pursuant to this part biennially. This requirement must still be in effect for the biennial period.
                (b) Any nonprofit organization that had biennial audits for all biennial periods ending between July 1, 1992, and January 1, 1995, is permitted to undergo its audits pursuant to this part biennially.
              
              
                
                § 75.505
                Sanctions.
                In cases of continued inability or unwillingness to have an audit conducted in accordance with this part, Federal agencies and pass-through entities must take appropriate action as provided in § 75.371.
              
              
                § 75.506
                Audit costs.
                See § 75.425.
              
              
                § 75.507
                Program-specific audits.
                (a) Program-specific audit guide available. In many cases, a program-specific audit guide will be available to provide specific guidance to the auditor with respect to internal controls, compliance requirements, suggested audit procedures, and audit reporting requirements. A listing of current program-specific audit guides can be found in the compliance supplement beginning with the 2014 supplement including HHS awarding agency contact information and a Web site where a copy of the guide can be obtained. When a current program-specific audit guide is available, the auditor must follow GAGAS and the guide when performing a program-specific audit.
                (b) Program-specific audit guide not available. (1) When a current program-specific audit guide is not available, the auditee and auditor must have basically the same responsibilities for the Federal program as they would have for an audit of a major program in a single audit.
                (2) The auditee must prepare the financial statement(s) for the Federal program that includes, at a minimum, a schedule of expenditures of Federal awards for the program and notes that describe the significant accounting policies used in preparing the schedule, a summary schedule of prior audit findings consistent with the requirements of § 75.511(b), and a corrective action plan consistent with the requirements of § 75.511(c).
                (3) The auditor must:
                (i) Perform an audit of the financial statement(s) for the Federal program in accordance with GAGAS;
                (ii) Obtain an understanding of internal controls and perform tests of internal controls over the Federal program consistent with the requirements of § 75.514(c) for a major program;
                (iii) Perform procedures to determine whether the auditee has complied with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards that could have a direct and material effect on the Federal program consistent with the requirements of § 75.514(d) for a major program;
                (iv) Follow up on prior audit findings, perform procedures to assess the reasonableness of the summary schedule of prior audit findings prepared by the auditee in accordance with the requirements of § 75.511, and report, as a current year audit finding, when the auditor concludes that the summary schedule of prior audit findings materially misrepresents the status of any prior audit finding; and
                (v) Report any audit findings consistent with the requirements of § 75.516.
                (4) The auditor's report(s) may be in the form of either combined or separate reports and may be organized differently from the manner presented in this section. The auditor's report(s) must state that the audit was conducted in accordance with this part and include the following:
                (i) An opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) as to whether the financial statement(s) of the Federal program is presented fairly in all material respects in accordance with the stated accounting policies;
                (ii) A report on internal control related to the Federal program, which must describe the scope of testing of internal control and the results of the tests;
                (iii) A report on compliance which includes an opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) as to whether the auditee complied with laws, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards which could have a direct and material effect on the Federal program; and

                (iv) A schedule of findings and questioned costs for the Federal program that includes a summary of the auditor's results relative to the Federal program in a format consistent with § 75.515(d)(1) and findings and questioned costs consistent with the requirements of § 75.515(d)(3).
                
                (c) Report submission for program-specific audits. (1) The audit must be completed and the reporting required by paragraph (c)(2) or (c)(3) of this section submitted within the earlier of 30 calendar days after receipt of the auditor's report(s), or nine months after the end of the audit period, unless a different period is specified in a program-specific audit guide. Unless restricted by Federal law or regulation, the auditee must make report copies available for public inspection. Auditees and auditors must ensure that their respective parts of the reporting package do not include protected personally identifiable information.
                (2) When a program-specific audit guide is available, the auditee must electronically submit to the FAC the data collection form prepared in accordance with § 75.512(b), as applicable to a program-specific audit, and the reporting required by the program-specific audit guide.
                (3) When a program-specific audit guide is not available, the reporting package for a program-specific audit must consist of the financial statement(s) of the Federal program, a summary schedule of prior audit findings, and a corrective action plan as described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, and the auditor's report(s) described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section. The data collection form prepared in accordance with § 75.512(b), as applicable to a program-specific audit, and one copy of this reporting package must be electronically submitted to the FAC.
                (d) Other sections of this part may apply. Program-specific audits are subject to:
                (1) § 75.500 through § 75.503(d);
                (2) § 75.504 through § 75.506;
                (3) § 75.508 through § 75.509;
                (4) § 75.511;
                (5) § 75.512(e) through (h);
                (6) § 75.513;
                (7) § 75.516 through § 75.517;
                (8) § 75.521, and
                (9) Other referenced provisions of this part unless contrary to the provisions of this section, a program-specific audit guide, or program statutes and regulations.
              
            
            
              Auditees
              
                § 75.508
                Auditee responsibilities.
                The auditee must:
                (a) Procure or otherwise arrange for the audit required by this part in accordance with § 75.509, and ensure it is properly performed and submitted when due in accordance with § 75.512.
                (b) Prepare appropriate financial statements, including the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards in accordance with § 75.510.
                (c) Promptly follow up and take corrective action on audit findings, including preparation of a summary schedule of prior audit findings and a corrective action plan in accordance with § 75.511(b) and § 75.511(c), respectively.
                (d) Provide the auditor with access to personnel, accounts, books, records, supporting documentation, and other information as needed for the auditor to perform the audit required by this part.
              
              
                § 75.509
                Auditor selection.
                (a) Auditor procurement. In procuring audit services, the auditee must follow the procurement standards prescribed by the Procurement Standards in §§ 75.326 through 75.335 of subpart D of this part or the FAR (48 CFR part 42), as applicable. When procuring audit services, the objective is to obtain high-quality audits. In requesting proposals for audit services, the objectives and scope of the audit must be made clear and the non-Federal entity must request a copy of the audit organization's peer review report which the auditor is required to provide under GAGAS. Factors to be considered in evaluating each proposal for audit services include the responsiveness to the request for proposal, relevant experience, availability of staff with professional qualifications and technical abilities, the results of peer and external quality control reviews, and price. Whenever possible, the auditee must make positive efforts to utilize small businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's business enterprises, in procuring audit services as stated in § 75.330, or the FAR (48 CFR part 42), as applicable.
                
                (b) Restriction on auditor preparing indirect cost proposals. An auditor who prepares the indirect cost proposal or cost allocation plan may not also be selected to perform the audit required by this part when the indirect costs recovered by the auditee during the prior year exceeded $1 million. This restriction applies to the base year used in the preparation of the indirect cost proposal or cost allocation plan and any subsequent years in which the resulting indirect cost agreement or cost allocation plan is used to recover costs.
                (c) Use of Federal auditors. Federal auditors may perform all or part of the work required under this part if they comply fully with the requirements of this part.
              
              
                § 75.510
                Financial statements.
                (a) Financial statements. The auditee must prepare financial statements that reflect its financial position, results of operations or changes in net assets, and, where appropriate, cash flows for the fiscal year audited. The financial statements must be for the same organizational unit and fiscal year that is chosen to meet the requirements of this part. However, non-Federal entity-wide financial statements may also include departments, agencies, and other organizational units that have separate audits in accordance with § 75.514(a) and prepare separate financial statements.
                (b) Schedule of expenditures of Federal awards. The auditee must also prepare a schedule of expenditures of Federal awards for the period covered by the auditee's financial statements which must include the total Federal awards expended as determined in accordance with § 75.502. While not required, the auditee may choose to provide information requested by HHS awarding agencies and pass-through entities to make the schedule easier to use. For example, when a Federal program has multiple Federal award years, the auditee may list the amount of Federal awards expended for each Federal award year separately. At a minimum, the schedule must:
                (1) List individual Federal programs by Federal agency. For a cluster of programs, provide the cluster name, list individual Federal programs within the cluster of programs, and provide the applicable Federal agency name. For R&D, total Federal awards expended must be shown either by individual Federal award or by Federal agency and major subdivision within the Federal agency. For example, the National Institutes of Health is a major subdivision in the Department of Health and Human Services.
                (2) For Federal awards received as a subrecipient, the name of the pass-through entity and identifying number assigned by the pass-through entity must be included.
                (3) Provide total Federal awards expended for each individual Federal program and the CFDA number or other identifying number when the CFDA information is not available. For a cluster of programs also provide the total for the cluster.
                (4) Include the total amount provided to subrecipients from each Federal program.
                (5) For loan or loan guarantee programs described in § 75.502(b), identify in the notes to the schedule the balances outstanding at the end of the audit period. This is in addition to including the total Federal awards expended for loan or loan guarantee programs in the schedule.
                (6) Include notes that describe that significant accounting policies used in preparing the schedule, and note whether or not the auditee elected to use the 10% de minimis cost rate as covered in § 75.414.
              
              
                § 75.511
                Audit findings follow-up.
                (a) General. The auditee is responsible for follow-up and corrective action on all audit findings. As part of this responsibility, the auditee must prepare a summary schedule of prior audit findings. The auditee must also prepare a corrective action plan for current year audit findings. The summary schedule of prior audit findings and the corrective action plan must include the reference numbers the auditor assigns to audit findings under § 75.516(c). Since the summary schedule may include audit findings from multiple years, it must include the fiscal year in which the finding initially occurred. The corrective action plan and summary schedule of prior audit findings must include findings relating to the financial statements which are required to be reported in accordance with GAGAS.
                (b) Summary schedule of prior audit findings. The summary schedule of prior audit findings must report the status of all audit findings included in the prior audit's schedule of findings and questioned costs. The summary schedule must also include audit findings reported in the prior audit's summary schedule of prior audit findings except audit findings listed as corrected in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section, or no longer valid or not warranting further action in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
                (1) When audit findings were fully corrected, the summary schedule need only list the audit findings and state that corrective action was taken.
                (2) When audit findings were not corrected or were only partially corrected, the summary schedule must describe the reasons for the finding's recurrence and planned corrective action, and any partial corrective action taken. When corrective action taken is significantly different from corrective action previously reported in a corrective action plan or in the Federal agency's or pass-through entity's management decision, the summary schedule must provide an explanation.
                (3) When the auditee believes the audit findings are no longer valid or do not warrant further action, the reasons for this position must be described in the summary schedule. A valid reason for considering an audit finding as not warranting further action is that all of the following have occurred:
                (i) Two years have passed since the audit report in which the finding occurred was submitted to the FAC;
                (ii) The Federal agency or pass-through entity is not currently following up with the auditee on the audit finding; and
                (iii) A management decision was not issued.
                (c) Corrective action plan. At the completion of the audit, the auditee must prepare, in a document separate from the auditor's findings described in § 75.516, a corrective action plan to address each audit finding included in the current year auditor's reports. The corrective action plan must provide the name(s) of the contact person(s) responsible for corrective action, the corrective action planned, and the anticipated completion date. If the auditee does not agree with the audit findings or believes corrective action is not required, then the corrective action plan must include an explanation and specific reasons.
              
              
                § 75.512
                Report submission.
                (a) General. (1) The audit must be completed and the data collection form described in paragraph (b) of this section and reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section must be submitted within the earlier of 30 calendar days after receipt of the auditor's report(s), or nine months after the end of the audit period. If the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal holiday, the reporting package is due the next business day.
                (2) Unless restricted by Federal statutes or regulations, the auditee must make copies available for public inspection. Auditees and auditors must ensure that their respective parts of the reporting package do not include protected personally identifiable information.
                (b) Data collection. The FAC is the repository of record for subpart F of this part reporting packages and the data collection form. All Federal agencies, pass-through entities and others interested in a reporting package and data collection form must obtain it by accessing the FAC.

                (1) The auditee must submit required data elements described in appendix X to part 75, which state whether the audit was completed in accordance with this part and provides information about the auditee, its Federal programs, and the results of the audit. The data must include information available from the audit required by this part that is necessary for Federal agencies to use the audit to ensure integrity for Federal programs. The data elements and format must be approved by OMB, available from the FAC, and include collections of information from the reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section. A senior level representative of the auditee (e.g.,
                  state controller, director of finance, chief executive officer, or chief financial officer) must sign a statement to be included as part of the data collection that says that the auditee complied with the requirements of this part, the data were prepared in accordance with this part (and the instructions accompanying the form), the reporting package does not include protected personally identifiable information, the information included in its entirety is accurate and complete, and that the FAC is authorized to make the reporting package and the form publicly available on a Web site.
                (2) Exception for Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations. An auditee that is an Indian tribe or a tribal organization (as defined in the Indian Self-Determination, Education and Assistance Act (ISDEAA), 25 U.S.C. 450b(l)) may opt not to authorize the FAC to make the reporting package publicly available on a Web site, by excluding the authorization for the FAC publication in the statement described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section. If this option is exercised, the auditee becomes responsible for submitting the reporting package directly to any pass-through entities through which it has received a Federal award and to pass-through entities for which the summary schedule of prior audit findings reported the status of any findings related to Federal awards that the pass-through entity provided. Unless restricted by Federal statute or regulation, if the auditee opts not to authorize publication, it must make copies of the reporting package available for public inspection.
                (3) Using the information included in the reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section, the auditor must complete the applicable data elements of the data collection form. The auditor must sign a statement to be included as part of the data collection form that indicates, at a minimum, the source of the information included in the form, the auditor's responsibility for the information, that the form is not a substitute for the reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section, and that the content of the form is limited to the collection of information prescribed by OMB.
                (c) Reporting package. The reporting package must include the:
                (1) Financial statements and schedule of expenditures of Federal awards discussed in § 75.510(a) and (b), respectively;
                (2) Summary schedule of prior audit findings discussed in § 75.511(b);
                (3) Auditor's report(s) discussed in § 75.515; and
                (4) Corrective action plan discussed in § 75.511(c).
                (d) Submission to FAC. The auditee must electronically submit to the FAC the data collection form described in paragraph (b) of this section and the reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section.
                (e) Requests for management letters issued by the auditor. In response to requests by a Federal agency or pass-through entity, auditees must submit a copy of any management letters issued by the auditor.
                (f) Report retention requirements. Auditees must keep one copy of the data collection form described in paragraph (b) of this section and one copy of the reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section on file for three years from the date of submission to the FAC.
                (g) FAC responsibilities. The FAC must make available the reporting packages received in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section and § 75.507(c) to the public, except for Indian tribes exercising the option in (b)(2) of this section, and maintain a data base of completed audits, provide appropriate information to Federal agencies, and follow up with known auditees that have not submitted the required data collection forms and reporting packages.
                (h) Electronic filing. Nothing in this part must preclude electronic submissions to the FAC in such manner as may be approved by OMB.
              
            
            
              Federal Agencies
              
                § 75.513
                Responsibilities.

                (a)(1) Cognizant agency for audit responsibilities. A non-Federal entity expending more than $50 million a year in Federal awards must have a cognizant agency for audit. The designated cognizant agency for audit must be the Federal awarding agency that provides the predominant amount of direct funding to a non-Federal entity unless OMB designates a specific cognizant agency for audit.
                (2) To provide for continuity of cognizance, the determination of the predominant amount of direct funding must be based upon direct Federal awards expended in the non-Federal entity's fiscal years ending in 2009, 2014, 2019 and every fifth year thereafter. For example, audit cognizance for periods ending in 2011 through 2015 will be determined based on Federal awards expended in 2009.
                (3) Notwithstanding the manner in which audit cognizance is determined, a Federal awarding agency with cognizance for an auditee may reassign cognizance to another Federal awarding agency that provides substantial funding and agrees to be the cognizant agency for audit. Within 30 calendar days after any reassignment, both the old and the new cognizant agency for audit must provide notice of the change to the FAC, the auditee, and, if known, the auditor. The cognizant agency for audit must:
                (i) Provide technical audit advice and liaison assistance to auditees and auditors.
                (ii) Obtain or conduct quality control reviews on selected audits made by non-Federal auditors, and provide the results to other interested organizations. Cooperate and provide support to the Federal agency designated by OMB to lead a government-wide project to determine the quality of single audits by providing a statistically reliable estimate of the extent that single audits conform to applicable requirements, standards, and procedures; and to make recommendations to address noted audit quality issues, including recommendations for any changes to applicable requirements, standards and procedures indicated by the results of the project. This government-wide audit quality project must be performed once every 6 years beginning in 2018 or at such other interval as determined by OMB, and the results must be public.
                (iii) Promptly inform other affected Federal agencies and appropriate Federal law enforcement officials of any direct reporting by the auditee or its auditor required by GAGAS or statutes and regulations.
                (iv) Advise the community of independent auditors of any noteworthy or important factual trends related to the quality of audits stemming from quality control reviews. Significant problems or quality issues consistently identified through quality control reviews of audit reports must be referred to appropriate state licensing agencies and professional bodies.
                (v) Advise the auditor, HHS awarding agencies, and, where appropriate, the auditee of any deficiencies found in the audits when the deficiencies require corrective action by the auditor. When advised of deficiencies, the auditee must work with the auditor to take corrective action. If corrective action is not taken, the cognizant agency for audit must notify the auditor, the auditee, and applicable HHS awarding agencies and pass-through entities of the facts and make recommendations for follow-up action. Major inadequacies or repetitive substandard performance by auditors must be referred to appropriate state licensing agencies and professional bodies for disciplinary action.
                (vi) Coordinate, to the extent practical, audits or reviews made by or for Federal agencies that are in addition to the audits made pursuant to this part, so that the additional audits or reviews build upon rather than duplicate audits performed in accordance with this part.

                (vii) Coordinate a management decision for cross-cutting audit findings (as defined in § 75.2 Cross-cutting audit finding) that affect the Federal programs of more than one agency when requested by any Federal awarding agency whose awards are included in the audit finding of the auditee.
                (viii) Coordinate the audit work and reporting responsibilities among auditors to achieve the most cost-effective audit.
                (ix) Provide advice to auditees as to how to handle changes in fiscal years.

                (b) Oversight agency for audit responsibilities. An auditee who does not have a designated cognizant agency for audit will be under the general oversight of the Federal agency determined in accordance with § 75.2 Oversight agency for audit. A Federal agency with oversight for an auditee may reassign oversight to another Federal agency that agrees to be the oversight agency for audit. Within 30 calendar days after any reassignment, both the old and the new oversight agency for audit must provide notice of the change to the FAC, the auditee, and, if known, the auditor. The oversight agency for audit:
                (1) Must provide technical advice to auditees and auditors as requested.
                (2) May assume all or some of the responsibilities normally performed by a cognizant agency for audit.
                (c) HHS awarding agency responsibilities. The HHS awarding agency must perform the following for the Federal awards it makes (See also the requirements of § 75.210):
                (1) Ensure that audits are completed and reports are received in a timely manner and in accordance with the requirements of this part.
                (2) Provide technical advice and counsel to auditees and auditors as requested.
                (3) Follow-up on audit findings to ensure that the recipient takes appropriate and timely corrective action. As part of audit follow-up, the HHS awarding agency must:
                (i) Issue a management decision as prescribed in § 75.521;
                (ii) Monitor the recipient taking appropriate and timely corrective action;

                (iii) Use cooperative audit resolution mechanisms (see § 75.2 Cooperative audit resolution) to improve Federal program outcomes through better audit resolution, follow-up, and corrective action; and
                (iv) Develop a baseline, metrics, and targets to track, over time, the effectiveness of the Federal agency's process to follow-up on audit findings and on the effectiveness of Single Audits in improving non-Federal entity accountability and their use by HHS awarding agencies in making award decisions.
                (4) Provide OMB annual updates to the compliance supplement and work with OMB to ensure that the compliance supplement focuses the auditor to test the compliance requirements most likely to cause improper payments, fraud, waste, abuse or generate audit finding for which the Federal awarding agency will take sanctions.
                (5) Provide OMB with the name of a single audit accountable official from among the senior policy officials of the HHS awarding agency who must be:
                (i) Responsible for ensuring that the agency fulfills all the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section and effectively uses the single audit process to reduce improper payments and improve Federal program outcomes.
                (ii) Held accountable to improve the effectiveness of the single audit process based upon metrics as described in paragraph (c)(3)(iv) of this section.
                (iii) Responsible for designating the Federal agency's key management single audit liaison.
                (6) Provide OMB with the name of a key management single audit liaison who must:
                (i) Serve as the Federal awarding agency's management point of contact for the single audit process both within and outside the Federal Government.
                (ii) Promote interagency coordination, consistency, and sharing in areas such as coordinating audit follow-up; identifying higher-risk non-Federal entities; providing input on single audit and follow-up policy; enhancing the utility of the FAC; and studying ways to use single audit results to improve Federal award accountability and best practices.
                (iii) Oversee training for the HHS awarding agency's program management personnel related to the single audit process.
                (iv) Promote the HHS awarding agency's use of cooperative audit resolution mechanisms.
                (v) Coordinate the HHS awarding agency's activities to ensure appropriate and timely follow-up and corrective action on audit findings.
                (vi) Organize the Federal cognizant agency for audit's follow-up on cross-cutting audit findings that affect the Federal programs of more than one HHS awarding agency.
                (vii) Ensure the HHS awarding agency provides annual updates of the compliance supplement to OMB.
                (viii) Support the HHS awarding agency's single audit accountable official's mission.
              
            
            
              
              Auditors
              
                § 75.514
                Scope of audit.
                (a) General. The audit must be conducted in accordance with GAGAS. The audit must cover the entire operations of the auditee, or, at the option of the auditee, such audit must include a series of audits that cover departments, agencies, and other organizational units that expended or otherwise administered Federal awards during such audit period, provided that each such audit must encompass the financial statements and schedule of expenditures of Federal awards for each such department, agency, and other organizational unit, which must be considered to be a non-Federal entity. The financial statements and schedule of expenditures of Federal awards must be for the same audit period.
                (b) Financial statements. The auditor must determine whether the financial statements of the auditee are presented fairly in all material respects in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The auditor must also determine whether the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards is stated fairly in all material respects in relation to the auditee's financial statements as a whole.
                (c) Internal control. (1) The compliance supplement provides guidance on internal controls over Federal programs based upon the guidance in Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government issued by the Comptroller General of the United States and the Internal Control—Integrated Framework, issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
                (2) In addition to the requirements of GAGAS, the auditor must perform procedures to obtain an understanding of internal control over Federal programs sufficient to plan the audit to support a low assessed level of control risk of noncompliance for major programs.
                (3) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(4) of this section, the auditor must:
                (i) Plan the testing of internal control over compliance for major programs to support a low assessed level of control risk for the assertions relevant to the compliance requirements for each major program; and
                (ii) Perform testing of internal control as planned in paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section.
                (4) When internal control over some or all of the compliance requirements for a major program are likely to be ineffective in preventing or detecting noncompliance, the planning and performing of testing described in paragraph (c)(3) of this section are not required for those compliance requirements. However, the auditor must report a significant deficiency or material weakness in accordance with § 75.516, assess the related control risk at the maximum, and consider whether additional compliance tests are required because of ineffective internal control.
                (d) Compliance. (1) In addition to the requirements of GAGAS, the auditor must determine whether the auditee has complied with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards that may have a direct and material effect on each of its major programs.
                (2) The principal compliance requirements applicable to most Federal programs and the compliance requirements of the largest Federal programs are included in the compliance supplement.
                (3) For the compliance requirements related to Federal programs contained in the compliance supplement, an audit of these compliance requirements will meet the requirements of this part. Where there have been changes to the compliance requirements and the changes are not reflected in the compliance supplement, the auditor must determine the current compliance requirements and modify the audit procedures accordingly. For those Federal programs not covered in the compliance supplement, the auditor must follow the compliance supplement's guidance for programs not included in the supplement.

                (4) The compliance testing must include tests of transactions and such other auditing procedures necessary to provide the auditor sufficient appropriate audit evidence to support an opinion on compliance.
                
                (e) Audit follow-up. The auditor must follow-up on prior audit findings, perform procedures to assess the reasonableness of the summary schedule of prior audit findings prepared by the auditee in accordance with § 75.511(b), and report, as a current year audit finding, when the auditor concludes that the summary schedule of prior audit findings materially misrepresents the status of any prior audit finding. The auditor must perform audit follow-up procedures regardless of whether a prior audit finding relates to a major program in the current year.
                (f) Data collection form. As required in § 75.512(b)(3), the auditor must complete and sign specified sections of the data collection form.
              
              
                § 75.515
                Audit reporting.
                The auditor's report(s) may be in the form of either combined or separate reports and may be organized differently from the manner presented in this section. The auditor's report(s) must state that the audit was conducted in accordance with this part and include the following:
                (a) An opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) as to whether the financial statements are presented fairly in all material respects in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and an opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) as to whether the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards is fairly stated in all material respects in relation to the financial statements as a whole.
                (b) A report on internal control over financial reporting and compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and award agreements, noncompliance with which could have a material effect on the financial statements. This report must describe the scope of testing of internal control and compliance and the results of the tests, and, where applicable, it will refer to the separate schedule of findings and questioned costs described in paragraph (d) of this section.
                (c) A report on compliance for each major program and a report on internal control over compliance. This report must describe the scope of testing of internal control over compliance, include an opinion or disclaimer of opinion as to whether the auditee complied with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards which could have a direct and material effect on each major program and refer to the separate schedule of findings and questioned costs described in paragraph (d) of this section.
                (d) A schedule of findings and questioned costs which must include the following three components:
                (1) A summary of the auditor's results, which must include:

                (i) The type of report the auditor issued on whether the financial statements audited were prepared in accordance with GAAP (i.e., unmodified opinion, qualified opinion, adverse opinion, or disclaimer of opinion);
                (ii) Where applicable, a statement about whether significant deficiencies or material weaknesses in internal control were disclosed by the audit of the financial statements;
                (iii) A statement as to whether the audit disclosed any noncompliance that is material to the financial statements of the auditee;
                (iv) Where applicable, a statement about whether significant deficiencies or material weaknesses in internal control over major programs were disclosed by the audit;

                (v) The type of report the auditor issued on compliance for major programs (i.e., unmodified opinion, qualified opinion, adverse opinion, or disclaimer of opinion);
                (vi) A statement as to whether the audit disclosed any audit findings that the auditor is required to report under § 75.516(a);
                (vii) An identification of major programs by listing each individual major program; however in the case of a cluster of programs only the cluster name as shown on the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards is required;
                (viii) The dollar threshold used to distinguish between Type A and Type B programs, as described in § 75.518(b)(1), or (b)(3) when a recalculation of the Type A threshold is required for large loan or loan guarantees; and

                (ix) A statement as to whether the auditee qualified as a low-risk auditee under § 75.520.
                
                (2) Findings relating to the financial statements which are required to be reported in accordance with GAGAS.
                (3) Findings and questioned costs for Federal awards which must include audit findings as defined in § 75.516(a).
                (i) Audit findings (e.g., internal control findings, compliance findings, questioned costs, or fraud) that relate to the same issue must be presented as a single audit finding. Where practical, audit findings should be organized by Federal agency or pass-through entity.
                (ii) Audit findings that relate to both the financial statements and Federal awards, as reported under paragraphs (d)(2) and (d)(3) of this section, respectively, must be reported in both sections of the schedule. However, the reporting in one section of the schedule may be in summary form with a reference to a detailed reporting in the other section of the schedule.
                (e) Nothing in this part precludes combining of the audit reporting required by this section with the reporting required by § 75.512(b) when allowed by GAGAS and appendix X to part 75.
                [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 75.516
                Audit findings.
                (a) Audit findings reported. The auditor must report the following as audit findings in a schedule of findings and questioned costs:
                (1) Significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in internal control over major programs and significant instances of abuse relating to major programs. The auditor's determination of whether a deficiency in internal control is a significant deficiency or material weakness for the purpose of reporting an audit finding is in relation to a type of compliance requirement for a major program identified in the Compliance Supplement.
                (2) Material noncompliance with the provisions of Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of Federal awards related to a major program. The auditor's determination of whether a noncompliance with the provisions of Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of Federal awards is material for the purpose of reporting an audit finding is in relation to a type of compliance requirement for a major program identified in the compliance supplement.
                (3) Known questioned costs that are greater than $25,000 for a type of compliance requirement for a major program. Known questioned costs are those specifically identified by the auditor. In evaluating the effect of questioned costs on the opinion on compliance, the auditor considers the best estimate of total costs questioned (likely questioned costs), not just the questioned costs specifically identified (known questioned costs). The auditor must also report known questioned costs when likely questioned costs are greater than $25,000 for a type of compliance requirement for a major program. In reporting questioned costs, the auditor must include information to provide proper perspective for judging the prevalence and consequences of the questioned costs.

                (4) Known questioned costs that are greater than $25,000 for a Federal program which is not audited as a major program. Except for audit follow-up, the auditor is not required under this part to perform audit procedures for such a Federal program; therefore, the auditor will normally not find questioned costs for a program that is not audited as a major program. However, if the auditor does become aware of questioned costs for a Federal program that is not audited as a major program (e.g., as part of audit follow-up or other audit procedures) and the known questioned costs are greater than $25,000, then the auditor must report this as an audit finding.
                (5) The circumstances concerning why the auditor's report on compliance for each major program is other than an unmodified opinion, unless such circumstances are otherwise reported as audit findings in the schedule of findings and questioned costs for Federal awards.

                (6) Known or likely fraud affecting a Federal award, unless such fraud is otherwise reported as an audit finding in the schedule of findings and questioned costs for Federal awards. This paragraph does not require the auditor to report publicly information which could compromise investigative or legal proceedings or to make an additional reporting when the auditor confirms that the fraud was reported outside the auditor's reports under the direct reporting requirements of GAGAS.
                (7) Instances where the results of audit follow-up procedures disclosed that the summary schedule of prior audit findings prepared by the auditee in accordance with § 75.511(b) materially misrepresents the status of any prior audit finding.
                (b) Audit finding detail and clarity. Audit findings must be presented in sufficient detail and clarity for the auditee to prepare a corrective action plan and take corrective action, and for Federal agencies and pass-through entities to arrive at a management decision. The following specific information must be included, as applicable, in audit findings:
                (1) Federal program and specific Federal award identification including the CFDA title and number, Federal award identification number and year, name of Federal agency, and name of the applicable pass-through entity. When information, such as the CFDA title and number or Federal award identification number, is not available, the auditor must provide the best information available to describe the Federal award.
                (2) The criteria or specific requirement upon which the audit finding is based, including the Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal awards. Criteria generally identify the required or desired state or expectation with respect to the program or operation. Criteria provide a context for evaluating evidence and understanding findings.
                (3) The condition found, including facts that support the deficiency identified in the audit finding.
                (4) A statement of cause that identifies the reason or explanation for the condition or the factors responsible for the difference between the situation that exists (condition) and the required or desired state (criteria), which may also serve as a basis for recommendations for corrective action.
                (5) The possible asserted effect to provide sufficient information to the auditee and Federal agency, or pass-through entity in the case of a subrecipient, to permit them to determine the cause and effect to facilitate prompt and proper corrective action. A statement of the effect or potential effect should provide a clear, logical link to establish the impact or potential impact of the difference between the condition and the criteria.
                (6) Identification of questioned costs and how they were computed. Known questioned costs must be identified by applicable CFDA number(s) and applicable Federal award identification number(s).
                (7) Information to provide proper perspective for judging the prevalence and consequences of the audit findings, such as whether the audit findings represent an isolated instance or a systemic problem. Where appropriate, instances identified must be related to the universe and the number of cases examined and be quantified in terms of dollar value. The auditor should report whether the sampling was a statistically valid sample.
                (8) Identification of whether the audit finding was a repeat of a finding in the immediately prior audit and if so any applicable prior year audit finding numbers.
                (9) Recommendations to prevent future occurrences of the deficiency identified in the audit finding.
                (10) Views of responsible officials of the auditee.
                (c) Reference numbers. Each audit finding in the schedule of findings and questioned costs must include a reference number in the format meeting the requirements of the data collection form submission required by § 75.512(b) to allow for easy referencing of the audit findings during follow-up.
              
              
                § 75.517
                Audit documentation.
                (a) Retention of audit documentation. The auditor must retain audit documentation and reports for a minimum of three years after the date of issuance of the auditor's report(s) to the auditee, unless the auditor is notified in writing by the cognizant agency for audit, oversight agency for audit, cognizant agency for indirect costs, or pass-through entity to extend the retention period. When the auditor is aware that the Federal agency, pass-through entity, or auditee is contesting an audit finding, the auditor must contact the parties contesting the audit finding for guidance prior to destruction of the audit documentation and reports.
                (b) Access to audit documentation. Audit documentation must be made available upon request to the cognizant or oversight agency for audit or its designee, cognizant agency for indirect cost, a Federal agency, or GAO at the completion of the audit, as part of a quality review, to resolve audit findings, or to carry out oversight responsibilities consistent with the purposes of this part. Access to audit documentation includes the right of Federal agencies to obtain copies of audit documentation, as is reasonable and necessary.
              
              
                § 75.518
                Major program determination.
                (a) General. The auditor must use a risk-based approach to determine which Federal programs are major programs. This risk-based approach must include consideration of: Current and prior audit experience, oversight by Federal agencies and pass-through entities, and the inherent risk of the Federal this program. The process in paragraphs (b) through (h) of this section must be followed.
                (b) Step one. (1) The auditor must identify the larger Federal programs, which must be labeled Type A programs. Type A programs are defined as Federal programs with Federal awards expended during the audit period exceeding the levels outlined in the table in this paragraph (b)(1):
                
                  
                    Total Federal awards expended
                    Type A/B threshold
                  
                  
                    (i) Equal to or exceed $750,000 but less than or equal to $25 million
                    $750,000.
                  
                  
                    (ii) Exceed $25 million but less than or equal to $100 million
                    Total Federal awards expended times .03.
                  
                  
                    (iii) Exceed $100 million but less than or equal to $1 billion
                    $3 million.
                  
                  
                    (iv) Exceed $1 billion but less than or equal to $10 billion
                    Total Federal awards expended times .003.
                  
                  
                    (v) Exceed $10 billion but less than or equal to $20 billion
                    $30 million.
                  
                  
                    (vi) Exceed $20 billion
                    Total Federal awards expended times .0015.
                  
                
                (2) Federal programs not labeled Type A under paragraph (b)(1) of this section must be labeled Type B programs.
                (3) The inclusion of large loan and loan guarantees (loans) must not result in the exclusion of other programs as Type A programs. When a Federal program providing loans exceeds four times the largest non-loan program it is considered a large loan program, and the auditor must consider this Federal program as a Type A program and exclude its values in determining other Type A programs. This recalculation of the Type A program is performed after removing the total of all large loan programs. For the purposes of this paragraph a program is only considered to be a Federal program providing loans if the value of Federal awards expended for loans within the program comprises fifty percent or more of the total Federal awards expended for the program. A cluster of programs is treated as one program and the value of Federal awards expended under a loan program is determined as described in § 75.502.
                (4) For biennial audits permitted under § 75.504, the determination of Type A and Type B programs must be based upon the Federal awards expended during the two-year period.
                (c) Step two. (1) The auditor must identify Type A programs which are low-risk. In making this determination, the auditor must consider whether the requirements in § 75.519(c), the results of audit follow-up, or any changes in personnel or systems affecting the program indicate significantly increased risk and preclude the program from being low risk. For a Type A program to be considered low-risk, it must have been audited as a major program in at least one of the two most recent audit periods (in the most recent audit period in the case of a biennial audit), and, in the most recent audit period, the program must have not had:

                (i) Internal control deficiencies which were identified as material weaknesses in the auditor's report on internal control for major programs as required under § 75.515(c);
                (ii) A modified opinion on the program in the auditor's report on major programs as required under § 75.515(c); or
                (iii) Known or likely questioned costs that exceed five percent of the total Federal awards expended for the program.
                (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (c)(1) of this section, OMB may approve an HHS awarding agency's request that a Type A program may not be considered low risk for a certain recipient. For example, it may be necessary for a large Type A program to be audited as a major program each year at a particular recipient to allow the HHS awarding agency to comply with 31 U.S.C. 3515. The HHS awarding agency must notify the recipient and, if known, the auditor of OMB's approval at least 180 calendar days prior to the end of the fiscal year to be audited.
                (d) Step three. (1) The auditor must identify Type B programs which are high-risk using professional judgment and the criteria in § 75.519. However, the auditor is not required to identify more high-risk Type B programs than at least one fourth the number of low-risk Type A programs identified as low-risk under Step 2 (paragraph (c) of this section). Except for known material weakness in internal control or compliance problems as discussed in § 75.519(b)(1), (b)(2), and (c)(1), a single criteria in risk would seldom cause a Type B program to be considered high-risk. When identifying which Type B programs to risk assess, the auditor is encouraged to use an approach which provides an opportunity for different high-risk Type B programs to be audited as major over a period of time.
                (2) The auditor is not expected to perform risk assessments on relatively small Federal programs. Therefore, the auditor is only required to perform risk assessments on Type B programs that exceed twenty-five percent (0.25) of the Type A threshold determined in Step 1 (paragraph (b) of this section).
                (e) Step four. At a minimum, the auditor must audit all of the following as major programs:
                (1) All Type A programs not identified as low risk under step two (paragraph (c)(1) of this section).
                (2) All Type B programs identified as high-risk under step three (paragraph (d) of this section).
                (3) Such additional programs as may be necessary to comply with the percentage of coverage rule discussed in paragraph (f) of this section. This may require the auditor to audit more programs as major programs than the number of Type A programs.
                (f) Percentage of coverage rule. If the auditee meets the criteria in § 75.520, the auditor need only audit the major programs identified in Step 4 (paragraph (e)(1) and (2) of this section) and such additional Federal programs with Federal awards expended that, in aggregate, all major programs encompass at least 20 percent (0.20) of total Federal awards expended. Otherwise, the auditor must audit the major programs identified in Step 4 (paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this section) and such additional Federal programs with Federal awards expended that, in aggregate, all major programs encompass at least 40 percent (0.40) of total Federal awards expended.
                (g) Documentation of risk. The auditor must include in the audit documentation the risk analysis process used in determining major programs.
                (h) Auditor's judgment. When the major program determination was performed and documented in accordance with this subpart, the auditor's judgment in applying the risk-based approach to determine major programs must be presumed correct. Challenges by Federal agencies and pass-through entities must only be for clearly improper use of the requirements in this part. However, Federal agencies and pass-through entities may provide auditors guidance about the risk of a particular Federal program and the auditor must consider this guidance in determining major programs in audits not yet completed.
              
              
                § 75.519
                Criteria for Federal program risk.
                (a) General. The auditor's determination should be based on an overall evaluation of the risk of noncompliance occurring that could be material to the Federal program. The auditor must consider criteria, such as described in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, to identify risk in Federal programs. Also, as part of the risk analysis, the auditor may wish to discuss a particular Federal program with auditee management and the Federal agency or pass-through entity.
                (b) Current and prior audit experience. (1) Weaknesses in internal control over Federal programs would indicate higher risk. Consideration should be given to the control environment over Federal programs and such factors as the expectation of management's adherence to Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards and the competence and experience of personnel who administer the Federal programs.

                (i) A Federal program administered under multiple internal control structures may have higher risk. When assessing risk in a large single audit, the auditor must consider whether weaknesses are isolated in a single operating unit (e.g., one college campus) or pervasive throughout the entity.
                (ii) When significant parts of a Federal program are passed through to subrecipients, a weak system for monitoring subrecipients would indicate higher risk.
                (2) Prior audit findings would indicate higher risk, particularly when the situations identified in the audit findings could have a significant impact on a Federal program or have not been corrected.
                (3) Federal programs not recently audited as major programs may be of higher risk than Federal programs recently audited as major programs without audit findings.
                (c) Oversight exercised by Federal agencies and pass-through entities. (1) Oversight exercised by Federal agencies or pass-through entities could be used to assess risk. For example, recent monitoring or other reviews performed by an oversight entity that disclosed no significant problems would indicate lower risk, whereas monitoring that disclosed significant problems would indicate higher risk.
                (2) Federal agencies, with the concurrence of OMB, may identify Federal programs that are higher risk. OMB will provide this identification in the compliance supplement.
                (d) Inherent risk of the Federal program. (1) The nature of a Federal program may indicate risk. Consideration should be given to the complexity of the program and the extent to which the Federal program contracts for goods and services. For example, Federal programs that disburse funds through third party contracts or have eligibility criteria may be of higher risk. Federal programs primarily involving staff payroll costs may have high risk for noncompliance with requirements of § 75.430, but otherwise be at low risk.
                (2) The phase of a Federal program in its life cycle at the Federal agency may indicate risk. For example, a new Federal program with new or interim regulations may have higher risk than an established program with time-tested regulations. Also, significant changes in Federal programs, statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of Federal awards may increase risk.
                (3) The phase of a Federal program in its life cycle at the auditee may indicate risk. For example, during the first and last years that an auditee participates in a Federal program, the risk may be higher due to start-up or closeout of program activities and staff.
                (4) Type B programs with larger Federal awards expended would be of higher risk than programs with substantially smaller Federal awards expended.
              
              
                § 75.520
                Criteria for a low-risk auditee.
                An auditee that meets all of the following conditions for each of the preceding two audit periods must qualify as a low-risk auditee and be eligible for reduced audit coverage in accordance with § 75.518.
                (a) Single audits were performed on an annual basis in accordance with the provisions of this subpart, including submitting the data collection form and the reporting package to the FAC within the timeframe specified in § 75.512 . A non-Federal entity that has biennial audits does not qualify as a low-risk auditee.

                (b) The auditor's opinion on whether the financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP, or a basis of accounting required by state law, and the auditor's in relation to opinion on the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards were unmodified.
                (c) There were no deficiencies in internal control which were identified as material weaknesses under the requirements of GAGAS.
                (d) The auditor did not report a substantial doubt about the auditee's ability to continue as a going concern.
                (e) None of the Federal programs had audit findings from any of the following in either of the preceding two audit periods in which they were classified as Type A programs:
                (1) Internal control deficiencies that were identified as material weaknesses in the auditor's report on internal control for major programs as required under § 75.515(c);
                (2) A modified opinion on a major program in the auditor's report on major programs as required under § 75.515(c); or
                (3) Known or likely questioned costs that exceeded five percent of the total Federal awards expended for a Type A program during the audit period.
              
            
            
              Management Decisions
              
                § 75.521
                Management decision.
                (a) General. The management decision must clearly state whether or not the audit finding is sustained, the reasons for the decision, and the expected auditee action to repay disallowed costs, make financial adjustments, or take other action. If the auditee has not completed corrective action, a timetable for follow-up should be given. Prior to issuing the management decision, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may request additional information or documentation from the auditee, including a request for auditor assurance related to the documentation, as a way of mitigating disallowed costs. The management decision should describe any appeal process available to the auditee. While not required, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may also issue a management decision on findings relating to the financial statements which are required to be reported in accordance with GAGAS.
                (b) Federal agency. As provided in § 75.513(a)(3)(vii), the cognizant agency for audit must be responsible for coordinating a management decision for audit findings that affect the programs of more than one Federal agency. As provided in § 75.513(c)(3), a Federal awarding agency is responsible for issuing a management decision for findings that relate to Federal awards it makes to non-Federal entities.
                (c) Pass-through entity. As provided in § 75.352(d), the pass-through entity must be responsible for issuing a management decision for audit findings that relate to Federal awards it makes to subrecipients.
                (d) Time requirements. The HHS awarding agency or pass-through entity responsible for issuing a management decision must do so within six months of acceptance of the audit report by the FAC. The auditee must initiate and proceed with corrective action as rapidly as possible and corrective action should begin no later than upon receipt of the audit report.
                (e) Reference numbers. Management decisions must include the reference numbers the auditor assigned to each audit finding in accordance with § 75.516(c).
              
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. I
              Appendix I to Part 75—Full Text of Notice of Funding Opportunity
              The full text of the notice of funding opportunity is organized in sections. The required format outlined in this appendix indicates immediately following the title of each section whether that section is required in every announcement or is an HHS awarding agency option. The format is designed so that similar types of information will appear in the same sections in announcements of different Federal funding opportunities. Toward that end, there is text in each of the following sections to describe the types of information that an HHS awarding agency would include in that section of an actual announcement.

              An HHS awarding agency that wishes to include information that the format does not specifically discuss may address that subject in whatever section(s) is most appropriate. For example, if an HHS awarding agency chooses to address performance goals in the announcement, it might do so in the funding opportunity description, the application content, or the reporting requirements.
              
              Similarly, when this format calls for a type of information to be in a particular section, an HHS awarding agency wishing to address that subject in other sections may elect to repeat the information in those sections or use cross references between the sections (there should be hyperlinks for cross-references in any electronic versions of the announcement). For example, an HHS awarding agency may want to include in Section A information about the types of non-Federal entities who are eligible to apply. The format specifies a standard location for that information in Section C.1 but that does not preclude repeating the information in Section I or creating a cross reference between Sections A and C.1, as long as a potential applicant can find the information quickly and easily from the standard location.
              The sections of the full text of the announcement are described in the following paragraphs.
              A. Program Description—Required

              This section contains the full program description of the funding opportunity. It may be as long as needed to adequately communicate to potential applicants the areas in which funding may be provided. It describes the HHS awarding agency's funding priorities or the technical or focus areas in which the HHS awarding agency intends to provide assistance. As appropriate, it may include any program history (e.g., whether this is a new program or a new or changed area of program emphasis). This section may communicate indicators of successful projects (e.g., if the program encourages collaborative efforts) and may include examples of projects that have been funded previously. This section also may include other information the HHS awarding agency deems necessary, and must at a minimum include citations for authorizing statutes and regulations for the funding opportunity.
              B. Federal Award Information—Required
              This section provides sufficient information to help an applicant make an informed decision about whether to submit a proposal. Relevant information could include the total amount of funding that the HHS awarding agency expects to award through the announcement; the anticipated number of Federal awards; the expected amounts of individual Federal awards (which may be a range); the amount of funding per Federal award, on average, experienced in previous years; and the anticipated start dates and periods of performance for new Federal awards. This section also should address whether applications for renewal or supplementation of existing projects are eligible to compete with applications for new Federal awards.

              This section also must indicate the type(s) of assistance instrument (e.g., grant, cooperative agreement) that may be awarded if applications are successful. If cooperative agreements may be awarded, this section either should describe the “substantial involvement” that the HHS awarding agency expects to have or should reference where the potential applicant can find that information (e.g., in the funding opportunity description in section A. or Federal award administration information in Section D. If procurement contracts also may be awarded, this must be stated.
              C. Eligibility Information
              This section addresses the considerations or factors that determine applicant or application eligibility. This includes the eligibility of particular types of applicant organizations, any factors affecting the eligibility of the principal investigator or project director, and any criteria that make particular projects ineligible. HHS agencies should make clear whether an applicant's failure to meet an eligibility criterion by the time of an application deadline will result in the HHS awarding agency returning the application without review or, even though an application may be reviewed, will preclude the HHS awarding agency from making a Federal award. Key elements to be addressed are:
              1. Eligible Applicants—Required. Announcements must clearly identify the types of entities that are eligible to apply. If there are no restrictions on eligibility, this section may simply indicate that all potential applicants are eligible. If there are restrictions on eligibility, it is important to be clear about the specific types of entities that are eligible, not just the types that are ineligible. For example, if the program is limited to nonprofit organizations subject to 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3) of the tax code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)), the announcement should say so. Similarly, it is better to state explicitly that Native American tribal organizations are eligible than to assume that they can unambiguously infer that from a statement that nonprofit organizations may apply. Eligibility also can be expressed by exception, (e.g., open to all types of domestic applicants other than individuals). This section should refer to any portion of Section D. specifying documentation that must be submitted to support an eligibility determination (e.g., proof of 501(c)(3) status as determined by the Internal Revenue Service or an authorizing tribal resolution). To the extent that any funding restriction in Section D.6 could affect the eligibility of an applicant or project, the announcement must either restate that restriction in this section or provide a cross-reference to its description in Section D.6.
              
              2. Cost Sharing or Matching—Required. Announcements must state whether there is required cost sharing, matching, or cost participation without which an application would be ineligible (if cost sharing is not required, the announcement must explicitly say so). Required cost sharing may be a certain percentage or amount, or may be in the form of contributions of specified items or activities (e.g., provision of equipment). It is important that the announcement be clear about any restrictions on the types of cost (e.g., in-kind contributions) that are acceptable as cost sharing. Cost sharing as an eligibility criterion includes requirements based in statute or regulation, as described in § 75.306. This section should refer to the appropriate portion(s) of section D. stating any pre-award requirements for submission of letters or other documentation to verify commitments to meet cost-sharing requirements if a Federal award is made.
              3. Other—Required, if applicable. If there are other eligibility criteria (i.e., criteria that have the effect of making an application or project ineligible for Federal awards, whether referred to as “responsiveness” criteria, “go-no go” criteria, “threshold” criteria, or in other ways), must be clearly stated and must include a reference to the regulation of requirement that describes the restriction, as applicable. For example, if entities that have been found to be in violation of a particular Federal statute are ineligible, it is important to say so. This section must also state any limit on the number of applications an applicant may submit under the announcement and make clear whether the limitation is on the submitting organization, individual investigator/program director, or both. This section should also address any eligibility criteria for beneficiaries or for program participants other than Federal award recipients.
              D. Application and Submission Information
              1. Address to Request Application Package—Required. Potential applicants must be told how to get application forms, kits, or other materials needed to apply (if this announcement contains everything needed, this section need only say so). An Internet address where the materials can be accessed is acceptable. However, since high-speed Internet access is not yet universally available for downloading documents, and applicants may have additional accessibility requirements, there also should be a way for potential applicants to request paper copies of materials, such as a U.S. Postal Service mailing address, telephone or FAX number, Telephone Device for the Deaf (TDD), Text Telephone (TTY) number, and/or Federal Information Relay Service (FIRS) number.
              2. Content and Form of Application Submission—Required. This section must identify the required content of an application and the forms or formats that an applicant must use to submit it. If any requirements are stated elsewhere because they are general requirements that apply to multiple programs or funding opportunities, this section should refer to where those requirements may be found. This section also should include required forms or formats as part of the announcement or state where the applicant may obtain them.
              This section should specifically address content and form or format requirements for:
              i. Pre-applications, letters of intent, or white papers required or encouraged (see Section D.4), including any limitations on the number of pages or other formatting requirements similar to those for full applications.
              ii. The application as a whole. For all submissions, this would include any limitations on the number of pages, font size and typeface, margins, paper size, number of copies, and sequence or assembly requirements. If electronic submission is permitted or required, this could include special requirements for formatting or signatures.
              iii. Component pieces of the application (e.g., if all copies of the application must bear original signatures on the face page or the program narrative may not exceed 10 pages). This includes any pieces that may be submitted separately by third parties (e.g., references or letters confirming commitments from third parties that will be contributing a portion of any required cost sharing).
              iv. Information that successful applicants must submit after notification of intent to make a Federal award, but prior to a Federal award. This could include evidence of compliance with requirements relating to human subjects or information needed to comply with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321-4370h).
              3. Unique Entity Identifier and System for Award Management (SAM)—Required.
              
              This paragraph must state clearly that each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is excepted from those requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to:
              (i) Be registered in SAM before submitting its application;
              (ii) provide a valid unique entity identifier in its application; and
              (iii) continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a Federal awarding agency.

              It also must state that the Federal awarding agency may not make a Federal award to an applicant until the applicant has complied with all applicable unique entity identifier and SAM requirements and, if an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements by the time the Federal awarding agency is ready to make a Federal award, the Federal awarding agency may determine that the applicant is not qualified to receive a Federal award and use that determination as a basis for making a Federal award to another applicant.
              4. Submission Dates and Times—Required. Announcements must identify due dates and times for all submissions. This includes not only the full applications but also any preliminary submissions (e.g., letters of intent, white papers, or pre-applications). It also includes any other submissions of information before Federal award that are separate from the full application. If the funding opportunity is a general announcement that is open for a period of time with no specific due dates for applications, this section should say so. Note that the information on dates that is included in this section also must appear with other overview information in a location preceding the full text of the announcement (see § 75.203).
              Each type of submission should be designated as encouraged or required and, if required, any deadline date (or dates, if the Federal awarding agency plans more than one cycle of application submission, review, and Federal award under the announcement) should be specified. The announcement must state (or provide a reference to another document that states):
              i. Any deadline in terms of a date and local time. If the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal holiday, the reporting package is due the next business day.
              ii. What the deadline means (e.g., whether it is the date and time by which the Federal awarding agency must receive the application, the date by which the application must be postmarked, or something else) and how that depends, if at all, on the submission method (e.g., mail, electronic, or personal/courier delivery).
              iii. The effect of missing a deadline (e.g., whether late applications are neither reviewed nor considered or are reviewed and considered under some circumstances).
              iv. How the receiving Federal office determines whether an application or pre-application has been submitted before the deadline. This includes the form of acceptable proof of mailing or system-generated documentation of receipt date and time.
              This section also may indicate whether, when, and in what form the applicant will receive an acknowledgement of receipt. This information should be displayed in ways that will be easy to understand and use. It can be difficult to extract all needed information from narrative paragraphs, even when they are well written. A tabular form for providing a summary of the information may help applicants for some programs and give them what effectively could be a checklist to verify the completeness of their application package before submission.
              5. Intergovernmental Review—Required, if applicable. If the funding opportunity is subject to Executive Order 12372, “Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs,” the notice must say so. In alerting applicants that they must contact their state's Single Point of Contact (SPOC) to find out about and comply with the state's process under Executive Order 12372, it may be useful to inform potential applicants that the names and addresses of the SPOCs are listed in the Office of Management and Budget's Web site. www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/spoc.html.
              6. Funding Restrictions—Required. Notices must include information on funding restrictions in order to allow an applicant to develop an application and budget consistent with program requirements. Examples are whether construction is an allowable activity, if there are any limitations on direct costs such as foreign travel or equipment purchases, and if there are any limits on indirect costs (or facilities and administrative costs). Applicants must be advised if Federal awards will not allow reimbursement of pre-Federal award costs.
              7. Other Submission Requirements— Required. This section must address any other submission requirements not included in the other paragraphs of this section. This might include the format of submission, i.e., paper or electronic, for each type of required submission. Applicants should not be required to submit in more than one format and this section should indicate whether they may choose whether to submit applications in hard copy or electronically, may submit only in hard copy, or may submit only electronically.

              This section also must indicate where applications (and any pre-applications) must be submitted if sent by postal mail, electronic means, or hand-delivery. For postal mail submission, this must include the name of an office, official, individual or function (e.g., application receipt center) and a complete mailing address. For electronic submission, this must include the URL or email address; whether a password(s) is required; whether particular software or other electronic capabilities are required; what to do in the event of system problems and a point of contact who will be available in the event the applicant experiences technical difficulties.1
                
              
              
                
                  1With respect to electronic methods for providing information about funding opportunities or accepting applicants' submissions of information, each HHS awarding agency is responsible for compliance with Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794d).
              
              
              E. Application Review Information
              
                1. Criteria—Required. This section must address the criteria that the Federal awarding agency will use to evaluate applications. This includes the merit and other review criteria that evaluators will use to judge applications, including any statutory, regulatory, or other preferences (e.g., minority status or Native American tribal preferences) that will be applied in the review process. These criteria are distinct from eligibility criteria that are addressed before an application is accepted for review and any program policy or other factors that are applied during the selection process, after the review process is completed. The intent is to make the application process transparent so applicants can make informed decisions when preparing their applications to maximize fairness of the process. The announcement should clearly describe all criteria, including any sub-criteria. If criteria vary in importance, the announcement should specify the relative percentages, weights, or other means used to distinguish among them. For statutory, regulatory, or other preferences, the announcement should provide a detailed explanation of those preferences with an explicit indication of their effect (e.g., whether they result in additional points being assigned).

              If an applicant's proposed cost sharing will be considered in the review process (as opposed to being an eligibility criterion described in Section C.2), the announcement must specifically address how it will be considered (e.g., to assign a certain number of additional points to applicants who offer cost sharing, or to break ties among applications with equivalent scores after evaluation against all other factors). If cost sharing will not be considered in the evaluation, the announcement should say so, so that there is no ambiguity for potential applicants. Vague statements that cost sharing is encouraged, without clarification as to what that means, are unhelpful to applicants. It also is important that the announcement be clear about any restrictions on the types of cost (e.g., in-kind contributions) that are acceptable as cost sharing.
              
                2. Review and Selection Process—Required. This section may vary in the level of detail provided. The announcement must list any program policy or other factors or elements, other than merit criteria, that the selecting official may use in selecting applications for Federal award (e.g., geographical dispersion, program balance, or diversity). The HHS awarding agency may also include other appropriate details. For example, this section may indicate who is responsible for evaluation against the merit criteria (e.g., peers external to the HHS awarding agency or HHS awarding agency personnel) and/or who makes the final selections for Federal awards. If there is a multi-phase review process (e.g., an external panel advising internal HHS awarding agency personnel who make final recommendations to the deciding official), the announcement may describe the phases. It also may include: the number of people on an evaluation panel and how it operates, the way reviewers are selected, reviewer qualifications, and the way that conflicts of interest are avoided. With respect to electronic methods for providing information about funding opportunities or accepting applicants' submissions of information, each HHS awarding agency is responsible for compliance with Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794d).
              In addition, if the HHS awarding agency permits applicants to nominate suggested reviewers of their applications or suggest those they feel may be inappropriate due to a conflict of interest, that information should be included in this section.

              3. For any Federal award under a notice of funding opportunity, if the HHS awarding agency anticipates that the total Federal share will be greater than the simplified acquisition threshold on any Federal award under a notice of funding opportunity may include, over the period of performance (see § 75.2 Simplified Acquisition Threshold), this section must also inform applicants:
              i. That the HHS awarding agency, prior to making a Federal award with a total amount of Federal share greater than the simplified acquisition threshold, is required to review and consider any information about the applicant that is in the designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM (currently FAPIIS) (see 41 U.S.C. 2313);
              ii. That an applicant, at its option, may review information in the designated integrity and performance systems accessible through SAM and comment on any information about itself that the HHS awarding agency previously entered and is currently in the designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM;
              iii. That the HHS awarding agency will consider any comments by the applicant, in addition to the other information in the designated integrity and performance system, in making a judgment about the applicant's integrity, business ethics, and record of performance under Federal awards when completing the review of risk posed by applicants as described in § 75.205.
              
                4. Anticipated Announcement and Federal Award Dates—Optional. This section is intended to provide applicants with information they can use for planning purposes. If there is a single application deadline followed by the simultaneous review of all applications, the HHS awarding agency can include in this section information about the anticipated dates for announcing or notifying successful and unsuccessful applicants and for having Federal awards in place. If applications are received and evaluated on a “rolling” basis at different times during an extended period, it may be appropriate to give applicants an estimate of the time needed to process an application and notify the applicant of the HHS awarding agency's decision.
              F. Federal Award Administration Information
              
                1. Federal Award Notices—Required. This section must address what a successful applicant can expect to receive following selection. If the HHS awarding agency's practice is to provide a separate notice stating that an application has been selected before it actually makes the Federal award, this section would be the place to indicate that the letter is not an authorization to begin performance (to the extent that it allows charging to Federal awards of pre-award costs at the non-Federal entity's own risk). This section should indicate that the notice of Federal award signed by the grants officer (or equivalent) is the authorizing document, and whether it is provided through postal mail or by electronic means and to whom. It also may address the timing, form, and content of notifications to unsuccessful applicants. See also § 75.210.
              
                2. Administrative and National Policy Requirements—Required. This section must identify the usual administrative and national policy requirements the HHS awarding agency's Federal awards may include. Providing this information lets a potential applicant identify any requirements with which it would have difficulty complying if its application is successful. In those cases, early notification about the requirements allows the potential applicant to decide not to apply or to take needed actions before receiving the Federal award. The announcement need not include all of the terms and conditions of the Federal-award, but may refer to a document (with information about how to obtain it) or Internet site where applicants can see the terms and conditions. If this funding opportunity will lead to Federal awards with some specific terms and conditions that differ from the HHS awarding agency's usual (sometimes called “general”) terms and conditions, this section should highlight those specific terms and conditions. Doing so will alert applicants that have received Federal awards from the HHS awarding agency previously and might not otherwise expect different terms and conditions. For the same reason, the announcement should inform potential applicants about special requirements that could apply to particular Federal awards after the review of applications and other information, based on the particular circumstances of the effort to be supported (e.g., if human subjects were to be involved or if some situations may justify special terms on intellectual property, data sharing or security requirements).
              
                3. Reporting—Required. This section must include general information about the type (e.g., financial or performance), frequency, and means of submission (paper or electronic) of post-Federal award reporting requirements. Highlight any special reporting requirements for Federal awards under this funding opportunity that differ (e.g., by report type, frequency, form/format, or circumstances for use) from what the HHS awarding agency's Federal awards usually require. HHS agencies must also describe in this section all relevant requirements such as those at 2 CFR 180.335 and 2 CFR 180.350. If the Federal share of any Federal award may include more than $500,000 over the period of performance, this section must inform potential applicants about the post award reporting requirements in Appendix XII.
              G. HHS Awarding Agency Contact(s)—Required
              The announcement must give potential applicants a point(s) of contact for answering questions or helping with problems while the funding opportunity is open. The intent of this requirement is to be as helpful as possible to potential applicants, so the HHS awarding agency should consider approaches such as giving:

              1. Points of contact who may be reached in multiple ways (e.g., by telephone, FAX, and/or email, as well as regular mail).
              2. A fax or email address that multiple people access, so that someone will respond even if others are unexpectedly absent during critical periods.
              3. Different contacts for distinct kinds of help (e.g., one for questions of programmatic content and a second for administrative questions).
              H. Other Information—Optional
              This section may include any additional information that will assist a potential applicant. For example, the section might:
              1. Indicate whether this is a new program or a one-time initiative.
              2. Mention related programs or other upcoming or ongoing HHS awarding agency funding opportunities for similar activities.
              3. Include current Internet addresses for the HHS awarding agency Web sites that may be useful to an applicant in understanding the program.

              4. Alert applicants to the need to identify proprietary information and inform them about the way the HHS awarding agency will handle it.
              
              5. Include certain routine notices to applicants (e.g., that the Federal Government is not obligated to make any Federal award as a result of the announcement or that only grants officers can bind the Federal Government to the expenditure of funds).
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. II
              Appendix II to Part 75—Contract Provisions for Non-Federal Entity Contracts Under Federal Awards
              In addition to other provisions required by the HHS agency or non-Federal entity, all contracts made by the non-Federal entity under the Federal award must contain provisions covering the following, as applicable.
              A. Contracts for more than the simplified acquisition threshold currently set at $150,000, which is the inflation adjusted amount determined by the Civilian Agency Acquisition Council and the Defense Acquisition Regulations Council (Councils) as authorized by 41 U.S.C. 1908, must address administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances where contractors violate or breach contract terms, and provide for such sanctions and penalties as appropriate.
              B. All contracts in excess of $10,000 must address termination for cause and for convenience by the non-Federal entity including the manner by which it will be effected and the basis for settlement.
              C. Equal Employment Opportunity. Except as otherwise provided under 41 CFR part 60, all contracts that meet the definition of “federally assisted construction contract” in 41 CFR part 60-1.3 must include the equal opportunity clause provided under 41 CFR 60-1.4(b), in accordance with Executive Order 11246, Equal Employment Opportunity (30 FR 12319, 12935, 3 CFR 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339) as amended by Executive Order 11375 amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity, and implementing regulations at 41 CFR part 60.
              D. Davis-Bacon Act, as amended (40 U.S.C. 3141-3148). When required by Federal program legislation, all prime construction contracts in excess of $2,000 awarded by non-Federal entities must include a provision for compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 3141-3144, and 3146-3148) as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 5). In accordance with the statute, contractors must be required to pay wages to laborers and mechanics at a rate not less than the prevailing wages specified in a wage determination made by the Secretary of Labor. In addition, contractors must be required to pay wages not less than once a week. The non-Federal entity must place a copy of the current prevailing wage determination issued by the Department of Labor in each solicitation. The decision to award a contract or subcontract must be conditioned upon the acceptance of the wage determination. The non-Federal entity must report all suspected or reported violations to the Federal awarding agency. The contracts must also include a provision for compliance with the Copeland “Anti-Kickback” Act (40 U.S.C. 3145), as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 3). The Act provides that each contractor or subrecipient must be prohibited from inducing, by any means, any person employed in the construction, completion, or repair of public work, to give up any part of the compensation to which he or she is otherwise entitled. The non-Federal entity must report all suspected or reported violations to the Federal awarding agency.
              E. Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 3701-3708). Where applicable, all contracts awarded by the non-Federal entity in excess of $100,000 that involve the employment of mechanics or laborers must include a provision for compliance with 40 U.S.C. 3702 and 3704, as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 5). Under 40 U.S.C. 3702 of the Act, each contractor must be required to compute the wages of every mechanic and laborer on the basis of a standard work week of 40 hours. Work in excess of the standard work week is permissible provided that the worker is compensated at a rate of not less than one and a half times the basic rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours in the work week. The requirements of 40 U.S.C. 3704 are applicable to construction work and provide that no laborer or mechanic must be required to work in surroundings or under working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous. These requirements do not apply to the purchases of supplies or materials or articles ordinarily available on the open market, or contracts for transportation or transmission of intelligence.
              F. Rights to Inventions Made Under a Contract or Agreement. If the Federal award meets the definition of “funding agreement” under 37 CFR 401.2 (a) and the recipient or subrecipient wishes to enter into a contract with a small business firm or nonprofit organization regarding the substitution of parties, assignment or performance of experimental, developmental, or research work under that “funding agreement,” the recipient or subrecipient must comply with the requirements of 37 CFR part 401 and any implementing regulations issued by the awarding agency.

              G. Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7671q.) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251-1387), as amended—Contracts and subgrants of amounts in excess of $150,000 must contain a provision that requires the non-Federal award to agree to comply with all applicable standards, orders or regulations issued pursuant to the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7671q) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251-1387). Violations must be reported to the Federal awarding agency and the Regional Office of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
              H. Debarment and Suspension (Executive Orders 12549 and 12689)—A contract award (see 2 CFR 180.220) must not be made to parties listed on the government-wide exclusions in the System for Award Management (SAM), in accordance with the OMB guidelines at 2 CFR part 180 that implement Executive Orders 12549 (3 CFR part 1986 Comp., p. 189) and 12689 (3 CFR part 1989 Comp., p. 235), “Debarment and Suspension.” SAM Exclusions contains the names of parties debarred, suspended, or otherwise excluded by agencies, as well as parties declared ineligible under statutory or regulatory authority other than Executive Order 12549.
              I. Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment (31 U.S.C. 1352)—Contractors that apply or bid for an award exceeding $100,000 must file the required certification. Each tier certifies to the tier above that it will not and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any person or organization for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a member of Congress, officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a member of Congress in connection with obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any other award covered by 31 U.S.C. 1352. Each tier must also disclose any lobbying with non-Federal funds that takes place in connection with obtaining any Federal award. Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier up to the non-Federal award.
              J. See § 75.331 Procurement of recovered materials.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 19044, Apr. 4, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. III
              Appendix III to Part 75—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs)
              A. General
              This appendix provides criteria for identifying and computing indirect (or indirect (F&A)) rates at IHEs (institutions). Indirect (F&A) costs are those that are incurred for common or joint objectives and therefore cannot be identified readily and specifically with a particular sponsored project, an instructional activity, or any other institutional activity. See subsection B.1, for a discussion of the components of indirect (F&A) costs.
              1. Major Functions of an Institution
              Refers to instruction, organized research, other sponsored activities and other institutional activities as defined in this section:
              a. Instruction means the teaching and training activities of an institution. Except for research training as provided in subsection b, this term includes all teaching and training activities, whether they are offered for credits toward a degree or certificate or on a non-credit basis, and whether they are offered through regular academic departments or separate divisions, such as a summer school division or an extension division. Also considered part of this major function are departmental research, and, where agreed to, university research.
              (1) Sponsored instruction and training means specific instructional or training activity established by grant, contract, or cooperative agreement. For purposes of the cost principles, this activity may be considered a major function even though an institution's accounting treatment may include it in the instruction function.
              (2) Departmental research means research, development and scholarly activities that are not organized research and, consequently, are not separately budgeted and accounted for. Departmental research, for purposes of this document, is not considered as a major function, but as a part of the instruction function of the institution.
              (3) Only mandatory cost sharing or cost sharing specifically committed in the project budget must be included in the organized research base for computing the indirect (F&A) cost rate or reflected in any allocation of indirect costs. Salary costs above statutory limits are not considered cost sharing.
              b. Organized research means all research and development activities of an institution that are separately budgeted and accounted for. It includes:
              (1) Sponsored research means all research and development activities that are sponsored by Federal and non-Federal agencies and organizations. This term includes activities involving the training of individuals in research techniques (commonly called research training) where such activities utilize the same facilities as other research and development activities and where such activities are not included in the instruction function.
              (2) University research means all research and development activities that are separately budgeted and accounted for by the institution under an internal application of institutional funds. University research, for purposes of this document, must be combined with sponsored research under the function of organized research.
              c. Other sponsored activities means programs and projects financed by Federal and non-Federal agencies and organizations which involve the performance of work other than instruction and organized research. Examples of such programs and projects are health service projects and community service programs. However, when any of these activities are undertaken by the institution without outside support, they may be classified as other institutional activities.
              d. Other institutional activities means all activities of an institution except for instruction, departmental research, organized research, and other sponsored activities, as defined in this section; indirect (F&A) cost activities identified in this Appendix paragraph B, Identification and assignment of indirect (F&A) costs; and specialized services facilities described in § 75.468 of this part.
              Examples of other institutional activities include operation of residence halls, dining halls, hospitals and clinics, student unions, intercollegiate athletics, bookstores, faculty housing, student apartments, guest houses, chapels, theaters, public museums, and other similar auxiliary enterprises. This definition also includes any other categories of activities, costs of which are “unallowable” to Federal awards, unless otherwise indicated in an award.
              2. Criteria for Distribution
              a. Base period. A base period for distribution of indirect (F&A) costs is the period during which the costs are incurred. The base period normally should coincide with the fiscal year established by the institution, but in any event the base period should be so selected as to avoid inequities in the distribution of costs.
              b. Need for cost groupings. The overall objective of the indirect (F&A) cost allocation process is to distribute the indirect (F&A) costs described in Section B, Identification and assignment of indirect (F&A) costs, to the major functions of the institution in proportions reasonably consistent with the nature and extent of their use of the institution's resources. In order to achieve this objective, it may be necessary to provide for selective distribution by establishing separate groupings of cost within one or more of the indirect (F&A) cost categories referred to in subsection B.1. In general, the cost groupings established within a category should constitute, in each case, a pool of those items of expense that are considered to be of like nature in terms of their relative contribution to (or degree of remoteness from) the particular cost objectives to which distribution is appropriate. Cost groupings should be established considering the general guides provided in subsection c of this section. Each such pool or cost grouping should then be distributed individually to the related cost objectives, using the distribution base or method most appropriate in light of the guidelines set forth in subsection d of this section.
              c. General considerations on cost groupings. The extent to which separate cost groupings and selective distribution would be appropriate at an institution is a matter of judgment to be determined on a case-by-case basis. Typical situations which may warrant the establishment of two or more separate cost groupings (based on account classification or analysis) within an indirect (F&A) cost category include but are not limited to the following:
              (1) If certain items or categories of expense relate solely to one of the major functions of the institution or to less than all functions, such expenses should be set aside as a separate cost grouping for direct assignment or selective allocation in accordance with the guides provided in subsections b and d.
              (2) If any types of expense ordinarily treated as general administration or departmental administration are charged to Federal awards as direct costs, expenses applicable to other activities of the institution when incurred for the same purposes in like circumstances must, through separate cost groupings, be excluded from the indirect (F&A) costs allocable to those Federal awards and included in the direct cost of other activities for cost allocation purposes.
              (3) If it is determined that certain expenses are for the support of a service unit or facility whose output is susceptible of measurement on a workload or other quantitative basis, such expenses should be set aside as a separate cost grouping for distribution on such basis to organized research, instructional, and other activities at the institution or within the department.
              (4) If activities provide their own purchasing, personnel administration, building maintenance or similar service, the distribution of general administration and general expenses, or operation and maintenance expenses to such activities should be accomplished through cost groupings which include only that portion of central indirect (F&A) costs (such as for overall management) which are properly allocable to such activities.
              (5) If the institution elects to treat fringe benefits as indirect (F&A) charges, such costs should be set aside as a separate cost grouping for selective distribution to related cost objectives.
              (6) The number of separate cost groupings within a category should be held within practical limits, after taking into consideration the materiality of the amounts involved and the degree of precision attainable through less selective methods of distribution.
              d. Selection of distribution method.

              (1) Actual conditions must be taken into account in selecting the method or base to be used in distributing individual cost groupings. The essential consideration in selecting a base is that it be the one best suited for assigning the pool of costs to cost objectives in accordance with benefits derived; with a traceable cause-and-effect relationship; or with logic and reason, where neither benefit nor a cause-and-effect relationship is determinable.
              (2) If a cost grouping can be identified directly with the cost objective benefitted, it should be assigned to that cost objective.
              (3) If the expenses in a cost grouping are more general in nature, the distribution may be based on a cost analysis study which results in an equitable distribution of the costs. Such cost analysis studies may take into consideration weighting factors, population, or space occupied if appropriate. Cost analysis studies, however, must (a) be appropriately documented in sufficient detail for subsequent review by the cognizant agency for indirect costs, (b) distribute the costs to the related cost objectives in accordance with the relative benefits derived, (c) be statistically sound, (d) be performed specifically at the institution at which the results are to be used, and (e) be reviewed periodically, but not less frequently than rate negotiations, updated if necessary, and used consistently. Any assumptions made in the study must be stated and explained. The use of cost analysis studies and periodic changes in the method of cost distribution must be fully justified.
              (4) If a cost analysis study is not performed, or if the study does not result in an equitable distribution of the costs, the distribution must be made in accordance with the appropriate base cited in Section B, unless one of the following conditions is met:
              (a) It can be demonstrated that the use of a different base would result in a more equitable allocation of the costs, or that a more readily available base would not increase the costs charged to Federal awards, or
              (b) The institution qualifies for, and elects to use, the simplified method for computing indirect (F&A) cost rates described in Section D.
              (5) Notwithstanding subsection (3), effective July 1, 1998, a cost analysis or base other than that in Section B must not be used to distribute utility or student services costs. Instead, subsections B.4.c may be used in the recovery of utility costs.
              e. Order of distribution.
              (1) Indirect (F&A) costs are the broad categories of costs discussed in Section B.1.
              (2) Depreciation, interest expenses, operation and maintenance expenses, and general administrative and general expenses should be allocated in that order to the remaining indirect (F&A) cost categories as well as to the major functions and specialized service facilities of the institution. Other cost categories may be allocated in the order determined to be most appropriate by the institutions. When cross allocation of costs is made as provided in subsection (3), this order of allocation does not apply.
              (3) Normally an indirect (F&A) cost category will be considered closed once it has been allocated to other cost objectives, and costs may not be subsequently allocated to it. However, a cross allocation of costs between two or more indirect (F&A) cost categories may be used if such allocation will result in a more equitable allocation of costs. If a cross allocation is used, an appropriate modification to the composition of the indirect (F&A) cost categories described in Section B is required.
              B. Identification and Assignment of Indirect (F&A) Costs
              1. Definition of Facilities and Administration
              See § 75.414 which provides the basis for these indirect cost requirements.
              2. Depreciation
              a. The expenses under this heading are the portion of the costs of the institution's buildings, capital improvements to land and buildings, and equipment which are computed in accordance with § 75.436.
              b. In the absence of the alternatives provided for in Section A.2.d, the expenses included in this category must be allocated in the following manner:
              (1) Depreciation on buildings used exclusively in the conduct of a single function, and on capital improvements and equipment used in such buildings, must be assigned to that function.
              (2) Depreciation on buildings used for more than one function, and on capital improvements and equipment used in such buildings, must be allocated to the individual functions performed in each building on the basis of usable square feet of space, excluding common areas such as hallways, stairwells, and rest rooms.

              (3) Depreciation on buildings, capital improvements and equipment related to space (e.g., individual rooms, laboratories) used jointly by more than one function (as determined by the users of the space) must be treated as follows. The cost of each jointly used unit of space must be allocated to benefitting functions on the basis of:
              (a) The employee full-time equivalents (FTEs) or salaries and wages of those individual functions benefitting from the use of that space; or
              (b) Institution-wide employee FTEs or salaries and wages applicable to the benefitting major functions (see Section A.1) of the institution.

              (4) Depreciation on certain capital improvements to land, such as paved parking areas, fences, sidewalks, and the like, not included in the cost of buildings, must be allocated to user categories of students and employees on a full-time equivalent basis. The amount allocated to the student category must be assigned to the instruction function of the institution. The amount allocated to the employee category must be further allocated to the major functions of the institution in proportion to the salaries and wages of all employees applicable to those functions.
              3. Interest
              Interest on debt associated with certain buildings, equipment and capital improvements, as defined in § 75.449, must be classified as an expenditure under the category Facilities. These costs must be allocated in the same manner as the depreciation on the buildings, equipment and capital improvements to which the interest relates.
              4. Operation and Maintenance Expenses
              a. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for the administration, supervision, operation, maintenance, preservation, and protection of the institution's physical plant. They include expenses normally incurred for such items as janitorial and utility services; repairs and ordinary or normal alterations of buildings, furniture and equipment; care of grounds; maintenance and operation of buildings and other plant facilities; security; earthquake and disaster preparedness; environmental safety; hazardous waste disposal; property, liability and all other insurance relating to property; space and capital leasing; facility planning and management; and central receiving. The operation and maintenance expense category should also include its allocable share of fringe benefit costs, depreciation, and interest costs.
              b. In the absence of the alternatives provided for in Section A.2.d, the expenses included in this category must be allocated in the same manner as described in subsection 2.b for depreciation.
              c. A utility cost adjustment of up to 1.3 percentage points may be included in the negotiated indirect cost rate of the IHE for organized research, per the computation alternatives in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section:
              (1) Where space is devoted to a single function and metering allows unambiguous measurement of usage related to that space, costs must be assigned to the function located in that space.
              (2) Where space is allocated to different functions and metering does not allow unambiguous measurement of usage by function, costs must be allocated as follows:
              (i) Utilities costs should be apportioned to functions in the same manner as depreciation, based on the calculated difference between the site or building actual square footage for monitored research laboratory space (site, building, floor, or room), and a separate calculation prepared by the IHE using the “effective square footage” described in subsection (c)(2)(ii) of this section.
              (ii) “Effective square footage” allocated to research laboratory space must be calculated as the actual square footage times the relative energy utilization index (REUI) posted on the OMB Web site at the time of a rate determination.
              A. This index is the ratio of a laboratory energy use index (lab EUI) to the corresponding index for overall average college or university space (college EUI).

              B. In July 2012, values for these two indices (taken respectively from the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory “Labs for the 21st Century” benchmarking tool http://labs21benchmarking.lbl.gov/CompareData.php and the US Department of Energy “Buildings Energy Databook” and http://buildingsdatabook.eren.doe.gov/CBECS.aspx) were 310 kBtu/sq ft-yr. and 155 kBtu/sq ft-yr., so that the adjustment ratio is 2.0 by this methodology. To retain currency, OMB will adjust the EUI numbers from time to time (no more often than annually nor less often than every 5 years), using reliable and publicly disclosed data. Current values of both the EUIs and the REUI will be posted on the OMB Web site.
              5. General Administration and General Expenses

              a. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for the general executive and administrative offices of educational institutions and other expenses of a general character which do not relate solely to any major function of the institution; i.e., solely to (1) instruction, (2) organized research, (3) other sponsored activities, or (4) other institutional activities. The general administration and general expense category should also include its allocable share of fringe benefit costs, operation and maintenance expense, depreciation, and interest costs. Examples of general administration and general expenses include: Those expenses incurred by administrative offices that serve the entire university system of which the institution is a part; central offices of the institution such as the President's or Chancellor's office, the offices for institution-wide financial management, business services, budget and planning, personnel management, and safety and risk management; the office of the General Counsel; and the operations of the central administrative management information systems. General administration and general expenses must not include expenses incurred within non-university-wide deans' offices, academic departments, organized research units, or similar organizational units. (See subsection 6.)
              b. In the absence of the alternatives provided for in Section A.2.d, the expenses included in this category must be grouped first according to common major functions of the institution to which they render services or provide benefits. The aggregate expenses of each group must then be allocated to serviced or benefitted functions on the modified total cost basis. Modified total costs consist of the same elements as those in Section C.2. When an activity included in this indirect (F&A) cost category provides a service or product to another institution or organization, an appropriate adjustment must be made to either the expenses or the basis of allocation or both, to assure a proper allocation of costs.
              6. Departmental Administration Expenses
              a. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for administrative and supporting services that benefit common or joint departmental activities or objectives in academic deans' offices, academic departments and divisions, and organized research units. Organized research units include such units as institutes, study centers, and research centers. Departmental administration expenses are subject to the following limitations.
              (1) Academic deans' offices. Salaries and operating expenses are limited to those attributable to administrative functions.
              (2) Academic departments:
              (a) Salaries and fringe benefits attributable to the administrative work (including bid and proposal preparation) of faculty (including department heads) and other professional personnel conducting research and/or instruction, must be allowed at a rate of 3.6 percent of modified total direct costs. This category does not include professional business or professional administrative officers. This allowance must be added to the computation of the indirect (F&A) cost rate for major functions in Section C; the expenses covered by the allowance must be excluded from the departmental administration cost pool. No documentation is required to support this allowance.
              (b) Other administrative and supporting expenses incurred within academic departments are allowable provided they are treated consistently in like circumstances. This would include expenses such as the salaries of secretarial and clerical staffs, the salaries of administrative officers and assistants, travel, office supplies, stockrooms, and the like.
              (3) Other fringe benefit costs applicable to the salaries and wages included in subsections (1) and (2) are allowable, as well as an appropriate share of general administration and general expenses, operation and maintenance expenses, and depreciation.
              (4) Federal agencies may authorize reimbursement of additional costs for department heads and faculty only in exceptional cases where an institution can demonstrate undue hardship or detriment to project performance.
              b. The following guidelines apply to the determination of departmental administrative costs as direct or indirect (F&A) costs.

              (1) In developing the departmental administration cost pool, special care should be exercised to ensure that costs incurred for the same purpose in like circumstances are treated consistently as either direct or indirect (F&A) costs. For example, salaries of technical staff, laboratory supplies (e.g., chemicals), telephone toll charges, animals, animal care costs, computer costs, travel costs, and specialized shop costs must be treated as direct costs wherever identifiable to a particular cost objective. Direct charging of these costs may be accomplished through specific identification of individual costs to benefitting cost objectives, or through recharge centers or specialized service facilities, as appropriate under the circumstances. See §§ 75.413(c) and 75.468.
              (2) Items such as office supplies, postage, local telephone costs, and memberships must normally be treated as indirect (F&A) costs.
              c. In the absence of the alternatives provided for in Section A.2.d, the expenses included in this category must be allocated as follows:
              (1) The administrative expenses of the dean's office of each college and school must be allocated to the academic departments within that college or school on the modified total cost basis.
              (2) The administrative expenses of each academic department, and the department's share of the expenses allocated in subsection (1) must be allocated to the appropriate functions of the department on the modified total cost basis.
              7. Sponsored Projects Administration

              a. The expenses under this heading are limited to those incurred by a separate organization(s) established primarily to administer sponsored projects, including such functions as grant and contract administration (Federal and non-Federal), special security, purchasing, personnel, administration, and editing and publishing of research and other reports. They include the salaries and expenses of the head of such organization, assistants, and immediate staff, together with the salaries and expenses of personnel engaged in supporting activities maintained by the organization, such as stock rooms, print shops, and the like. This category also includes an allocable share of fringe benefit costs, general administration and general expenses, operation and maintenance expenses, and depreciation. Appropriate adjustments will be made for services provided to other functions or organizations.
              b. In the absence of the alternatives provided for in Section A.2.d, the expenses included in this category must be allocated to the major functions of the institution under which the sponsored projects are conducted on the basis of the modified total cost of sponsored projects.
              c. An appropriate adjustment must be made to eliminate any duplicate charges to Federal awards when this category includes similar or identical activities as those included in the general administration and general expense category or other indirect (F&A) cost items, such as accounting, procurement, or personnel administration.
              8. Library Expenses
              a. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for the operation of the library, including the cost of books and library materials purchased for the library, less any items of library income that qualify as applicable credits under § 75.406. The library expense category should also include the fringe benefits applicable to the salaries and wages included therein, an appropriate share of general administration and general expense, operation and maintenance expense, and depreciation. Costs incurred in the purchases of rare books (museum-type books) with no value to Federal awards should not be allocated to them.
              b. In the absence of the alternatives provided for in Section A.2.d, the expenses included in this category must be allocated first on the basis of primary categories of users, including students, professional employees, and other users.
              (1) The student category must consist of full-time equivalent students enrolled at the institution, regardless of whether they earn credits toward a degree or certificate.
              (2) The professional employee category must consist of all faculty members and other professional employees of the institution, on a full-time equivalent basis. This category may also include post-doctorate fellows and graduate students.
              (3) The other users category must consist of a reasonable factor as determined by institutional records to account for all other users of library facilities.
              c. Amount allocated in paragraph b of this section must be assigned further as follows:
              (1) The amount in the student category must be assigned to the instruction function of the institution.
              (2) The amount in the professional employee category must be assigned to the major functions of the institution in proportion to the salaries and wages of all faculty members and other professional employees applicable to those functions.
              (3) The amount in the other users category must be assigned to the other institutional activities function of the institution.
              9. Student Administration and Services
              a. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for the administration of student affairs and for services to students, including expenses of such activities as deans of students, admissions, registrar, counseling and placement services, student advisers, student health and infirmary services, catalogs, and commencements and convocations. The salaries of members of the academic staff whose responsibilities to the institution require administrative work that benefits sponsored projects may also be included to the extent that the portion charged to student administration is determined in accordance with Subpart E of this part. This expense category also includes the fringe benefit costs applicable to the salaries and wages included therein, an appropriate share of general administration and general expenses, operation and maintenance, interest expense, and depreciation.
              b. In the absence of the alternatives provided for in Section A.2.d, the expenses in this category must be allocated to the instruction function, and subsequently to Federal awards in that function.
              10. Offset for Indirect (F&A) Expenses Otherwise Provided for by the Federal Government
              a. The items to be accumulated under this heading are the reimbursements and other payments from the Federal Government which are made to the institution to support solely, specifically, and directly, in whole or in part, any of the administrative or service activities described in subsections 2 through 9.
              b. The items in this group must be treated as a credit to the affected individual indirect (F&A) cost category before that category is allocated to benefitting functions.
              C. Determination and Application of Indirect (F&A) Cost Rate or Rates
              1. Indirect (F&A) Cost Pools
              a. (1) Subject to subsection b, the separate categories of indirect (F&A) costs allocated to each major function of the institution as prescribed in Section B of this paragraph C.1-, must be aggregated and treated as a common pool for that function. The amount in each pool must be divided by the distribution base described in subsection 2 to arrive at a single indirect (F&A) cost rate for each function.

              (2) The rate for each function is used to distribute indirect (F&A) costs to individual Federal awards of that function. Since a common pool is established for each major function of the institution, a separate indirect (F&A) cost rate would be established for each of the major functions described in Section A.1 under which Federal awards are carried out.
              (3) Each institution's indirect (F&A) cost rate process must be appropriately designed to ensure that Federal sponsors do not in any way subsidize the indirect (F&A) costs of other sponsors, specifically activities sponsored by industry and foreign governments. Accordingly, each allocation method used to identify and allocate the indirect (F&A) cost pools, as described in Sections A.2, and B.2 through B.9, must contain the full amount of the institution's modified total costs or other appropriate units of measurement used to make the computations. In addition, the final rate distribution base (as defined in subsection 2) for each major function (organized research, instruction, etc., as described in Section A.1) must contain all the programs or activities which utilize the indirect (F&A) costs allocated to that major function. At the time an indirect (F&A) cost proposal is submitted to a cognizant agency for indirect costs, each institution must describe the process it uses to ensure that Federal funds are not used to subsidize industry and foreign government funded programs.
              b. In some instances a single rate basis for use across the board on all work within a major function at an institution may not be appropriate. A single rate for research, for example, might not take into account those different environmental factors and other conditions which may affect substantially the indirect (F&A) costs applicable to a particular segment of research at the institution. A particular segment of research may be that performed under a single sponsored agreement or it may consist of research under a group of Federal awards performed in a common environment. The environmental factors are not limited to the physical location of the work. Other important factors are the level of the administrative support required, the nature of the facilities or other resources employed, the scientific disciplines or technical skills involved, the organizational arrangements used, or any combination thereof. If a particular segment of a sponsored agreement is performed within an environment which appears to generate a significantly different level of indirect (F&A) costs, provisions should be made for a separate indirect (F&A) cost pool applicable to such work. The separate indirect (F&A) cost pool should be developed during the regular course of the rate determination process and the separate indirect (F&A) cost rate resulting therefrom should be utilized; provided it is determined that (1) such indirect (F&A) cost rate differs significantly from that which would have been obtained under subsection a, and (2) the volume of work to which such rate would apply is material in relation to other Federal awards at the institution.
              2. The Distribution Basis
              Indirect (F&A) costs must be distributed to applicable Federal awards and other benefitting activities within each major function (see section A.1, Major functions of an institution) on the basis of modified total direct costs (MTDC), consisting of all salaries and wages, fringe benefits, materials and supplies, services, travel, and up to the first $25,000 of each subaward (regardless of the period covered by the subaward). MTDC is defined in § 75.2. For this purpose, an indirect (F&A) cost rate should be determined for each of the separate indirect (F&A) cost pools developed pursuant to subsection 1. The rate in each case should be stated as the percentage which the amount of the particular indirect (F&A) cost pool is of the modified total direct costs identified with such pool.
              3. Negotiated Lump Sum for Indirect (F&A) Costs
              A negotiated fixed amount in lieu of indirect (F&A) costs may be appropriate for self-contained, off-campus, or primarily subcontracted activities where the benefits derived from an institution's indirect (F&A) services cannot be readily determined. Such negotiated indirect (F&A) costs will be treated as an offset before allocation to instruction, organized research, other sponsored activities, and other institutional activities. The base on which such remaining expenses are allocated should be appropriately adjusted.
              4. Predetermined Rates for Indirect (F&A) Costs

              Public Law 87-638 (76 Stat. 437) as amended (41 U.S.C. 4708) authorizes the use of predetermined rates in determining the “indirect costs” (indirect (F&A) costs) applicable under research agreements with educational institutions. The stated objectives of the law are to simplify the administration of cost-type research and development contracts (including grants) with educational institutions, to facilitate the preparation of their budgets, and to permit more expeditious closeout of such contracts when the work is completed. In view of the potential advantages offered by this procedure, negotiation of predetermined rates for indirect (F&A) costs for a period of two to four years should be the norm in those situations where the cost experience and other pertinent facts available are deemed sufficient to enable the parties involved to reach an informed judgment as to the probable level of indirect (F&A) costs during the ensuing accounting periods.
              
              5. Negotiated Fixed Rates and Carry-Forward Provisions
              When a fixed rate is negotiated in advance for a fiscal year (or other time period), the over- or under-recovery for that year may be included as an adjustment to the indirect (F&A) cost for the next rate negotiation. When the rate is negotiated before the carry-forward adjustment is determined, the carry-forward amount may be applied to the next subsequent rate negotiation. When such adjustments are to be made, each fixed rate negotiated in advance for a given period will be computed by applying the expected indirect (F&A) costs allocable to Federal awards for the forecast period plus or minus the carry-forward adjustment (over- or under-recovery) from the prior period, to the forecast distribution base. Unrecovered amounts under lump-sum agreements or cost-sharing provisions of prior years must not be carried forward for consideration in the new rate negotiation. There must, however, be an advance understanding in each case between the institution and the cognizant agency for indirect costs as to whether these differences will be considered in the rate negotiation rather than making the determination after the differences are known. Further, institutions electing to use this carry-forward provision may not subsequently change without prior approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs. In the event that an institution returns to a post-determined rate, any over- or under-recovery during the period in which negotiated fixed rates and carry-forward provisions were followed will be included in the subsequent post-determined rates. Where multiple rates are used, the same procedure will be applicable for determining each rate.
              6. Provisional and Final Rates for Indirect (F&A) Costs
              Where the cognizant agency for indirect costs determines that cost experience and other pertinent facts do not justify the use of predetermined rates, or a fixed rate with a carry-forward, or if the parties cannot agree on an equitable rate, a provisional rate must be established. To prevent substantial overpayment or underpayment, the provisional rate may be adjusted by the cognizant agency for indirect costs during the institution's fiscal year. Predetermined or fixed rates may replace provisional rates at any time prior to the close of the institution's fiscal year. If a provisional rate is not replaced by a predetermined or fixed rate prior to the end of the institution's fiscal year, a final rate will be established and upward or downward adjustments will be made based on the actual allowable costs incurred for the period involved.
              7. Fixed Rates for the Life of the Sponsored Agreement
              a. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(1) of § 75.414 Federal agencies must use the negotiated rates for indirect (F&A) costs in effect at the time of the initial award throughout the life of the Federal award. Award levels for Federal awards may not be adjusted in future years as a result of changes in negotiated rates. “Negotiated rates” per the rate agreement include final, fixed, and predetermined rates and exclude provisional rates. “Life” for the purpose of this subsection means each competitive segment of a project. A competitive segment is a period of years approved by the Federal awarding agency at the time of the Federal award. If negotiated rate agreements do not extend through the life of the Federal award at the time of the initial award, then the negotiated rate for the last year of the Federal award must be extended through the end of the life of the Federal award.
              b. Except as provided in § 75.414, when an educational institution does not have a negotiated rate with the Federal Government at the time of an award (because the educational institution is a new recipient or the parties cannot reach agreement on a rate), the provisional rate used at the time of the award must be adjusted once a rate is negotiated and approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              8. Limitation on Reimbursement of Administrative Costs
              a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C.1.a, the administrative costs charged to Federal awards awarded or amended (including continuation and renewal awards) with effective dates beginning on or after the start of the institution's first fiscal year which begins on or after October 1, 1991, must be limited to 26% of modified total direct costs (as defined in subsection 2) for the total of General Administration and General Expenses, Departmental Administration, Sponsored Projects Administration, and Student Administration and Services (including their allocable share of depreciation, interest costs, operation and maintenance expenses, and fringe benefits costs, as provided by Section B, Identification and assignment of indirect (F&A) costs, and all other types of expenditures not listed specifically under one of the subcategories of facilities in Section B.

              b. Institutions should not change their accounting or cost allocation methods if the effect is to change the charging of a particular type of cost from F&A to direct, or to reclassify costs, or increase allocations from the administrative pools identified in paragraph B.1 of this Appendix to the other F&A cost pools or fringe benefits. Cognizant agencies for indirect cost are authorized to allow changes where an institution's charging practices are at variance with acceptable practices followed by a substantial majority of other institutions.
              9. Alternative Method for Administrative Costs
              a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C.1.a, an institution may elect to claim a fixed allowance for the “Administration” portion of indirect (F&A) costs. The allowance could be either 24% of modified total direct costs or a percentage equal to 95% of the most recently negotiated fixed or predetermined rate for the cost pools included under “Administration” as defined in Section B.1, whichever is less. Under this alternative, no cost proposal need be prepared for the “Administration” portion of the indirect (F&A) cost rate nor is further identification or documentation of these costs required (see subsection c). Where a negotiated indirect (F&A) cost agreement includes this alternative, an institution must make no further charges for the expenditure categories described in Section B.5, Section B.6, Section B.7, and Section B.9.
              b. In negotiations of rates for subsequent periods, an institution that has elected the option of subsection a may continue to exercise it at the same rate without further identification or documentation of costs.
              c. If an institution elects to accept a threshold rate as defined in subsection a of this section, it is not required to perform a detailed analysis of its administrative costs. However, in order to compute the facilities components of its indirect (F&A) cost rate, the institution must reconcile its indirect (F&A) cost proposal to its financial statements and make appropriate adjustments and reclassifications to identify the costs of each major function as defined in Section A.1, as well as to identify and allocate the facilities components. Administrative costs that are not identified as such by the institution's accounting system (such as those incurred in academic departments) will be classified as instructional costs for purposes of reconciling indirect (F&A) cost proposals to financial statements and allocating facilities costs.
              10. Individual Rate Components
              In order to provide mutually agreed-upon information for management purposes, each indirect (F&A) cost rate negotiation or determination must include development of a rate for each indirect (F&A) cost pool as well as the overall indirect (F&A) cost rate.
              11. Negotiation and Approval of Indirect (F&A) Rate
              a. Cognizant agency for indirect costs is defined in § 75.2.
              (1) Cost negotiation cognizance is assigned to the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) or the Department of Defense's Office of Naval Research (DOD), normally depending on which of the two agencies (HHS or DOD) provides more funds to the educational institution for the most recent three years. Information on funding must be derived from relevant data gathered by the National Science Foundation. In cases where neither HHS nor DOD provides Federal funding to an educational institution, the cognizant agency for indirect costs assignment must default to HHS. Notwithstanding the method for cognizance determination described in this section, other arrangements for cognizance of a particular educational institution may also be based in part on the types of research performed at the educational institution and must be decided based on mutual agreement between HHS and DOD. Where a non-Federal entity only receives funds as a subrecipient, see the requirements of § 75.352.
              (2) After cognizance is established, it must continue for a five-year period.
              b. Acceptance of rates. See § 75.414.
              c. Correcting deficiencies. The cognizant agency for indirect costs must negotiate changes needed to correct systems deficiencies relating to accountability for Federal awards. Cognizant agencies for indirect costs must address the concerns of other affected agencies, as appropriate, and must negotiate special rates for Federal agencies that are required to limit recovery of indirect costs by statute.
              d. Resolving questioned costs. The cognizant agency for indirect costs must conduct any necessary negotiations with an educational institution regarding amounts questioned by audit that are due the Federal Government related to costs covered by a negotiated agreement.
              e. Reimbursement. Reimbursement to cognizant agencies for indirect costs for work performed under this Part may be made by reimbursement billing under the Economy Act, 31 U.S.C. 1535.
              f. Procedure for establishing facilities and administrative rates must be established by one of the following methods:

              (1) Formal negotiation. The cognizant agency for indirect costs is responsible for negotiating and approving rates for an educational institution on behalf of all Federal agencies. Federal awarding agencies that do not have cognizance for indirect costs must notify the cognizant agency for indirect costs of specific concerns (i.e., a need to establish special cost rates) which could affect the negotiation process. The cognizant agency for indirect costs must address the concerns of all interested agencies, as appropriate. A pre-negotiation conference may be scheduled among all interested agencies, if necessary. The cognizant agency for indirect costs must then arrange a negotiation conference with the educational institution.
              (2) Other than formal negotiation. The cognizant agency for indirect costs and educational institution may reach an agreement on rates without a formal negotiation conference; for example, through correspondence or use of the simplified method described in this section D of this Appendix.
              g. Formalizing determinations and agreements. The cognizant agency for indirect costs must formalize all determinations or agreements reached with an educational institution and provide copies to other agencies having an interest. Determinations should include a description of any adjustments, the actual amount, both dollar and percentage adjusted, and the reason for making adjustments.
              h. Disputes and disagreements. Where the cognizant agency for indirect costs is unable to reach agreement with an educational institution with regard to rates or audit resolution, the appeal system of the cognizant agency for indirect costs must be followed for resolution of the disagreement.
              12. Standard Format for Submission
              For facilities and administrative (indirect (F&A)) rate proposals, educational institutions must use the standard format, shown in section E of this appendix, to submit their indirect (F&A) rate proposal to the cognizant agency for indirect costs. The cognizant agency for indirect costs may, on an institution-by-institution basis, grant exceptions from all or portions of Part II of the standard format requirement. This requirement does not apply to educational institutions that use the simplified method for calculating indirect (F&A) rates, as described in Section D of this Appendix.
              As provided in section C.10, each F&A cost rate negotiation or determination must include development of a rate for each F&A cost pool as well as the overall F&A rate.
              D. Simplified Method for Small Institutions
              1. General
              a. Where the total direct cost of work covered by this part 75 at an institution does not exceed $10 million in a fiscal year, the simplified procedure described in subsections 2 or 3 may be used in determining allowable indirect (F&A) costs. Under this simplified procedure, the institution's most recent annual financial report and immediately available supporting information must be utilized as a basis for determining the indirect (F&A) cost rate applicable to all Federal awards. The institution may use either the salaries and wages (see subsection 2) or modified total direct costs (see subsection 3) as the distribution basis.
              b. The simplified procedure should not be used where it produces results which appear inequitable to the Federal Government or the institution. In any such case, indirect (F&A) costs should be determined through use of the regular procedure.
              2. Simplified Procedure—Salaries and Wages Base
              a. Establish the total amount of salaries and wages paid to all employees of the institution.
              b. Establish an indirect (F&A) cost pool consisting of the expenditures (exclusive of capital items and other costs specifically identified as unallowable) which customarily are classified under the following titles or their equivalents:
              (1) General administration and general expenses (exclusive of costs of student administration and services, student activities, student aid, and scholarships).
              (2) Operation and maintenance of physical plant and depreciation (after appropriate adjustment for costs applicable to other institutional activities).
              (3) Library.
              (4) Department administration expenses, which will be computed as 20 percent of the salaries and expenses of deans and heads of departments.
              In those cases where expenditures classified under subsection (1) have previously been allocated to other institutional activities, they may be included in the indirect (F&A) cost pool. The total amount of salaries and wages included in the indirect (F&A) cost pool must be separately identified.
              c. Establish a salary and wage distribution base, determined by deducting from the total of salaries and wages as established in subsection a. from the amount of salaries and wages included under subsection b.
              d. Establish the indirect (F&A) cost rate, determined by dividing the amount in the indirect (F&A) cost pool, subsection b, by the amount of the distribution base, subsection c.
              e. Apply the indirect (F&A) cost rate to direct salaries and wages for individual agreements to determine the amount of indirect (F&A) costs allocable to such agreements.
              3. Simplified Procedure—Modified Total Direct Cost Base
              a. Establish the total costs incurred by the institution for the base period.
              b. Establish an indirect (F&A) cost pool consisting of the expenditures (exclusive of capital items and other costs specifically identified as unallowable) which customarily are classified under the following titles or their equivalents:

              (1) General administration and general expenses (exclusive of costs of student administration and services, student activities, student aid, and scholarships).
              
              (2) Operation and maintenance of physical plant and depreciation (after appropriate adjustment for costs applicable to other institutional activities).
              (3) Library.
              (4) Department administration expenses, which will be computed as 20 percent of the salaries and expenses of deans and heads of departments. In those cases where expenditures classified under subsection (1) have previously been allocated to other institutional activities, they may be included in the indirect (F&A) cost pool. The modified total direct costs amount included in the indirect (F&A) cost pool must be separately identified.
              c. Establish a modified total direct cost distribution base, as defined in Section C.2, that consists of all institution's direct functions.
              d. Establish the indirect (F&A) cost rate, determined by dividing the amount in the indirect (F&A) cost pool, subsection b, by the amount of the distribution base, subsection c.
              e. Apply the indirect (F&A) cost rate to the modified total direct costs for individual agreements to determine the amount of indirect (F&A) costs allocable to such agreements.
              E. Documentation Requirements

              The standard format for documentation requirements for indirect (indirect (F&A)) rate proposals for claiming costs under the regular method is available on the OMB Web site here: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_forms.
              
              F. Certification
              1. Certification of Charges
              To assure that expenditures for Federal awards are proper and in accordance with the agreement documents and approved project budgets, the annual and/or final fiscal reports or vouchers requesting payment under the agreements will include a certification, signed by an authorized official of the university, which reads “By signing this report, I certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the report is true, complete, and accurate, and the expenditures, disbursements and cash receipts are for the purposes and intent set forth in the award documents. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information, or the omission of any material fact, may subject me to criminal, civil or administrative penalties for fraud, false statements, false claims or otherwise. (U.S. Code, Title 18, Section 1001 and Title 31, Sections 3729-3733 and 3801-3812)”.
              2. Certification of Indirect (F&A) Costs
              a. Policy. Cognizant agencies must not accept a proposed indirect cost rate unless such costs have been certified by the educational institution using the Certificate of indirect (F&A) Costs set forth in subsection F.2.c
              b. The certificate must be signed on behalf of the institution by the chief financial officer or an individual designated by an individual at a level no lower than vice president or chief financial officer.
              An indirect (F&A) cost rate is not binding upon the Federal Government if the most recent required proposal from the institution has not been certified. Where it is necessary to establish indirect (F&A) cost rates, and the institution has not submitted a certified proposal for establishing such rates in accordance with the requirements of this section, the Federal Government must unilaterally establish such rates. Such rates may be based upon audited historical data or such other data that have been furnished to the cognizant agency for indirect costs and for which it can be demonstrated that all unallowable costs have been excluded. When indirect (F&A) cost rates are unilaterally established by the Federal Government because of failure of the institution to submit a certified proposal for establishing such rates in accordance with this section, the rates established will be set at a level low enough to ensure that potentially unallowable costs will not be reimbursed.
              c. Certificate. The certificate required by this section must be in the following form:
              Certificate of Indirect (F&A) Costs
              This is to certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief:
              (1) I have reviewed the indirect (F&A) cost proposal submitted herewith;
              (2) All costs included in this proposal [identify date] to establish billing or final indirect (F&A) costs rate for [identify period covered by rate] are allowable in accordance with the requirements of the Federal agreement(s) to which they apply and with the cost principles applicable to those agreements.
              (3) This proposal does not include any costs which are unallowable under applicable cost principles such as (without limitation): public relations costs, contributions and donations, entertainment costs, fines and penalties, lobbying costs, and defense of fraud proceedings; and
              (4) All costs included in this proposal are properly allocable to Federal agreements on the basis of a beneficial or causal relationship between the expenses incurred and the agreements to which they are allocated in accordance with applicable requirements.
              I declare that the foregoing is true and correct.
              Institution of Higher Education:
              Signature:
              Name of Official:
              Title:
              
              Date of Execution:
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. IV
              Appendix IV to Part 75—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations
              A. General
              1. Indirect costs are those that have been incurred for common or joint objectives and cannot be readily identified with a particular final cost objective. Direct cost of minor amounts may be treated as indirect costs under the conditions described in § 75.413(d). After direct costs have been determined and assigned directly to awards or other work as appropriate, indirect costs are those remaining to be allocated to benefitting cost objectives. A cost may not be allocated to a Federal award as an indirect cost if any other cost incurred for the same purpose, in like circumstances, has been assigned to a Federal award as a direct cost.
              2. “Major nonprofit organizations” are defined in § 75.414(a). See indirect cost rate reporting requirements in sections B.2.e and B.3.g. of this appendix.
              B. Allocation of Indirect Costs and Determination of Indirect Cost Rates
              1. General
              a. If a nonprofit organization has only one major function, or where all its major functions benefit from its indirect costs to approximately the same degree, the allocation of indirect costs and the computation of an indirect cost rate may be accomplished through simplified allocation procedures, as described in section B.2 of this Appendix.
              b. If an organization has several major functions which benefit from its indirect costs in varying degrees, allocation of indirect costs may require the accumulation of such costs into separate cost groupings which then are allocated individually to benefitting functions by means of a base which best measures the relative degree of benefit. The indirect costs allocated to each function are then distributed to individual Federal awards and other activities included in that function by means of an indirect cost rate(s).
              c. The determination of what constitutes an organization's major functions will depend on its purpose in being; the types of services it renders to the public, its clients, and its members; and the amount of effort it devotes to such activities as fundraising, public information and membership activities.
              d. Specific methods for allocating indirect costs and computing indirect cost rates along with the conditions under which each method should be used are described in section B.2 through B.5 of this Appendix.
              e. The base period for the allocation of indirect costs is the period in which such costs are incurred and accumulated for allocation to work performed in that period. The base period normally should coincide with the organization's fiscal year but, in any event, must be so selected as to avoid inequities in the allocation of the costs.
              2. Simplified Allocation Method
              a. Where an organization's major functions benefit from its indirect costs to approximately the same degree, the allocation of indirect costs may be accomplished by (i) separating the organization's total costs for the base period as either direct or indirect, and (ii) dividing the total allowable indirect costs (net of applicable credits) by an equitable distribution base. The result of this process is an indirect cost rate which is used to distribute indirect costs to individual Federal awards. The rate should be expressed as the percentage which the total amount of allowable indirect costs bears to the base selected. This method should also be used where an organization has only one major function encompassing a number of individual projects or activities, and may be used where the level of Federal awards to an organization is relatively small.
              b. Both the direct costs and the indirect costs must exclude capital expenditures and unallowable costs. However, unallowable costs which represent activities must be included in the direct costs under the conditions described in § 75.413(e).
              c. The distribution base may be total direct costs (excluding capital expenditures and other distorting items, such as subawards for $25,000 or more), direct salaries and wages, or other base which results in an equitable distribution. The distribution base must exclude participant support costs as defined in § 75.2.
              d. Except where a special rate(s) is required in accordance with section B.5 of this Appendix, the indirect cost rate developed under the above principles is applicable to all Federal awards of the organization. If a special rate(s) is required, appropriate modifications must be made in order to develop the special rate(s).

              e. For an organization that receives more than $10 million in direct Federal funding in a fiscal year, a breakout of the indirect cost component into two broad categories, Facilities and Administration as defined in § 75.414(a), is required. The rate in each case must be stated as the percentage which the amount of the particular indirect cost category (i.e., Facilities or Administration) is of the distribution base identified with that category.
              
              3. Multiple Allocation Base Method
              a. General. Where an organization's indirect costs benefit its major functions in varying degrees, indirect costs must be accumulated into separate cost groupings, as described in subparagraph b. Each grouping must then be allocated individually to benefitting functions by means of a base which best measures the relative benefits. The default allocation bases by cost pool are described in section B.3.c of this Appendix.
              b. Identification of indirect costs. Cost groupings must be established so as to permit the allocation of each grouping on the basis of benefits provided to the major functions. Each grouping must constitute a pool of expenses that are of like character in terms of functions they benefit and in terms of the allocation base which best measures the relative benefits provided to each function. The groupings are classified within the two broad categories: “Facilities” and “Administration,” as described in section A.3 of this Appendix. The indirect cost pools are defined as follows:
              (1) Depreciation. The expenses under this heading are the portion of the costs of the organization's buildings, capital improvements to land and buildings, and equipment which are computed in accordance with § 75.436 .
              (2) Interest. Interest on debt associated with certain buildings, equipment and capital improvements are computed in accordance with § 75.449.
              (3) Operation and maintenance expenses. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for the administration, operation, maintenance, preservation, and protection of the organization's physical plant. They include expenses normally incurred for such items as: janitorial and utility services; repairs and ordinary or normal alterations of buildings, furniture and equipment; care of grounds; maintenance and operation of buildings and other plant facilities; security; earthquake and disaster preparedness; environmental safety; hazardous waste disposal; property, liability and other insurance relating to property; space and capital leasing; facility planning and management; and central receiving. The operation and maintenance expenses category must also include its allocable share of fringe benefit costs, depreciation, and interest costs.
              (4) General administration and general expenses. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for the overall general executive and administrative offices of the organization and other expenses of a general nature which do not relate solely to any major function of the organization. This category must also include its allocable share of fringe benefit costs, operation and maintenance expense, depreciation, and interest costs. Examples of this category include central offices, such as the director's office, the office of finance, business services, budget and planning, personnel, safety and risk management, general counsel, management information systems, and library costs.
              In developing this cost pool, special care should be exercised to ensure that costs incurred for the same purpose in like circumstances are treated consistently as either direct or indirect costs. For example, salaries of technical staff, project supplies, project publication, telephone toll charges, computer costs, travel costs, and specialized services costs must be treated as direct costs wherever identifiable to a particular program. The salaries and wages of administrative and pooled clerical staff should normally be treated as indirect costs. Direct charging of these costs may be appropriate as described in § 75.413. Items such as office supplies, postage, local telephone costs, periodicals and memberships should normally be treated as indirect costs.
              c. Allocation bases. Actual conditions must be taken into account in selecting the base to be used in allocating the expenses in each grouping to benefitting functions. The essential consideration in selecting a method or a base is that it is the one best suited for assigning the pool of costs to cost objectives in accordance with benefits derived; a traceable cause and effect relationship; or logic and reason, where neither the cause nor the effect of the relationship is determinable. When an allocation can be made by assignment of a cost grouping directly to the function benefitted, the allocation must be made in that manner. When the expenses in a cost grouping are more general in nature, the allocation must be made through the use of a selected base which produces results that are equitable to both the Federal Government and the organization. The distribution must be made in accordance with the bases described herein unless it can be demonstrated that the use of a different base would result in a more equitable allocation of the costs, or that a more readily available base would not increase the costs charged to Federal awards. The results of special cost studies (such as an engineering utility study) must not be used to determine and allocate the indirect costs to Federal awards.
              (1) Depreciation. Depreciation expenses must be allocated in the following manner:
              (a) Depreciation on buildings used exclusively in the conduct of a single function, and on capital improvements and equipment used in such buildings, must be assigned to that function.

              (b) Depreciation on buildings used for more than one function, and on capital improvements and equipment used in such buildings, must be allocated to the individual functions performed in each building on the basis of usable square feet of space, excluding common areas, such as hallways, stairwells, and restrooms.

              (c) Depreciation on buildings, capital improvements and equipment related space (e.g., individual rooms, and laboratories) used jointly by more than one function (as determined by the users of the space) must be treated as follows. The cost of each jointly used unit of space must be allocated to the benefitting functions on the basis of:
              (i) the employees and other users on a full-time equivalent (FTE) basis or salaries and wages of those individual functions benefitting from the use of that space; or
              (ii) organization-wide employee FTEs or salaries and wages applicable to the benefitting functions of the organization.
              (d) Depreciation on certain capital improvements to land, such as paved parking areas, fences, sidewalks, and the like, not included in the cost of buildings, must be allocated to user categories on a FTE basis and distributed to major functions in proportion to the salaries and wages of all employees applicable to the functions.
              (2) Interest. Interest costs must be allocated in the same manner as the depreciation on the buildings, equipment and capital equipment to which the interest relates.
              (3) Operation and maintenance expenses. Operation and maintenance expenses must be allocated in the same manner as the depreciation.
              (4) General administration and general expenses. General administration and general expenses must be allocated to benefitting functions based on modified total costs (MTC). The MTC is the modified total direct costs (MTDC), as described in § 75.2, plus the allocated indirect cost proportion. The expenses included in this category could be grouped first according to major functions of the organization to which they render services or provide benefits. The aggregate expenses of each group must then be allocated to benefitting functions based on MTC.
              d. Order of distribution.
              (1) Indirect cost categories consisting of depreciation, interest, operation and maintenance, and general administration and general expenses must be allocated in that order to the remaining indirect cost categories as well as to the major functions of the organization. Other cost categories should be allocated in the order determined to be most appropriate by the organization. This order of allocation does not apply if cross allocation of costs is made as provided in section B.3.d.2 of this Appendix.
              (2) Normally, an indirect cost category will be considered closed once it has been allocated to other cost objectives, and costs must not be subsequently allocated to it. However, a cross allocation of costs between two or more indirect costs categories could be used if such allocation will result in a more equitable allocation of costs. If a cross allocation is used, an appropriate modification to the composition of the indirect cost categories is required.
              e. Application of indirect cost rate or rates. Except where a special indirect cost rate(s) is required in accordance with section B.5 of this Appendix, the separate groupings of indirect costs allocated to each major function must be aggregated and treated as a common pool for that function. The costs in the common pool must then be distributed to individual Federal awards included in that function by use of a single indirect cost rate.
              f. Distribution basis. Indirect costs must be distributed to applicable Federal awards and other benefitting activities within each major function on the basis of MTDC (see definition in § 75.2).
              g. Individual Rate Components. An indirect cost rate must be determined for each separate indirect cost pool developed. The rate in each case must be stated as the percentage which the amount of the particular indirect cost pool is of the distribution base identified with that pool. Each indirect cost rate negotiation or determination agreement must include development of the rate for each indirect cost pool as well as the overall indirect cost rate. The indirect cost pools must be classified within two broad categories: “Facilities” and “Administration,” as described in § 75.414(a).
              4. Direct Allocation Method
              a. Some nonprofit organizations treat all costs as direct costs except general administration and general expenses. These organizations generally separate their costs into three basic categories: (i) General administration and general expenses, (ii) fundraising, and (iii) other direct functions (including projects performed under Federal awards). Joint costs, such as depreciation, rental costs, operation and maintenance of facilities, telephone expenses, and the like are prorated individually as direct costs to each category and to each Federal award or other activity using a base most appropriate to the particular cost being prorated.
              b. This method is acceptable, provided each joint cost is prorated using a base which accurately measures the benefits provided to each Federal award or other activity. The bases must be established in accordance with reasonable criteria, and be supported by current data. This method is compatible with the Standards of Accounting and Financial Reporting for Voluntary Health and Welfare Organizations issued jointly by the National Health Council, Inc., the National Assembly of Voluntary Health and Social Welfare Organizations, and the United Way of America.

              c. Under this method, indirect costs consist exclusively of general administration and general expenses. In all other respects, the organization's indirect cost rates must be computed in the same manner as that described in section B.2 of this Appendix.
              5. Special Indirect Cost Rates
              In some instances, a single indirect cost rate for all activities of an organization or for each major function of the organization may not be appropriate, since it would not take into account those different factors which may substantially affect the indirect costs applicable to a particular segment of work. For this purpose, a particular segment of work may be that performed under a single Federal award or it may consist of work under a group of Federal awards performed in a common environment. These factors may include the physical location of the work, the level of administrative support required, the nature of the facilities or other resources employed, the scientific disciplines or technical skills involved, the organizational arrangements used, or any combination thereof. When a particular segment of work is performed in an environment which appears to generate a significantly different level of indirect costs, provisions should be made for a separate indirect cost pool applicable to such work. The separate indirect cost pool should be developed during the course of the regular allocation process, and the separate indirect cost rate resulting therefrom should be used, provided it is determined that (i) the rate differs significantly from that which would have been obtained under sections B.2, B.3, and B.4 of this Appendix, and (ii) the volume of work to which the rate would apply is material.
              C. Negotiation and Approval of Indirect Cost Rates
              1. Definitions
              As used in this section, the following terms have the meanings set forth in this section:
              a. Cognizant agency for indirect costs means the Federal agency responsible for negotiating and approving indirect cost rates for a nonprofit organization on behalf of all Federal agencies.
              b. Predetermined rate means an indirect cost rate, applicable to a specified current or future period, usually the organization's fiscal year. The rate is based on an estimate of the costs to be incurred during the period. A predetermined rate is not subject to adjustment.
              c. Fixed rate means an indirect cost rate which has the same characteristics as a predetermined rate, except that the difference between the estimated costs and the actual costs of the period covered by the rate is carried forward as an adjustment to the rate computation of a subsequent period.
              d. Final rate means an indirect cost rate applicable to a specified past period which is based on the actual costs of the period. A final rate is not subject to adjustment.
              e. Provisional rate or billing rate means a temporary indirect cost rate applicable to a specified period which is used for funding, interim reimbursement, and reporting indirect costs on Federal awards pending the establishment of a final rate for the period.
              f. Indirect cost proposal means the documentation prepared by an organization to substantiate its claim for the reimbursement of indirect costs. This proposal provides the basis for the review and negotiation leading to the establishment of an organization's indirect cost rate.
              g. Cost objective means a function, organizational subdivision, contract, Federal award, or other work unit for which cost data are desired and for which provision is made to accumulate and measure the cost of processes, projects, jobs and capitalized projects.
              2. Negotiation and Approval of Rates
              a. Unless different arrangements are agreed to by the Federal agencies concerned, the Federal agency with the largest dollar value of Federal awards with an organization will be designated as the cognizant agency for indirect costs for the negotiation and approval of the indirect cost rates and, where necessary, other rates such as fringe benefit and computer charge-out rates. Once an agency is assigned cognizance for a particular nonprofit organization, the assignment will not be changed unless there is a shift in the dollar volume of the Federal awards to the organization for at least three years. All concerned Federal agencies must be given the opportunity to participate in the negotiation process but, after a rate has been agreed upon, it will be accepted by all Federal agencies. When a Federal agency has reason to believe that special operating factors affecting its Federal awards necessitate special indirect cost rates in accordance with section B.5 of this Appendix, it will, prior to the time the rates are negotiated, notify the cognizant agency for indirect costs. (See also § 75.414.) Where a non-Federal entity only receives funds as a subrecipient, see the requirements of § 75.352.
              b. Except as otherwise provided in § 75.414(f), a nonprofit organization which has not previously established an indirect cost rate with a Federal agency must submit its initial indirect cost proposal immediately after the organization is advised that a Federal award will be made and, in no event, later than three months after the effective date of the Federal award.

              c. Unless approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs in accordance with § 75.414(g), organizations that have previously established indirect cost rates must submit a new indirect cost proposal to the cognizant agency for indirect costs within six months after the close of each fiscal year.
              
              d. A predetermined rate may be negotiated for use on Federal awards where there is reasonable assurance, based on past experience and reliable projection of the organization's costs, that the rate is not likely to exceed a rate based on the organization's actual costs.
              e. Fixed rates may be negotiated where predetermined rates are not considered appropriate. A fixed rate, however, must not be negotiated if (i) all or a substantial portion of the organization's Federal awards are expected to expire before the carry-forward adjustment can be made; (ii) the mix of Federal and non-Federal work at the organization is too erratic to permit an equitable carry-forward adjustment; or (iii) the organization's operations fluctuate significantly from year to year.
              f. Provisional and final rates must be negotiated where neither predetermined nor fixed rates are appropriate. Predetermined or fixed rates may replace provisional rates at any time prior to the close of the organization's fiscal year. If that event does not occur, a final rate will be established and upward or downward adjustments will be made based on the actual allowable costs incurred for the period involved.
              g. The results of each negotiation must be formalized in a written agreement between the cognizant agency for indirect costs and the nonprofit organization. The cognizant agency for indirect costs must make available copies of the agreement to all concerned Federal agencies.
              h. If a dispute arises in a negotiation of an indirect cost rate between the cognizant agency for indirect costs and the nonprofit organization, the dispute must be resolved in accordance with the appeals procedures of the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              i. To the extent that problems are encountered among the Federal agencies in connection with the negotiation and approval process, OMB will lend assistance as required to resolve such problems in a timely manner.
              D. Certification of Indirect (F&A) Costs
              1. Required Certification. No proposal to establish indirect (F&A) cost rates must be acceptable unless such costs have been certified by the non-profit organization using the Certificate of Indirect (F&A) Costs set forth in subsection 2., below. The certificate must be signed on behalf of the organization by an individual at a level no lower than vice president or chief financial officer for the organization.
              2. Each indirect cost rate proposal must be accompanied by a certification in the following form:
              Certificate of Indirect (F&A) Costs
              This is to certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief:
              (1) I have reviewed the indirect (F&A) cost proposal submitted herewith;
              (2) All costs included in this proposal [identify date] to establish billing or final indirect (F&A) costs rate for [identify period covered by rate] are allowable in accordance with the requirements of the Federal awards to which they apply and with Subpart E of part 75.
              (3) This proposal does not include any costs which are unallowable under Subpart E of part 75 such as (without limitation): public relations costs, contributions and donations, entertainment costs, fines and penalties, lobbying costs, and defense of fraud proceedings; and
              (4) All costs included in this proposal are properly allocable to Federal awards on the basis of a beneficial or causal relationship between the expenses incurred and the Federal awards to which they are allocated in accordance with applicable requirements.
              I declare that the foregoing is true and correct.
              Nonprofit Organization:
              Signature:
              Name of Official:
              Title:
              Date of Execution:
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3018, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. V
              Appendix V to Part 75—State/Local Governmentwide Central Service Cost Allocation Plans
              A. General
              1. Most governmental units provide certain services, such as motor pools, computer centers, purchasing, accounting, etc., to operating agencies on a centralized basis. Since federally-supported awards are performed within the individual operating agencies, there needs to be a process whereby these central service costs can be identified and assigned to benefitted activities on a reasonable and consistent basis. The central service cost allocation plan provides that process. All costs and other data used to distribute the costs included in the plan should be supported by formal accounting and other records that will support the propriety of the costs assigned to Federal awards.

              2. Guidelines and illustrations of central service cost allocation plans are provided in a brochure published by the Department of Health and Human Services entitled “A Guide for State, Local and Indian Tribal Governments: Cost Principles and Procedures for Developing Cost Allocation Plans and Indirect Cost Rates for Agreements with the Federal Government.” A copy of this brochure may be obtained from the HHS' Cost Allocation Services or at their Web site at https://rates.psc.gov.
              
              B. Definitions
              1. Agency or operating agency means an organizational unit or sub-division within a governmental unit that is responsible for the performance or administration of Federal awards or activities of the governmental unit.
              2. Allocated central services means central services that benefit operating agencies but are not billed to the agencies on a fee-for-service or similar basis. These costs are allocated to benefitted agencies on some reasonable basis. Examples of such services might include general accounting, personnel administration, purchasing, etc.
              3. Billed central services means central services that are billed to benefitted agencies or programs on an individual fee-for-service or similar basis. Typical examples of billed central services include computer services, transportation services, insurance, and fringe benefits.
              4. Cognizant agency for indirect costs is defined in § 75.2. The determination of cognizant agency for indirect costs for states and local governments is described in section F.1.
              5. Major local government means local government that receives more than $100 million in direct Federal awards subject to this part.
              C. Scope of the Central Service Cost Allocation Plans
              The central service cost allocation plan will include all central service costs that will be claimed (either as a billed or an allocated cost) under Federal awards and will be documented as described in section E. Costs of central services omitted from the plan will not be reimbursed.
              D. Submission Requirements
              1. Each state will submit a plan to the Department of Health and Human Services for each year in which it claims central service costs under Federal awards. The plan should include (a) a projection of the next year's allocated central service cost (based either on actual costs for the most recently completed year or the budget projection for the coming year), and (b) a reconciliation of actual allocated central service costs to the estimated costs used for either the most recently completed year or the year immediately preceding the most recently completed year.
              2. Each major local government is also required to submit a plan to its cognizant agency for indirect costs annually.
              3. All other local governments claiming central service costs must develop a plan in accordance with the requirements described in this Part and maintain the plan and related supporting documentation for audit. These local governments are not required to submit their plans for Federal approval unless they are specifically requested to do so by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. Where a local government only receives funds as a subrecipient, the pass-through entity will be responsible for monitoring the subrecipient's plan.
              4. All central service cost allocation plans will be prepared and, when required, submitted within six months prior to the beginning of each of the governmental unit's fiscal years in which it proposes to claim central service costs. Extensions may be granted by the cognizant agency for indirect costs on a case-by-case basis.
              E. Documentation Requirements for Submitted Plans
              The documentation requirements described in this section may be modified, expanded, or reduced by the cognizant agency for indirect costs on a case-by-case basis. For example, the requirements may be reduced for those central services which have little or no impact on Federal awards. Conversely, if a review of a plan indicates that certain additional information is needed, and will likely be needed in future years, it may be routinely requested in future plan submissions. Items marked with an asterisk (*) should be submitted only once; subsequent plans should merely indicate any changes since the last plan.
              1. General
              All proposed plans must be accompanied by the following: An organization chart sufficiently detailed to show operations including the central service activities of the state/local government whether or not they are shown as benefitting from central service functions; a copy of the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (or a copy of the Executive Budget if budgeted costs are being proposed) to support the allowable costs of each central service activity included in the plan; and, a certification (see subsection 4.) that the plan was prepared in accordance with this Part, contains only allowable costs, and was prepared in a manner that treated similar costs consistently among the various Federal awards and between Federal and non-Federal awards/activities.
              2. Allocated Central Services

              For each allocated central service*, the plan must also include the following: a brief description of the service, an identification of the unit rendering the service and the operating agencies receiving the service, the items of expense included in the cost of the service, the method used to distribute the cost of the service to benefitted agencies, and a summary schedule showing the allocation of each service to the specific benefitted agencies. If any self-insurance funds or fringe benefits costs are treated as allocated (rather than billed) central services, documentation discussed in subsections 3.b. and c. must also be included.
              3. Billed Services
              a. General. The information described in this section must be provided for all billed central services, including internal service funds, self-insurance funds, and fringe benefit funds.
              b. Internal service funds.
              

              (1) For each internal service fund or similar activity with an operating budget of $5 million or more, the plan must include: A brief description of each service; a balance sheet for each fund based on individual accounts contained in the governmental unit's accounting system; a revenue/expenses statement, with revenues broken out by source, e.g., regular billings, interest earned, etc.; a listing of all non-operating transfers (as defined by Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)) into and out of the fund; a description of the procedures (methodology) used to charge the costs of each service to users, including how billing rates are determined; a schedule of current rates; and, a schedule comparing total revenues (including imputed revenues) generated by the service to the allowable costs of the service, as determined under this Part, with an explanation of how variances will be handled.

              (2) Revenues must consist of all revenues generated by the service, including unbilled and uncollected revenues. If some users were not billed for the services (or were not billed at the full rate for that class of users), a schedule showing the full imputed revenues associated with these users must be provided. Expenses must be broken out by object cost categories (e.g., salaries, supplies, etc.).
              c. Self-insurance funds. For each self-insurance fund, the plan must include: The fund balance sheet; a statement of revenue and expenses including a summary of billings and claims paid by agency; a listing of all non-operating transfers into and out of the fund; the type(s) of risk(s) covered by the fund (e.g., automobile liability, workers' compensation, etc.); an explanation of how the level of fund contributions are determined, including a copy of the current actuarial report (with the actuarial assumptions used) if the contributions are determined on an actuarial basis; and, a description of the procedures used to charge or allocate fund contributions to benefitted activities. Reserve levels in excess of claims (1) submitted and adjudicated but not paid, (2) submitted but not adjudicated, and (3) incurred but not submitted must be identified and explained.
              d. Fringe benefits. For fringe benefit costs, the plan must include: A listing of fringe benefits provided to covered employees, and the overall annual cost of each type of benefit; current fringe benefit policies; and procedures used to charge or allocate the costs of the benefits to benefitted activities. In addition, for pension and post-retirement health insurance plans, the following information must be provided: the governmental unit's funding policies, e.g., legislative bills, trust agreements, or state-mandated contribution rules, if different from actuarially determined rates; the pension plan's costs accrued for the year; the amount funded, and date(s) of funding; a copy of the current actuarial report (including the actuarial assumptions); the plan trustee's report; and, a schedule from the activity showing the value of the interest cost associated with late funding.
              4. Required Certification
              Each central service cost allocation plan will be accompanied by a certification in the following form:
              Certificate of Cost Allocation Plan
              This is to certify that I have reviewed the cost allocation plan submitted herewith and to the best of my knowledge and belief:
              (1) All costs included in this proposal [identify date] to establish cost allocations or billings for [identify period covered by plan] are allowable in accordance with the requirements of this Part and the Federal award(s) to which they apply. Unallowable costs have been adjusted for in allocating costs as indicated in the cost allocation plan.
              (2) All costs included in this proposal are properly allocable to Federal awards on the basis of a beneficial or causal relationship between the expenses incurred and the Federal awards to which they are allocated in accordance with applicable requirements. Further, the same costs that have been treated as indirect costs have not been claimed as direct costs. Similar types of costs have been accounted for consistently.
              I declare that the foregoing is true and correct.
              Governmental Unit:
              Signature:
              Name of Official:
              Title:
              Date of Execution:
              F. Negotiation and Approval of Central Service Plans
              1. Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs Assignments for Cost Negotiation

              In general, unless different arrangements are agreed to by the concerned Federal agencies, for central service cost allocation plans, the cognizant agency responsible for review and approval is the Federal agency with the largest dollar value of total Federal awards with a governmental unit. For indirect cost rates and departmental indirect cost allocation plans, the cognizant agency is the Federal agency with the largest dollar value of direct Federal awards with a governmental unit or component, as appropriate. Once designated as the cognizant agency for indirect costs, the Federal agency must remain so for a period of five years. In addition, the following Federal agencies continue to be responsible for the indicated governmental entities:
              
                Department of Health and Human Services—Public assistance and state-wide cost allocation plans for all states (including the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico), state and local hospitals, libraries and health districts.
              
                Department of the Interior—Indian tribal governments, territorial governments, and state and local park and recreational districts.
              
                Department of Labor—State and local labor departments.
              
                Department of Education—School districts and state and local education agencies.
              
                Department of Agriculture—State and local agriculture departments.
              
                Department of Transportation—State and local airport and port authorities and transit districts.
              
                Department of Commerce—State and local economic development districts.
              
                Department of Housing and Urban Development—State and local housing and development districts.
              
                Environmental Protection Agency—State and local water and sewer districts.
              2. Review
              All proposed central service cost allocation plans that are required to be submitted will be reviewed, negotiated, and approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs on a timely basis. The cognizant agency for indirect costs will review the proposal within six months of receipt of the proposal and either negotiate/approve the proposal or advise the governmental unit of the additional documentation needed to support/evaluate the proposed plan or the changes required to make the proposal acceptable. Once an agreement with the governmental unit has been reached, the agreement will be accepted and used by all Federal agencies, unless prohibited or limited by statute. Where a Federal awarding agency has reason to believe that special operating factors affecting its Federal awards necessitate special consideration, the funding agency will, prior to the time the plans are negotiated, notify the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              3. Agreement
              The results of each negotiation must be formalized in a written agreement between the cognizant agency for indirect costs and the governmental unit. This agreement will be subject to re-opening if the agreement is subsequently found to violate a statute or the information upon which the plan was negotiated is later found to be materially incomplete or inaccurate. The results of the negotiation must be made available to all Federal agencies for their use.
              4. Adjustments
              Negotiated cost allocation plans based on a proposal later found to have included costs that: (a) Are unallowable (i) as specified by law or regulation, (ii) as identified in subpart F, General Provisions for selected Items of Cost of this Part, or (iii) by the terms and conditions of Federal awards, or (b) are unallowable because they are clearly not allocable to Federal awards, must be adjusted, or a refund must be made at the option of the cognizant agency for indirect costs, including earned or imputed interest from the date of transfer and debt interest, if applicable, chargeable in accordance with applicable Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs regulations. Adjustments or cash refunds may include, at the option of the cognizant agency for indirect costs, earned or imputed interest from the date of expenditure and delinquent debt interest, if applicable, chargeable in accordance with applicable cognizant agency claims collection regulations. These adjustments or refunds are designed to correct the plans and do not constitute a reopening of the negotiation.
              G. Other Policies
              1. Billed Central Service Activities
              Each billed central service activity must separately account for all revenues (including imputed revenues) generated by the service, expenses incurred to furnish the service, and profit/loss.
              2. Working Capital Reserves
              Internal service funds are dependent upon a reasonable level of working capital reserve to operate from one billing cycle to the next. Charges by an internal service activity to provide for the establishment and maintenance of a reasonable level of working capital reserve, in addition to the full recovery of costs, are allowable. A working capital reserve as part of retained earnings of up to 60 calendar days cash expenses for normal operating purposes is considered reasonable. A working capital reserve exceeding 60 calendar days may be approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs in exceptional cases.
              3. Carry-Forward Adjustments of Allocated Central Service Costs

              Allocated central service costs are usually negotiated and approved for a future fiscal year on a “fixed with carry-forward” basis. Under this procedure, the fixed amounts for the future year covered by agreement are not subject to adjustment for that year. However, when the actual costs of the year involved become known, the differences between the fixed amounts previously approved and the actual costs will be carried forward and used as an adjustment to the fixed amounts established for a later year. This “carry-forward” procedure applies to all central services whose costs were fixed in the approved plan. However, a carry-forward adjustment is not permitted, for a central service activity that was not included in the approved plan, or for unallowable costs that must be reimbursed immediately.
              4. Adjustments of Billed Central Services
              Billing rates used to charge Federal awards must be based on the estimated costs of providing the services, including an estimate of the allocable central service costs. A comparison of the revenue generated by each billed service (including total revenues whether or not billed or collected) to the actual allowable costs of the service will be made at least annually, and an adjustment will be made for the difference between the revenue and the allowable costs. These adjustments will be made through one of the following adjustment methods: (a) A cash refund including earned or imputed interest from the date of transfer and debt interest, if applicable, chargeable in accordance with applicable Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs regulations to the Federal Government for the Federal share of the adjustment, (b) credits to the amounts charged to the individual programs, (c) adjustments to future billing rates, or (d) adjustments to allocated central service costs. Adjustments to allocated central services will not be permitted where the total amount of the adjustment for a particular service (Federal share and non-Federal) share exceeds $500,000. Adjustment methods may include, at the option of the cognizant agency, earned or imputed interest from the date of expenditure and delinquent debt interest, if applicable, chargeable in accordance with applicable cognizant agency claims collection regulations.
              5. Records Retention
              All central service cost allocation plans and related documentation used as a basis for claiming costs under Federal awards must be retained for audit in accordance with the records retention requirements contained in Subpart D of part 75.
              6. Appeals
              If a dispute arises in the negotiation of a plan between the cognizant agency for indirect costs and the governmental unit, the dispute must be resolved in accordance with the appeals procedures of the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              7. OMB Assistance
              To the extent that problems are encountered among the Federal agencies or governmental units in connection with the negotiation and approval process, OMB will lend assistance, as required, to resolve such problems in a timely manner.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3019, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. VI
              Appendix VI to Part 75—Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plans
              A. General
              Federally-financed programs administered by state public assistance agencies are funded predominately by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). In support of its stewardship requirements, HHS has published requirements for the development, documentation, submission, negotiation, and approval of public assistance cost allocation plans in Subpart E of 45 CFR part 95. All administrative costs (direct and indirect) are normally charged to Federal awards by implementing the public assistance cost allocation plan. This Appendix extends these requirements to all Federal awarding agencies whose programs are administered by a state public assistance agency. Major federally-financed programs typically administered by state public assistance agencies include: Temporary Aid for Needy Families (TANF), Medicaid, Food Stamps, Child Support Enforcement, Adoption Assistance and Foster Care, and Social Services Block Grant.
              B. Definitions
              1. State public assistance agency means a state agency administering or supervising the administration of one or more public assistance programs operated by the state as identified in Subpart E of 45 CFR part 95. For the purpose of this Appendix, these programs include all programs administered by the state public assistance agency.
              2. State public assistance agency costs means all costs incurred by, or allocable to, the state public assistance agency, except expenditures for financial assistance, medical contractor payments, food stamps, and payments for services and goods provided directly to program recipients.
              C. Policy

              State public assistance agencies will develop, document and implement, and the Federal Government will review, negotiate, and approve, public assistance cost allocation plans in accordance with Subpart E of 45 CFR part 95. The plan will include all programs administered by the state public assistance agency. Where a letter of approval or disapproval is transmitted to a state public assistance agency in accordance with Subpart E, the letter will apply to all Federal agencies and programs. The remaining sections of this Appendix (except for the requirement for certification) summarize the provisions of Subpart E of 45 CFR part 95.
              D. Submission, Documentation, and Approval of Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plans
              1. State public assistance agencies are required to promptly submit amendments to the cost allocation plan to HHS for review and approval.
              2. Under the coordination process outlined in section E, Review of Implementation of Approved Plans, affected Federal agencies will review all new plans and plan amendments and provide comments, as appropriate, to HHS. The effective date of the plan or plan amendment will be the first day of the calendar quarter following the event that required the amendment, unless another date is specifically approved by HHS. HHS, as the cognizant agency for indirect costs acting on behalf of all affected Federal agencies, will, as necessary, conduct negotiations with the state public assistance agency and will inform the state agency of the action taken on the plan or plan amendment.
              E. Review of Implementation of Approved Plans
              1. Since public assistance cost allocation plans are of a narrative nature, the review during the plan approval process consists of evaluating the appropriateness of the proposed groupings of costs (cost centers) and the related allocation bases. As such, the Federal Government needs some assurance that the cost allocation plan has been implemented as approved. This is accomplished by reviews by the Federal awarding agencies, single audits, or audits conducted by the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              2. Where inappropriate charges affecting more than one Federal awarding agency are identified, the cognizant HHS cost negotiation office will be advised and will take the lead in resolving the issue(s) as provided for in Subpart E of 45 CFR part 95.
              3. If a dispute arises in the negotiation of a plan or from a disallowance involving two or more Federal awarding agencies, the dispute must be resolved in accordance with the appeals procedures set out in 45 CFR part 16. Disputes involving only one Federal awarding agency will be resolved in accordance with the Federal awarding agency's appeal process.
              4. To the extent that problems are encountered among the Federal awarding agencies or governmental units in connection with the negotiation and approval process, the Office of Management and Budget will lend assistance, as required, to resolve such problems in a timely manner.
              F. Unallowable Costs
              Claims developed under approved cost allocation plans will be based on allowable costs as identified in this Part. Where unallowable costs have been claimed and reimbursed, they will be refunded to the program that reimbursed the unallowable cost using one of the following methods: (a) A cash refund, (b) offset to a subsequent claim, or (c) credits to the amounts charged to individual Federal awards. Cash refunds, offsets, and credits may include at the option of the cognizant agency for indirect cost, earned or imputed interest from the date of expenditure and delinquent debt interest, if applicable, chargeable in accordance with applicable cognizant agency for indirect cost claims collection regulations.
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. VII
              Appendix VII to Part 75—States and Local Government and Indian Tribe Indirect Cost Proposals
              A. General
              1. Indirect costs are those that have been incurred for common or joint purposes. These costs benefit more than one cost objective and cannot be readily identified with a particular final cost objective without effort disproportionate to the results achieved. After direct costs have been determined and assigned directly to Federal awards and other activities as appropriate, indirect costs are those remaining to be allocated to benefitted cost objectives. A cost may not be allocated to a Federal award as an indirect cost if any other cost incurred for the same purpose, in like circumstances, has been assigned to a Federal award as a direct cost.
              2. Indirect costs include (a) the indirect costs originating in each department or agency of the governmental unit carrying out Federal awards and (b) the costs of central governmental services distributed through the central service cost allocation plan (as described in Appendix V to part) and not otherwise treated as direct costs.

              3. Indirect costs are normally charged to Federal awards by the use of an indirect cost rate. A separate indirect cost rate(s) is usually necessary for each department or agency of the governmental unit claiming indirect costs under Federal awards. Guidelines and illustrations of indirect cost proposals are provided in a brochure published by the Department of Health and Human Services entitled “A Guide for States and Local Government Agencies: Cost Principles and Procedures for Establishing Cost Allocation Plans and Indirect Cost Rates for Grants and Contracts with the Federal Government.” A copy of this brochure may be obtained from the HHS' Cost Allocation Services or at their Web site at https://rates.psc.gov.
              4. Because of the diverse characteristics and accounting practices of governmental units, the types of costs which may be classified as indirect costs cannot be specified in all situations. However, typical examples of indirect costs may include certain state/local-wide central service costs, general administration of the non-Federal entity accounting and personnel services performed within the non-Federal entity, depreciation on buildings and equipment, the costs of operating and maintaining facilities.
              5. This Appendix does not apply to state public assistance agencies. These agencies should refer instead to Appendix VI to part 75.
              B. Definitions
              1. Base means the accumulated direct costs (normally either total direct salaries and wages or total direct costs exclusive of any extraordinary or distorting expenditures) used to distribute indirect costs to individual Federal awards. The direct cost base selected should result in each Federal award bearing a fair share of the indirect costs in reasonable relation to the benefits received from the costs.
              2. Base period for the allocation of indirect costs is the period in which such costs are incurred and accumulated for allocation to activities performed in that period. The base period normally should coincide with the governmental unit's fiscal year, but in any event, must be so selected as to avoid inequities in the allocation of costs.
              3. Cognizant agency for indirect costs means the Federal agency responsible for reviewing and approving the governmental unit's indirect cost rate(s) on the behalf of the Federal Government. The cognizant agency for indirect costs assignment is described in Appendix V, section F.
              4. Final rate means an indirect cost rate applicable to a specified past period which is based on the actual allowable costs of the period. A final audited rate is not subject to adjustment.
              5. Fixed rate means an indirect cost rate which has the same characteristics as a predetermined rate, except that the difference between the estimated costs and the actual, allowable costs of the period covered by the rate is carried forward as an adjustment to the rate computation of a subsequent period.
              6. Indirect cost pool is the accumulated costs that jointly benefit two or more programs or other cost objectives.
              7. Indirect cost rate is a device for determining in a reasonable manner the proportion of indirect costs each program should bear. It is the ratio (expressed as a percentage) of the indirect costs to a direct cost base.
              8. Indirect cost rate proposal means the documentation prepared by a governmental unit or subdivision thereof to substantiate its request for the establishment of an indirect cost rate.
              9. Predetermined rate means an indirect cost rate, applicable to a specified current or future period, usually the governmental unit's fiscal year. This rate is based on an estimate of the costs to be incurred during the period. Except under very unusual circumstances, a predetermined rate is not subject to adjustment. (Because of legal constraints, predetermined rates are not permitted for Federal contracts; they may, however, be used for grants or cooperative agreements.) Predetermined rates may not be used by governmental units that have not submitted and negotiated the rate with the cognizant agency for indirect costs. In view of the potential advantages offered by this procedure, negotiation of predetermined rates for indirect costs for a period of two to four years should be the norm in those situations where the cost experience and other pertinent facts available are deemed sufficient to enable the parties involved to reach an informed judgment as to the probable level of indirect costs during the ensuing accounting periods.
              10. Provisional rate means a temporary indirect cost rate applicable to a specified period which is used for funding, interim reimbursement, and reporting indirect costs on Federal awards pending the establishment of a “final” rate for that period.
              C. Allocation of Indirect Costs and Determination of Indirect Cost Rates
              1. General
              a. Where a governmental unit's department or agency has only one major function, or where all its major functions benefit from the indirect costs to approximately the same degree, the allocation of indirect costs and the computation of an indirect cost rate may be accomplished through simplified allocation procedures as described in subsection 2.
              b. Where a governmental unit's department or agency has several major functions which benefit from its indirect costs in varying degrees, the allocation of indirect costs may require the accumulation of such costs into separate cost groupings which then are allocated individually to benefitted functions by means of a base which best measures the relative degree of benefit. The indirect costs allocated to each function are then distributed to individual Federal awards and other activities included in that function by means of an indirect cost rate(s).

              c. Specific methods for allocating indirect costs and computing indirect cost rates along with the conditions under which each method should be used are described in subsections 2, 3 and 4.
              
              2. Simplified Method
              a. Where a non-Federal entity's major functions benefit from its indirect costs to approximately the same degree, the allocation of indirect costs may be accomplished by (1) classifying the non-Federal entity's total costs for the base period as either direct or indirect, and (2) dividing the total allowable indirect costs (net of applicable credits) by an equitable distribution base. The result of this process is an indirect cost rate which is used to distribute indirect costs to individual Federal awards. The rate should be expressed as the percentage which the total amount of allowable indirect costs bears to the base selected. This method should also be used where a governmental unit's department or agency has only one major function encompassing a number of individual projects or activities, and may be used where the level of Federal awards to that department or agency is relatively small.
              b. Both the direct costs and the indirect costs must exclude capital expenditures and unallowable costs. However, unallowable costs must be included in the direct costs if they represent activities to which indirect costs are properly allocable.
              c. The distribution base may be (1) total direct costs (excluding capital expenditures and other distorting items, such as pass-through funds, subawards in excess of $25,000, participant support costs, etc.), (2) direct salaries and wages, or (3) another base which results in an equitable distribution.
              3. Multiple Allocation Base Method
              a. Where a non-Federal entity's indirect costs benefit its major functions in varying degrees, such costs must be accumulated into separate cost groupings. Each grouping must then be allocated individually to benefitted functions by means of a base which best measures the relative benefits.
              b. The cost groupings should be established so as to permit the allocation of each grouping on the basis of benefits provided to the major functions. Each grouping should constitute a pool of expenses that are of like character in terms of the functions they benefit and in terms of the allocation base which best measures the relative benefits provided to each function. The number of separate groupings should be held within practical limits, taking into consideration the materiality of the amounts involved and the degree of precision needed.
              c. Actual conditions must be taken into account in selecting the base to be used in allocating the expenses in each grouping to benefitted functions. When an allocation can be made by assignment of a cost grouping directly to the function benefitted, the allocation must be made in that manner. When the expenses in a grouping are more general in nature, the allocation should be made through the use of a selected base which produces results that are equitable to both the Federal Government and the governmental unit. In general, any cost element or related factor associated with the governmental unit's activities is potentially adaptable for use as an allocation base provided that: (1) It can readily be expressed in terms of dollars or other quantitative measures (total direct costs, direct salaries and wages, staff hours applied, square feet used, hours of usage, number of documents processed, population served, and the like), and (2) it is common to the benefitted functions during the base period.
              d. Except where a special indirect cost rate(s) is required in accordance with paragraph (C)(4) of this Appendix, the separate groupings of indirect costs allocated to each major function must be aggregated and treated as a common pool for that function. The costs in the common pool must then be distributed to individual Federal awards included in that function by use of a single indirect cost rate.
              e. The distribution base used in computing the indirect cost rate for each function may be (1) total direct costs (excluding capital expenditures and other distorting items such as pass-through funds, subawards in excess of $25,000, participant support costs, etc.), (2) direct salaries and wages, or (3) another base which results in an equitable distribution. An indirect cost rate should be developed for each separate indirect cost pool developed. The rate in each case should be stated as the percentage relationship between the particular indirect cost pool and the distribution base identified with that pool.
              4. Special Indirect Cost Rates

              a. In some instances, a single indirect cost rate for all activities of a non-Federal entity or for each major function of the agency may not be appropriate. It may not take into account those different factors which may substantially affect the indirect costs applicable to a particular program or group of programs. The factors may include the physical location of the work, the level of administrative support required, the nature of the facilities or other resources employed, the organizational arrangements used, or any combination thereof. When a particular Federal award is carried out in an environment which appears to generate a significantly different level of indirect costs, provisions should be made for a separate indirect cost pool applicable to that Federal award. The separate indirect cost pool should be developed during the course of the regular allocation process, and the separate indirect cost rate resulting therefrom should be used, provided that: (1) The rate differs significantly from the rate which would have been developed under paragraphs (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this Appendix, and (2) the Federal award to which the rate would apply is material in amount.
              b. Where Federal statutes restrict the reimbursement of certain indirect costs, it may be necessary to develop a special rate for the affected Federal award. Where a “restricted rate” is required, the same procedure for developing a non-restricted rate will be used except for the additional step of the elimination from the indirect cost pool those costs for which the law prohibits reimbursement.
              D. Submission and Documentation of Proposals
              1. Submission of Indirect Cost Rate Proposals
              a. All departments or agencies of the governmental unit desiring to claim indirect costs under Federal awards must prepare an indirect cost rate proposal and related documentation to support those costs. The proposal and related documentation must be retained for audit in accordance with the records retention requirements contained in § 75.361.
              b. A governmental department or agency unit that receives more than $35 million in direct Federal funding must submit its indirect cost rate proposal to its cognizant agency for indirect costs. Other governmental department or agency must develop an indirect cost proposal in accordance with the requirements of this Part and maintain the proposal and related supporting documentation for audit. These governmental departments or agencies are not required to submit their proposals unless they are specifically requested to do so by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. Where a non-Federal entity only receives funds as a subrecipient, the pass-through entity will be responsible for negotiating and/or monitoring the subrecipient's indirect costs.
              c. Each Indian tribal government desiring reimbursement of indirect costs must submit its indirect cost proposal to the Department of the Interior (its cognizant agency for indirect costs).
              d. Indirect cost proposals must be developed (and, when required, submitted) within six months after the close of the governmental unit's fiscal year, unless an exception is approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. If the proposed central service cost allocation plan for the same period has not been approved by that time, the indirect cost proposal may be prepared including an amount for central services that is based on the latest federally-approved central service cost allocation plan. The difference between these central service amounts and the amounts ultimately approved will be compensated for by an adjustment in a subsequent period.
              2. Documentation of Proposals
              The following must be included with each indirect cost proposal:
              a. The rates proposed, including subsidiary work sheets and other relevant data, cross referenced and reconciled to the financial data noted in subsection b. Allocated central service costs will be supported by the summary table included in the approved central service cost allocation plan. This summary table is not required to be submitted with the indirect cost proposal if the central service cost allocation plan for the same fiscal year has been approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs and is available to the funding agency.
              b. A copy of the financial data (financial statements, comprehensive annual financial report, executive budgets, accounting reports, etc.) upon which the rate is based. Adjustments resulting from the use of unaudited data will be recognized, where appropriate, by the Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs in a subsequent proposal.
              c. The approximate amount of direct base costs incurred under Federal awards. These costs should be broken out between salaries and wages and other direct costs.
              d. A chart showing the organizational structure of the agency during the period for which the proposal applies, along with a functional statement(s) noting the duties and/or responsibilities of all units that comprise the agency. (Once this is submitted, only revisions need be submitted with subsequent proposals.)
              3. Required Certification.
              Each indirect cost rate proposal must be accompanied by a certification in the following form:
              Certificate of Indirect Costs
              This is to certify that I have reviewed the indirect cost rate proposal submitted herewith and to the best of my knowledge and belief:
              (1) All costs included in this proposal [identify date] to establish billing or final indirect costs rates for [identify period covered by rate] are allowable in accordance with the requirements of the Federal award(s) to which they apply and the provisions of this 45 CFR part 75. Unallowable costs have been adjusted for in allocating costs as indicated in the indirect cost proposal.

              (2) All costs included in this proposal are properly allocable to Federal awards on the basis of a beneficial or causal relationship between the expenses incurred and the agreements to which they are allocated in accordance with applicable requirements. Further, the same costs that have been treated as indirect costs have not been claimed as direct costs. Similar types of costs have been accounted for consistently and the Federal Government will be notified of any accounting changes that would affect the predetermined rate.
              I declare that the foregoing is true and correct.
              Governmental Unit:
              Signature:
              Name of Official:
              Title:
              Date of Execution:
              E. Negotiation and Approval of Rates
              1. Indirect cost rates will be reviewed, negotiated, and approved by the cognizant agency on a timely basis. Once a rate has been agreed upon, it will be accepted and used by all Federal agencies unless prohibited or limited by statute. Where a Federal awarding agency has reason to believe that special operating factors affecting its Federal awards necessitate special indirect cost rates, the funding agency will, prior to the time the rates are negotiated, notify the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              2. The use of predetermined rates, if allowed, is encouraged where the cognizant agency for indirect costs has reasonable assurance based on past experience and reliable projection of the non-Federal entity's costs, that the rate is not likely to exceed a rate based on actual costs. Long-term agreements utilizing predetermined rates extending over two or more years are encouraged, where appropriate.
              3. The results of each negotiation must be formalized in a written agreement between the cognizant agency for indirect costs and the governmental unit. This agreement will be subject to re-opening if the agreement is subsequently found to violate a statute, or the information upon which the plan was negotiated is later found to be materially incomplete or inaccurate. The agreed upon rates must be made available to all Federal agencies for their use.
              4. Refunds must be made if proposals are later found to have included costs that (a) are unallowable (i) as specified by law or regulation, (ii) as identified in § 75.420 of this part, or (iii) by the terms and conditions of Federal awards, or (b) are unallowable because they are clearly not allocable to Federal awards. These adjustments or refunds will be made regardless of the type of rate negotiated (predetermined, final, fixed, or provisional).
              F. Other Policies
              1. Fringe Benefit Rates

              If overall fringe benefit rates are not approved for the governmental unit as part of the central service cost allocation plan, these rates will be reviewed, negotiated and approved for individual recipient agencies during the indirect cost negotiation process. In these cases, a proposed fringe benefit rate computation should accompany the indirect cost proposal. If fringe benefit rates are not used at the recipient agency level (i.e., the agency specifically identifies fringe benefit costs to individual employees), the governmental unit should so advise the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              2. Billed Services Provided by the Recipient Agency

              In some cases, governmental departments or agencies (components of the governmental unit) provide and bill for services similar to those covered by central service cost allocation plans (e.g., computer centers). Where this occurs, the governmental departments or agencies (components of the governmental unit) should be guided by the requirements in Appendix V relating to the development of billing rates and documentation requirements, and should advise the cognizant agency for indirect costs of any billed services. Reviews of these types of services (including reviews of costing/billing methodology, profits or losses, etc.) will be made on a case-by-case basis as warranted by the circumstances involved.
              3. Indirect Cost Allocations Not Using Rates
              In certain situations, governmental departments or agencies (components of the governmental unit), because of the nature of their Federal awards, may be required to develop a cost allocation plan that distributes indirect (and, in some cases, direct) costs to the specific funding sources. In these cases, a narrative cost allocation methodology should be developed, documented, maintained for audit, or submitted, as appropriate, to the cognizant agency for indirect costs for review, negotiation, and approval.
              4. Appeals
              If a dispute arises in a negotiation of an indirect cost rate (or other rate) between the cognizant agency for indirect costs and the governmental unit, the dispute must be resolved in accordance with the appeals procedures of the cognizant agency for indirect costs.
              5. Collection of Unallowable Costs and Erroneous Payments

              Costs specifically identified as unallowable and charged to Federal awards either directly or indirectly will be refunded (including interest chargeable in accordance with applicable Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs regulations).
              
              6. OMB Assistance
              To the extent that problems are encountered among the Federal agencies or governmental units in connection with the negotiation and approval process, OMB will lend assistance, as required, to resolve such problems in a timely manner.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3019, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. VIII
              Appendix VIII to Part 75—Nonprofit Organizations Exempted from Subpart E of Part 75
              1. Advance Technology Institute (ATI), Charleston, South Carolina
              2. Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, California
              3. American Institutes of Research (AIR), Washington, DC
              4. Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois
              5. Atomic Casualty Commission, Washington, DC
              6. Battelle Memorial Institute, Headquartered in Columbus, Ohio
              7. Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York
              8. Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Incorporated, Cambridge, Massachusetts
              9. CNA Corporation (CNAC), Alexandria, Virginia
              10. Environmental Institute of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
              11. Georgia Institute of Technology/Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation/Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, Georgia
              12. Hanford Environmental Health Foundation, Richland, Washington
              13. IIT Research Institute, Chicago, Illinois
              14. Institute of Gas Technology, Chicago, Illinois
              15. Institute for Defense Analysis, Alexandria, Virginia
              16. LMI, McLean, Virginia
              17. Mitre Corporation, Bedford, Massachusetts
              18. Noblis, Inc., Falls Church, Virginia
              19. National Radiological Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, West Virginia
              20. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado
              21. Oak Ridge Associated Universities, Oak Ridge, Tennessee
              22. Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, California
              23. Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
              24. Riverside Research Institute, New York, New York
              25. South Carolina Research Authority (SCRA), Charleston, South Carolina
              26. Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, Alabama
              27. Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas
              28. SRI International, Menlo Park, California
              29. Syracuse Research Corporation, Syracuse, New York
              30. Universities Research Association, Incorporated (National Acceleration Lab), Argonne, Illinois
              31. Urban Institute, Washington DC
              32. Non-profit insurance companies, such as Blue Cross and Blue Shield Organizations
              33. Other non-profit organizations as negotiated with Federal awarding agencies
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3019, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. IX
              Appendix IX to Part 75—Principles for Determining Costs Applicable to Research and Development Under Grants and Contracts with Hospitals
              A. Purpose and Scope
              1. Objectives
              This appendix provides principles for determining the costs applicable to research and development work performed by hospitals under grants and contracts with the Department of Health and Human Services. These principles are confined to the subject of cost determination and make no attempt to identify the circumstances or dictate the extent of hospital participation in the financing of a particular research or development project. The principles are designed to provide recognition of the full allocated costs of such research work under generally accepted accounting principles. These principles will be applicable to both proprietary and non-profit hospitals. No provision for profit or other increment above cost is provided for in these principles. However, this is not to be interpreted as precluding a negotiated fee between contracting parties when a fee is appropriate.
              2. Policy Guides
              The successful application of these principles requires development of mutual understanding between representatives of hospitals and of the Department of Health and Human Services as to their scope, applicability and interpretation. It is recognized that:
              a. The arrangements for hospital participation in the financing of a research and development project are properly subject to negotiation between the agency and the hospital concerned in accordance with such Government-wide criteria as may be applicable.

              b. Each hospital, possessing its own unique combination of staff, facilities and experience, should be encouraged to conduct research in a manner consonant with its own institutional philosophies and objectives.
              
              c. Each hospital in the fulfillment of its contractual obligations should be expected to employ sound management practices.
              d. The application of the principles established herein shall be in conformance with the generally accepted accounting practices of hospitals.
              e. Hospitals receive reimbursements from the Federal Government for differing types of services under various programs such as support of Research and Development (including discrete clinical centers) Health Services Projects, Medicare, etc. It is essential that consistent procedures for determining reimbursable costs for similar services be employed without regard to program differences. Therefore, both the direct and indirect costs of research programs must be identified as a cost center(s) for the cost finding and step-down requirements of the Medicare program, or in its absence the Medicaid program.
              3. Application
              All operating agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services that sponsor research and development work in hospitals will apply these principles and related policy guides in determining the costs incurred for such work under grants and cost-reimbursement type contracts and subcontracts. These principles will also be used as a guide in the pricing of fixed-price contracts and subcontracts.
              B. Definition of Terms
              1. Organized research means all research activities of a hospital that may be identified whether the support for such research is from a federal, non-federal or internal source.
              2. Departmental research means research activities that are not separately budgeted and accounted for. Such work, which includes all research activities not encompassed under the term organized research, is regarded for purposes of this document as a part of the patient care activities of the hospital.
              3. Research agreement means any valid arrangement to perform federally-sponsored research or development including grants, cost-reimbursement type contracts, cost-reimbursement type subcontracts, and fixed-price contracts and subcontracts.
              4. Instruction and training means the formal or informal programs of educating and training technical and professional health services personnel, primarily medical and nursing training. This activity, if separately budgeted or identifiable with specific costs, should be considered as a cost objective for purposes of indirect cost allocations and the development of patient care costs.
              5. Other hospital activities means all organized activities of a hospital not immediately related to the patient care, research, and instructional and training functions which produce identifiable revenue from the performance of these activities. If a non-related activity does not produce identifiable revenue, it may be necessary to allocate this expense using an appropriate basis. In such a case, the activity may be included as an allocable cost (See paragraph C.4 below.) Also included under this definition is any category of cost treated as “Unallowable,” provided such category of cost identifies a function or activity to which a portion of the institution's indirect cost (as defined in paragraph E.1.) are properly allocable.
              6. Patient care means those departments or cost centers which render routine or ancillary services to in-patients and/or out-patients. As used in paragraph I.2.w, it means the cost of these services applicable to patients involved in research programs.
              7. Allocation means the process by which the indirect costs are assigned as between:
              a. Organized research,
              b. Patient care including departmental research.
              c. Instruction and training, and
              d. Other hospital activities.
              8. Cost center means an identifiable department or area (including research) within the hospital which has been assigned an account number in the hospital accounting system for the purpose of accumulating expense by department or area.
              9. Cost finding is the process of recasting the data derived from the accounts ordinarily kept by a hospital to ascertain costs of the various types of services rendered. It is the determination of direct costs by specific identification and the proration of indirect costs by allocation.
              10. Step down is a cost finding method that recognizes that services rendered by certain nonrevenue-producing departments or centers are utilized by certain other nonrevenue producing centers as well as by the revenue-producing centers. All costs of nonrevenue-producing centers are allocated to all centers which they serve, regardless of whether or not these centers produce revenue. Following the apportionment of the cost of the nonrevenue-producing center, that center will be considered closed and no further costs are apportioned to that center.
              11. Scatter bed is a bed assigned to a research patient based on availability. Research patients occupying these beds are not physically segregated from nonresearch patients occupying beds. Scatter beds are geographically dispersed among all the beds available for use in the hospital. There are no special features attendant to a scatter bed that distinguishes it from others that could just as well have been occupied.
              12. Discrete bed is a bed or beds that have been set aside for occupancy by research patients and are physically segregated from other hospital beds in an environment that permits an easily ascertainable allocation of costs associated with the space they occupy and the services they generate.
              C. Basic Considerations
              1. Composition of Total Costs
              The cost of a research agreement is comprised of the allowable direct costs incident to its performance plus the allocable portion of the allowable indirect costs of the hospital less applicable credits. (See paragraph C.5.)
              2. Factors Affecting Allowability of Costs
              The tests of allowability of costs under these principles are:
              a. They must be reasonable.
              b. They must be assigned to research agreements under the standards and methods provided herein.
              c. They must be accorded consistent treatment through application of those generally accepted accounting principles appropriate to the circumstances (See paragraph A.2.e.) and
              d. They must conform to any limitations or exclusions set forth in these principles or in the research agreement as to types or amounts of cost items.
              3. Reasonable Costs
              A cost may be considered reasonable if the nature of the goods or services acquired or applied, and the amount involved therefor reflect the action that a prudent person would have taken under the circumstances prevailing at the time the decision to incur the cost was made. Major considerations involved in the determination of the reasonableness of a cost are:
              a. Whether or not the cost is of a type generally recognized as necessary for the operation of the hospital or the performance of the research agreement,
              b. The restraints or requirements imposed by such factors as arm's length bargaining, federal and state laws and regulations, and research agreement terms and conditions,
              c. Whether or not the individuals concerned acted with due prudence in the circumstances, considering their responsibilities to the hospital, its patients, its employees, its students, the Government, and the public at large, and
              d. The extent to which the actions taken with respect to the incurrence of the cost are consistent with established hospital policies and practices applicable to the work of the hospital generally, including Government research.
              4. Allocable Costs
              a. A cost is allocable to a particular cost center (i.e., a specific function, project, research agreement, department, or the like) if the goods or services involved are chargeable or assignable to such cost center in accordance with relative benefits received or other equitable relationship. Subject to the foregoing, a cost is allocable to a research agreement if it is incurred solely to advance the work under the research agreement; or it benefits both the research agreement and other work of the hospital in proportions that can be approximated through use of reasonable methods; or it is necessary to the overall operation of the hospital and, in light of the standards provided in this chapter, is deemed to be assignable in part to organized research. Where the purchase of equipment or other capital items are specifically authorized under a research agreement, the amounts thus authorized for such purchases are allocable to the research agreement regardless of the use that may subsequently be made of the equipment or other capital items involved.
              b. Any costs allocable to a particular research agreement under the standards provided in these principles may not be shifted to other research agreements in order to meet deficiencies caused by overruns or other fund considerations, to avoid restrictions imposed by law or by terms of the research agreement, or for other reasons of convenience.
              5. Applicable Credits
              a. The term applicable credits refers to those receipts or negative expenditure types of transactions which operate to offset or reduce expense items that are allocable to research agreements as direct or indirect costs as outlined in paragraph E.1. Typical examples of such transactions are: Purchase discounts, rebates, or allowances; recoveries or indemnities on losses; sales of scrap or incidental services; tuition; adjustments of overpayments or erroneous charges; and services rendered to patients admitted to federally funded clinical research centers, primarily for care though also participating in research protocols.

              b. In some instances, the amounts received from the Federal Government to finance hospital activities or service operations should be treated as applicable credits. Specifically, the concept of netting such credit items against related expenditures should be applied by the hospital in determining the rates or amounts to be charged to government research for services rendered whenever the facilities or other resources used in providing such services have been financed directly, in whole or in part, by federal funds. Thus, where such items are provided for or benefit a particular hospital activity, i.e., patient care, research, instruction and training, or other, they should be treated as an offset to the indirect costs apportioned to that activity. Where the benefits are common to all hospital activities they should be treated as a credit to the total indirect cost pool before allocation to the various cost objectives.
              D. Direct Costs
              1. General
              Direct costs are those that can be identified specifically with a particular cost center. For this purpose, the term cost center refers not only to the ultimate centers against which costs are finally lodged such as research agreements, but also to other established cost centers such as the individual accounts for recording particular objects or items of expense, and the separate account groupings designed to record the expenses incurred by individual organizational units, functions, projects and the like. In general, the administrative functions and service activities described in paragraph VI are identifiable as separate cost centers, and the expenses associated with such centers become eligible in due course for distribution as indirect costs of research agreements and other ultimate cost centers.
              2. Application to Research Agreements
              Identifiable benefit to the research work rather than the nature of the goods and services involved is the determining factor in distinguishing direct from indirect costs of research agreements. Typical of transactions chargeable to a research agreement as direct costs are the compensation of employees for the time or effort devoted to the performance of work under the research agreement, including related staff benefit and pension plan costs to the extent that such items are consistently accorded to all employees and treated by the hospital as direct rather than indirect costs (see paragraph E.2.d(2)); the costs of materials consumed or expended in the performance of such work; and other items of expense incurred for the research agreement, such as extraordinary utility consumption. The cost of materials supplied from stock or services rendered by specialized facilities or other institutional service operations may be included as direct costs of research agreements provided such items are consistently treated by the institution as direct rather than indirect costs and are charged under a recognized method of costing or pricing designed to recover only the actual direct and indirect costs of such material or service and conforming to generally accepted cost accounting practices consistently followed by the institution.
              E. Indirect Costs
              1. General
              Indirect costs are those that have been incurred for common or joint objectives, and thus are not readily subject to treatment as direct costs of research agreements or other ultimate or revenue producing cost centers. In hospitals such costs normally are classified but not necessarily restricted to the following functional categories: Depreciation; Administrative and General (including fringe benefits if not charged directly); Operation of Plant; Maintenance of Plant; Laundry and Linen Service; Housekeeping; Dietary; Maintenance of Personnel; and Medical Records and Library.
              2. Criteria for Distribution
              a. Base period.
              
              A base period for distribution of indirect costs is the period during which such costs are incurred and accumulated for distribution to work performed within that period. The base period normally should coincide with the fiscal year established by the hospital, but in any event the base period should be so selected as to avoid inequities in the distribution of costs.
              b. Need for cost groupings.
              
              The overall objective of the allocation process is to distribute the indirect costs described in paragraph F. to organized research, patient care, instruction and training, and other hospital activities in reasonable proportions consistent with the nature and extent of the use of the hospital's resources by research personnel, medical staff, patients, students, and other personnel or organizations. In order to achieve this objective with reasonable precision, it may be necessary to provide for selective distribution by establishing separate groupings of cost within one or more of the functional categories of indirect costs referred to in paragraph E.1. In general, the cost groupings established within a functional category should constitute, in each case, a pool of those items of expense that are considered to be of like character in terms of their relative contribution to (or degree of remoteness from) the particular cost centers to which distribution is appropriate. Each such pool or cost grouping should then be distributed individually to the related cost centers, using the distribution base or method most appropriate in the light of the guides set out in 2.c. below. While this paragraph places primary emphasis on a step-down method of indirect cost computation, paragraph H. provides an alternate method which may be used under certain conditions.
              c. Selection of distribution method.
              

              Actual conditions must be taken into account in selecting the method or base to be used in distributing to related cost centers the expenses assembled under each of the individual cost groups established as indicated under 2.b. above. Where a distribution can be made by assignment of a cost grouping directly to the area benefited, the distribution should be made in that manner. Care should be given, however, to eliminate similar or duplicative costs from any other distribution made to this area. Where the expenses under a cost grouping are more general in nature, the distribution to related cost centers should be made through use of a selected base which will produce results which are equitable to both the Government and the hospital. In general, any cost element or cost-related factor associated with the hospital's work is potentially adaptable for use as a distribution base provided:
              (1) It can readily be expressed in terms of dollars or other quantitative measure (total direct expenditures, direct salaries, man-hours applied, square feet utilized, hours of usage, number of documents processed, population served, and the like); and
              (2) It is common to the related cost centers during the base period. The essential consideration in selection of the distribution base in each instance is that it be the one best suited for assigning the pool of costs to related cost centers in accord with the relative benefits derived; the traceable cause and effect relationship; or logic and reason, where neither benefit nor cause and effect relationship is determinable.
              d. General consideration on cost groupings.
              
              The extent to which separate cost groupings and selective distribution would be appropriate at a hospital is a matter of judgment to be determined on a case-by-case basis. Typical situations which may warrant the establishment of two or more separate cost groups (based on account classification or analysis) within a functional category include but are not limited to the following:
              (1) Where certain items or categories of expense relate solely to one of the major divisions of the hospital (patient care, sponsored research, instruction and training, or other hospital activities) or to any two but not all, such expenses should be set aside as a separate cost grouping for direct assignment or selective distribution in accordance with the guides provided in 2.b. and 2.c.above.
              (2) Where any types of expense ordinary treated as indirect cost as outlined in paragraph are charged to research agreements as direct costs, the similar type expenses applicable to other activities of the institution must through separate cost grouping be excluded from the indirect costs allocable to research agreements.
              (3) Where it is determined that certain expenses are for the support of a service unit or facility whose output is susceptible of measurement on a workload or other quantitative basis, such expenses should be set aside as a separate cost grouping for distribution on such basis to organized research and other hospital activities.
              (4) Where organized activities (including identifiable segments of organized research as well as the activities cited inB.5.) provide their own purchasing, personnel administration, building maintenance, or housekeeping or similar service, the distribution of such elements of indirect cost to such activities should be accomplished through cost grouping which includes only that portion of central indirect costs (such as for overall management) which are properly allocable to such activities.
              (5) Where the hospital elects to treat as indirect charges the costs of pension plans and other staff benefits, such costs should be set aside as a separate cost grouping for selective distribution to related cost centers, including organized research.
              (6) Where the hospital is affiliated with a medical school or some other institution which performs organized research on the hospital's premises, every effort should be made to establish separate cost groupings in the Administrative and General or other applicable category which will reasonably reflect the use of services and facilities by such research. (See also paragraph.)
              e. Materiality.
              
              Where it is determined that the use of separate cost groupings and selective distribution are necessary to produce equitable results, the number of such separate cost groupings within a functional category should be held within practical limits, after taking into consideration the materiality of the amounts involved and the degree of precision attainable through less selective methods of distribution.
              3. Administration of Limitations on Allowances for Indirect Costs
              a. Research grants may be subject to laws and/or administrative regulations that limit the allowance for indirect costs under each such grant to a stated percentage of the direct costs allowed. Agencies that sponsor such grants will establish procedures which will assure that:
              (1) The terms and amount authorized in each case conform with the provisions of paragraphs C, E, and I of these principles as they apply to matters involving the consistent treatment and allowability of individual items of cost; and
              (2) The amount actually allowed for indirect costs under each such research grant does not exceed the maximum allowable under the limitation or the amount otherwise allowable under these principles, whichever is the smaller.
              b. Where the actual allowance for indirect costs on any research grant must be restricted to the smaller of the two alternative amounts referred to in 3.a. above, such alternative amounts should be determined in accordance with the following guides:

              (1) The maximum allowable under the limitation should be established by applying the stated percentage to a direct cost base which shall include all items of expenditure authorized by the sponsoring agency for inclusion as part of the total cost for the direct benefit of the work under the grant; and
              (2) The amount otherwise allowable under these principles should be established by applying the current institutional indirect cost rate to those elements of direct cost which were included in the base on which the rate was computed.
              c. When the maximum amount allowable under a statutory limitation or the terms of a research agreement is less than the amount otherwise allocable as indirect costs under these principles, the amount not recoverable as indirect costs under the research agreement involved may not be shifted to other research agreements.
              F. Identification and Assignment of Indirect Costs
              1. Depreciation or Use Charge
              a. The expenses under this heading should include depreciation (as defined in paragraph I.2.i(1)) on buildings, fixed equipment, and movable equipment, except to the extent purchased through federal funds. Where adequate records for the recording of depreciation are not available, a use charge may be substituted for depreciation (See paragraph I.2.)
              b. The expenses included in this category should be allocated to applicable cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides set forth in paragraph E.2., on a basis that gives primary emphasis to (a) space utilization with respect to depreciation on buildings and fixed equipment; and (b) specific identification of assets and their use with respect to movable equipment as it relates to patient care, organized research, instruction and training, and other hospital activities. Where such records are not sufficient for the purpose of the foregoing, reasonable estimates will suffice as a means for effecting distribution of the amounts involved.
              2. Administration and General Expenses

              a. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred for the administrative offices of the hospital including accounting, personnel, purchasing, information centers, telephone expense, and the like which do not relate solely to any major division of the institution, i.e., solely to patient care, organized research, instruction and training, or other hospital activities.
              b. The expenses included in this category may be allocated on the basis of total expenditures exclusive of capital expenditures, or salaries and wages in situations where the results of the distribution made on this basis are deemed to be equitable both to the Government and the hospital; otherwise the distribution of Administration and General expenses should be made through use of selected bases, applied to separate cost groupings established within this category of expenses in accordance with the guides set out in paragraph E.2.
              3. Operation of Plant
              a. The expenses under this heading are those that have been incurred by a central service organization or at the departmental level for the administration, supervision, and provision of utilities (exclusive of telephone expense) and protective services to the physical plant. They include expenses incurred for such items as power plant operations, general utility costs, elevator operations, protection services, and general parking lots.
              b. The expenses included in this category should be allocated to applicable cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides provided in paragraph E.2., on a basis that gives primary emphasis to space utilization. The allocations should be developed as follows:
              (1) Where actual space and related cost records are available or can readily be developed and maintained without significant change in the accounting practices, the amount distributed should be based on such records;
              (2) Where the space and related cost records maintained are not sufficient for purposes of the foregoing, a reasonable estimate of the proportion of total space assigned to the various costs centers normally will suffice as a means for effecting distribution of the amounts involved; or
              (3) Where it can be demonstrated that an area or volume or space basis of allocation is impractical or inequitable, other bases may be used provided consideration is given to the use of facilities by research personnel and others, including patients.
              4. Maintenance of Plant
              a. The expenses under this heading should include:
              (1) All salaries and wages pertaining to ordinary repair and maintenance work performed by employees on the payroll of the hospital;
              (2) All supplies and parts used in the ordinary repairing and maintaining of buildings and general equipment; and
              (3) Amounts paid to outside concerns for the ordinary repairing and maintaining of buildings and general equipment.
              b. The expenses included in this category should be allocated to applicable cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides provided in paragraph E.2. on a basis that gives primary emphasis to space utilization. The allocations and apportionments should be developed as follows:

              (1) Where actual space and related cost records are available and can readily be developed and maintained without significant change in the accounting practices, the amount distributed should be based on such records;
              (2) Where the space and related cost records maintained are not sufficient for purposes of the foregoing, a reasonable estimate of the proportion of total space assigned to the various cost centers normally will suffice as a means for effecting distribution of the amounts involved; or
              (3) Where it can be demonstrated that an area or volume of space basis of allocation is impractical or inequitable, other basis may be used provided consideration is given to the use of facilities by research personnel and others, including patients.
              5. Laundry and Linen
              a. The expenses under this heading should include:
              (1) Salaries and wages of laundry department employees, seamstresses, clean linen handlers, linen delivery men, etc.;
              (2) Supplies used in connection with the laundry operation and all linens purchased; and
              (3) Amounts paid to outside concerns for purchased laundry and/or linen service.
              b. The expense included in this category should be allocated to related cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides provided in paragraph E.2. on a basis that gives primary emphasis to actual pounds of linen used. The allocations should be developed as follows:
              (1) Where actual poundage and related cost records are available or can readily be developed and maintained without significant change in the accounting practices, the amount distributed should be based on such records;
              (2) Where it can be demonstrated that a poundage basis of allocation is impractical or inequitable other bases may be used provided consideration is given to the use of linen by research personnel and others, including patients.
              6. Housekeeping
              a. The expenses under this heading should include:
              (1) All salaries and wages of the department head, foreman, maids, porters, janitors, wall washers, and other housekeeping employees;
              (2) All supplies used in carrying out the housekeeping functions; and
              (3) Amounts paid to outside concerns for purchased services such as window washing, insect extermination, etc.
              b. The expenses included in this category should be allocated to related cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides provided in paragraph E.2. on a basis that gives primary emphasis to space actually serviced by the housekeeping department. The allocations and apportionments should be developed as follows:
              (1) Where actual space serviced and related cost records are available or can readily be developed and maintained without significant change in the accounting practices, the amount distributed should be based on such records;
              (2) Where the space serviced and related cost records maintained are not sufficient for purposes of the foregoing, a reasonable estimate of the proportion of total space assigned to the various cost centers normally will suffice as a means for effecting distribution of the amounts of housekeeping expenses involved; or
              (3) Where it can be demonstrated that the space serviced basis of allocation is impractical or inequitable, other bases may be used provided consideration is given to the use of housekeeping services by research personnel and others, including patients.
              7. Dietary
              a. These expenses, as used herein, shall mean only the subsidy provided by the hospital to its employees including research personnel through its cafeteria operation. The hospital must be able to demonstrate through the use of proper cost accounting techniques that the cafeteria operates at a loss to the benefit of employees.
              b. The reasonable operating loss of a subsidized cafeteria operation should be allocated to related cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides provided in paragraph E.2. on a basis that gives primary emphasis to number of employees.
              8. Maintenance (Housing) of Personnel
              a. The expenses under this heading should include:
              (1) The salaries and wages of matrons, clerks, and other employees engaged in work in nurses' residences and other employees' quarters;
              (2) All supplies used in connection with the operation of such dormitories; and
              (3) Payments to outside agencies for the rental of houses, apartments, or rooms used by hospital personnel.
              b. The expenses included in this category should be allocated to related cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides provided in paragraph E.2. on a basis that gives primary emphasis to employee utilization of housing facilities. The allocation should be developed as follows:
              (1) Appropriate credit should be given for all payments received from employees or otherwise to reduce the expense to be allocated;

              (2) A net cost per housed employee may then be computed; and
              
              (3) Allocation should be made on a departmental basis based on the number of housed employees in each respective department.
              9. Medical Records and Library
              a. The expenses under this heading should include:
              (1) The salaries and wages of the records librarian, medical librarian, clerks, stenographers, etc.; and
              (2) All supplies such as medical record forms, chart covers, filing supplies, stationery, medical library books, periodicals, etc.
              b. The expenses included in this category should be allocated to related cost centers in a manner consistent with the guides provided in paragraph E.2. on a basis that gives primary emphasis to a special time survey of medical records personnel. If this appears to be impractical or inequitable, other bases may be used provided consideration is given to the use of these facilities by research personnel and others, including patients.
              G. Determination and Application of Indirect Cost Rate or Rates
              1. Indirect Cost Pools
              a. Subject to b. below, indirect costs allocated to organized research should be treated as a common pool, and the costs in such common pool should be distributed to individual research agreements benefiting therefrom on a single rate basis.
              b. In some instances a single rate basis for use on all government research at a hospital may not be appropriate since it would not take into account those different environmental factors which may affect substantially the indirect costs applicable to a particular segment of government research at the institution. For this purpose, a particular segment of government research may be that performed under a single research agreement or it may consist of research under a group of research agreements performed in a common environment. The environmental factors are not limited to the physical location of the work. Other important factors are the level of the administrative support required, the nature of the facilities or other resources employed, the scientific disciplines or technical skills involved, the organizational arrangements used, or any combination thereof. Where a particular segment of government research is performed within an environment which appears to generate a significantly different level of indirect costs, provision should be made for a separate indirect cost pool applicable to such work. An example of this differential may be in the development of a separate indirect cost pool for a clinical research center grant. The separate indirect cost pool should be developed during the course of the regular distribution process, and the separate indirect cost rate resulting therefrom should be utilized provided it is determined that:
              (1) Such indirect cost rate differs significantly from that which would have obtained under a. above; and
              (2) The volume of research work to which such rate would apply is material in relation to other government research at the institution.
              c. It is a common practice for grants or contracts awarded to other institutions, typically University Schools of Medicine, to be performed on hospital premises. In these cases the hospital should develop a separate indirect cost pool applicable to the work under such grants or contracts. This pool should be developed by a selective distribution of only those indirect cost categories which benefit the work performed by the other institution, within the practical limits dictated by available data and the materiality of the amounts involved. Hospital costs determined to be allocable to grants or contracts awarded to another institution may not be recovered as a cost of grants or contracts awarded directly to the hospital.
              2. The Distribution Base
              Preferably, indirect costs allocated to organized research should be distributed to applicable research agreements on the basis of direct salaries and wages. However, where the use of salaries and wages results in an inequitable allocation of costs to the research agreements, total direct costs or a variation thereof, may be used in lieu of salaries and wages. Regardless of the base used, an indirect cost rate should be determined for each of the separate indirect cost pools developed pursuant to paragraph G.1. The rate in each case should be stated as the percentage which the amount of the particular indirect cost pool is of the total direct salaries and wages (or other base selected) for all research agreements identified with such a pool.
              3. Negotiated Lump Sum for Overhead

              A negotiated fixed amount in lieu of indirect costs may be appropriate for self-contained or off-campus research activities where the benefits derived from a hospital's indirect services cannot be readily determined. Such amount negotiated in lieu of indirect costs will be treated as an offset to the appropriate indirect cost pool after allocation to patient care, organized research, instruction and training, and other hospital activities. The base on which such remaining expenses are allocated should be appropriately adjusted.
              
              4. Predetermined Overhead Rates
              The utilization of predetermined fixed overhead rates may offer potential advantages in the administration of research agreements by facilitating the preparation of research budgets and permitting more expeditious close out of the agreements when the work is completed. Therefore, to the extent allowed by law, consideration may be given to the negotiation of predetermined fixed rates in those situations where the cost experience and other pertinent factors available are deemed sufficient to enable the Government and the hospital to reach a reasonable conclusion as to the probable level of the indirect cost rate for the ensuing accounting period.
              H. Simplified Method for Small Institutions
              1. General
              a. Where the total direct cost of all government-sponsored research and development work at a hospital in a year is minimal, the use of the abbreviated procedure described in paragraph H.2. below may be acceptable in the determination of allowable indirect costs. This method may also be used to initially determine a provisional indirect cost rate for hospitals that have not previously established a rate. Under this abbreviated procedure, data taken directly from the institution's most recent annual financial report and immediately available supporting information will be utilized as a basis for determining the indirect cost rate applicable to research agreements at the institution.
              b. The rigid formula approach provided under the abbreviated procedure has limitations which may preclude its use at some hospitals either because the minimum data required for this purpose are not readily available or because the application of the abbreviated procedure to the available data produces results which appear inequitable to the Government or the hospital. In any such case, indirect costs should be determined through use of the regular procedure rather than the abbreviated procedure.
              c. In certain instances where the total direct cost of all government-sponsored research and development work at the hospital is more than minimal, the abbreviated procedure may be used if prior permission is obtained. This alternative will be granted only in those cases where it can be demonstrated that the step-down technique cannot be followed.
              2. Abbreviated Procedure
              a. Total expenditures as taken from the most recent annual financial report will be adjusted by eliminating from further consideration expenditures for capital items as defined in paragraph I.2.d. and unallowable costs as defined under various headings in paragraph I. and paragraph C.5.
              b. Total expenditures as adjusted under the foregoing will then be distributed among (1) expenditures applicable to administrative and general overhead functions, (2) expenditures applicable to all other overhead functions, and (3) expenditures for all other purposes. The first group shall include amounts associated with the functional categories, Administration and General, and Dietary, as defined in paragraphs F.2. and 7. The second group shall include Depreciation, Operation of Plant, Maintenance of Plant, and Housekeeping. The third group—expenditures for all other purposes—shall include the amounts applicable to all other activities, namely, patient care, organized research, instruction and training, and other hospital activities as defined under paragraph B.5. For the purposes of this section, the functional categories of Laundry and Linen, Maintenance of Personnel, and Medical Records and Library as defined in paragraph E. shall be considered as expenditures for all other purposes.
              c. The expenditures distributed to the first two groups in paragraph H.2.b. should then be adjusted by those receipts or negative expenditure types of transactions which tend to reduce expense items allocable to research agreements as indirect costs. Examples of such receipts or negative expenditures are itemized in paragraph C.5.a.
              d. In applying the procedures in paragraphs H.2.a and 2.b, the cost of unallowable activities such as Gift Shop, Investment Property Management, Fund Raising, and Public Relations, when they benefit from the hospital's indirect cost services, should be treated as expenditures for all other purposes. Such activities are presumed to benefit from the hospital's indirect cost services when they include salaries of personnel working in the hospital. When they do not include such salaries, they should be eliminated from the indirect cost rate computation.
              e. The indirect cost rate will then be computed in two stages. The first stage requires the computation of an Administrative and General rate component. This is done by applying a ratio of research direct costs over total direct costs to the Administrative and General pool developed under paragraphs H.2.b and 2.c. above. The resultant amount—that which is allocable to research—is divided by the direct research cost base. The second stage requires the computation of an All Other Indirect Cost rate component. This is done by applying a ratio of research direct space over total direct space to All Other Indirect Cost pool developed under paragraphs H.2.b. and 2.c. above. The resultant amount—that which is allocable to research—is divided by the direct research cost base.

              The total of the two rate components will be the institution's indirect cost rate. For the purposes of this section, the research direct cost or space and total direct cost or space will be that cost or space identified with the functional categories classified under Expenditures for all other purposes under paragraph H.2.b.
              I. General Standards for Selected Items of Cost
              1. General
              This section provides standards to be applied in establishing the allowability of certain items involved in determining cost. These standards should apply irrespective of whether a particular item of cost is properly treated as direct cost or indirect cost. Failure to mention a particular item of cost in the standards is not intended to imply that it is either allowable or unallowable; rather, determination as to allowability in each case should be based on the treatment or standards provided for similar or related items of cost. In case of discrepancy between the provisions of a specific research agreement and the applicable standards provided, the provisions of the research agreement should govern. However, in some cases advance understandings should be reached on particular cost items in order that the full costs of research be supported. The extent of allowability of the selected items of cost covered in this section has been stated to apply broadly to many accounting systems in varying environmental situations. Thus, as to any given research agreement, the reasonableness and allocability of certain items of costs may be difficult to determine, particularly in connection with hospitals which have medical school or other affiliations. In order to avoid possible subsequent disallowance or dispute based on unreasonableness or nonallocability, it is important that prospective recipients of federal funds, particularly those whose work is predominantly or substantially with the Government, seek agreement with the Government in advance of the incurrence of special or unusual costs in categories where reasonableness or allocability are difficult to determine. Such agreement may also be initiated by the Government. Any such agreement should be incorporated in the research agreement itself. However, the absence of such an advance agreement on any element of cost will not in itself serve to make that element either allowable or unallowable. Examples of costs on which advance agreements may be particularly important are:
              a. Facilities costs, such as;
              (1) Depreciation
              (2) Rental
              (3) Use charges for fully depreciated assets
              (4) Idle facilities and idle capacity
              (5) Plant reconversion
              (6) Extraordinary or deferred maintenance and repair
              (7) Acquisition of automatic data processing equipment.
              b. Pre-award costs
              c. Non-hospital professional activities
              d. Self-insurance
              e. Support services charged directly (computer services, printing and duplicating services, etc.)
              f. Employee compensation, travel, and other personnel costs, including:
              (1) Compensation for personal service, including wages and salaries, bonuses and incentives, premium payments, pay for time not worked, and supplementary compensation and benefits, such as pension and retirement, group insurance, severance pay plans, and other forms of compensation;
              (2) Morale, health, welfare, and food service and dormitory costs.
              (3) Training and education costs.
              (4) Relocation costs, including special or mass personnel movement.
              2. Selected Items
              a. Advertising costs. The term advertising costs means the costs of advertising media and corollary administrative costs. Advertising media include magazines, newspapers, radio and television programs, direct mail, exhibits, and the like. The only advertising costs allowable are those which are solely for:
              (1) The recruitment of persons required for the performance by the institution of obligations arising under the research agreement, when considered in conjunction with all other recruitment costs as set forth in paragraph I.2.hh;
              (2) The procurement of scarce items for the performance of the research agreement; or
              (3) The disposal of scrap or surplus materials acquired in the performance of the research agreement.
              Costs of this nature, if incurred for more than one research agreement or for both research agreement work and other work of the institution, are allowable to the extent that the principles in paragraphs D. and E. are observed.
              b. Bad debts. Losses arising from uncollectible accounts and other claims and related collection and legal costs are unallowable except that a bad debt may be included as a direct cost of the research agreement to the extent that it is caused by a research patient and approved by the awarding agency. This inclusion is only intended to cover the situation of the patient admitted for research purposes who subsequently or in conjunction with the research receives clinical care for which a charge is made to the patient. If, after exhausting all means of collecting these charges, a bad debt results, it may be considered an appropriate charge to the research agreement.
              c. Bonding costs.
                
              
              (1) Bonding costs arise when the Government requires assurance against financial loss to itself or others by reason of the act or default of the hospital. They arise also in instances where the hospital requires similar assurance.
              Included are such types as bid, performance, payment, advance payment, infringement, and fidelity bonds.
              (2) Costs of bonding required pursuant to the terms of the research agreement are allowable.
              (3) Costs of bonding required by the hospital in the general conduct of its business are allowable to the extent that such bonding is in accordance with sound business practice and the rates and premiums are reasonable under the circumstances.
              d. Capital expenditures. The costs of equipment, buildings, and repairs which materially increase the value or useful life of buildings or equipment should be capitalized and are unallowable except as provided for in the research agreement.
              e. Civil defense costs. Civil defense costs are those incurred in planning for, and the protection of life and property against the possible effects of enemy attack. Reasonable costs of civil defense measures (including costs in excess of normal plant protection costs, first-aid training and supplies, fire-fighting training, posting of additional exit notices and directions, and other approved civil defense measures) undertaken on the institution's premises pursuant to suggestions or requirements of civil defense authorities are allowable when distributed to all activities of the institution. Capital expenditures for civil defense purposes will not be allowed, but a use allowance or depreciation may be permitted in accordance with provisions set forth elsewhere. Costs of local civil defense projects not on the institution's premises are unallowable.
              f. Communication costs. Costs incurred for telephone services, local and long distance telephone calls, telegrams, radiograms, postage, and the like are allowable.
              g. Compensation for personal services.
              (1) General
              Compensation for personal services covers all remuneration paid currently or accrued to employees of the hospital for services rendered during the period of performance under government research agreements. Such remuneration includes salaries, wages, staff benefits (see paragraph I.2.j.), and pension plan costs (see paragraph I.2.y.). The costs of such remuneration are allowable to the extent that the total compensation to individual employees is reasonable for the services rendered and conforms to the established policy of the institution consistently applied, and provided that the charges for work performed directly on government research agreements and for other work allocable as indirect costs to sponsored research are determined and supported as hereinafter provided. For non-profit, non-proprietary institutions, where federally supported programs constitute less than a preponderance of the activity at the institution the primary test of reasonableness will be to require that the institution's compensation policies be applied consistently both to federally-sponsored and non-sponsored activities alike. However, where special circumstances so dictate a contractual clause may be utilized which calls for application of the test of comparability in determining the reasonableness of compensation.
              (2) Payroll Distribution
              Amounts charged to organized research for personal services, regardless of whether treated as direct costs or allocated as indirect costs, will be based on hospital payrolls which have been approved and documented in accordance with generally accepted hospital practices. In order to develop necessary direct and indirect allocations of cost, supplementary data on time or effort as provided in paragraph (3) below, normally need be required only for individuals whose compensation is properly chargeable to two or more research agreements or to two or more of the following broad functional categories: (i) Patient care; (ii) organized research; (iii) instruction and training; (iv) indirect activities as defined in paragraph E.1.; or (v) other hospital activities as defined in paragraph B.5.
              (3) Reporting Time or Effort
              Charges for salaries and wages of individuals other than members of the professional staff will be supported by daily time and attendance and payroll distribution records. For members of the professional staff, current and reasonable estimates of the percentage distribution of their total effort may be used as support in the absence of actual time records. The term professional staff for purposes of this section includes physicians, research associates, and other personnel performing work at responsible levels of activities. These personnel normally fulfill duties, the competent performance of which usually requires persons possessing degrees from accredited institutions of higher learning and/or state licensure. In order to qualify as current and reasonable, estimates must be made no later than one month (though not necessarily a calendar month) after the month in which the services were performed.
              (4) Preparation of Estimates of Effort

              Where required under paragraph (3) above, estimates of effort spent by a member of the professional staff on each research agreement should be prepared by the individual who performed the services or by a responsible individual such as a department head or supervisor having first-hand knowledge of the services performed on each research agreement. Estimates must show the allocation of effort between organized research and all other hospital activities in terms of the percentage of total effort devoted to each of the broad functional categories referred to in (2) above. The estimate of effort spent on a research agreement may include a reasonable amount of time spent in activities contributing and intimately related to work under the agreement, such as preparing and delivering special lectures about specific aspects of the ongoing research, writing research reports and articles, participating in appropriate research seminars, consulting with colleagues with respect to related research, and attending appropriate scientific meetings and conferences. The term “all other hospital activities” would include departmental research, administration, committee work, and public services undertaken on behalf of the hospital.
              (5) Application of Budget Estimates
              Estimates determined before the performance of services, such as budget estimates on a monthly, quarterly, or yearly basis do not qualify as estimates of effort spent.
              (6) Non-Hospital Professional Activities
              A hospital must not alter or waive hospital-wide policies and practices dealing with the permissible extent of professional services over and above those traditionally performed without extra hospital compensation, unless such arrangements are specifically authorized by the sponsoring agency. Where hospital-wide policies do not adequately define the permissible extent of consultantships or other non-hospital activities undertaken for extra pay, the Government may require that the effort of professional staff working under research agreements be allocated as between (i) hospital activities, and (ii) non-hospital professional activities. If the sponsoring agency should consider the extent of non-hospital professional effort excessive, appropriate arrangements governing compensation will be negotiated on a case by case basis.
              (7) Salary Rates for Part-Time Appointments
              Charges for work performed on government research by staff members having only part-time appointments will be determined at a rate not in excess of that for which he is regularly paid for his part-time staff assignment.
              h. Contingency provisions.
              
              Contributions to a contingency reserve or any similar provisions made for events the occurrence of which cannot be foretold with certainty as to time, intensity, or with an assurance of their happening, are unallowable.
              i. Depreciation and use allowances.
              
              (1) Hospitals may be compensated for the use of buildings, capital improvements and usable equipment on hand through depreciation or use allowances. Depreciation is a charge to current operations which distributes the cost of a tangible capital asset, less estimated residual value, over the estimated useful life of the asset in a systematic and logical manner. It does not involve a process of valuation. Useful life has reference to the prospective period of economic usefulness in the particular hospital's operations as distinguished from physical life. Use allowances are the means of allowing compensation when depreciation or other equivalent costs are not considered.
              (2) Due consideration will be given to government-furnished research facilities utilized by the institution when computing use allowances and/or depreciation if the government-furnished research facilities are material in amount. Computation of the use allowance and/or depreciation will exclude both the cost or any portion of the cost of grounds, buildings and equipment borne by or donated by the Federal Government, irrespective of where title was originally vested or where it presently resides, and secondly, the cost of grounds. Capital expenditures for land improvements (paved areas, fences, streets, sidewalks, utility conduits, and similar improvements not already included in the cost of buildings) are allowable provided the systematic amortization of such capital expenditures has been provided in the institution's books of accounts, based on reasonable determinations of the probable useful lives of the individual items involved, and the share allocated to organized research is developed from the amount thus amortized for the base period involved.
              (3) Normal depreciation on a hospital's plant, equipment, and other capital facilities, except as excluded by (4) below, is an allowable element of research cost provided that the amount thereof is computed:
              i. Upon the property cost basis used by the hospital for Federal Income Tax purposes (See section 167 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954); or
              ii. In the case of non-profit or tax exempt organizations, upon a property cost basis which could have been used by the hospital for Federal Income Tax purposes, had such hospital been subject to the payment of income tax; and in either case
              iii. By the consistent application to the assets concerned of any generally accepted accounting method, and subject to the limitations of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 as amended, including—
              (a) The straight line method;

              (b) The declining balance method, using a rate not exceeding twice the rate which would have been used had the annual allowance been computed under the method described in (a) above;
              (c) The sum of the years-digits method; and
              (d) Any other consistent method productive of an annual allowance which, when added to all allowances for the period commencing with the use of the property and including the current year, does not during the first two-thirds of the useful life of the property exceed the total of such allowances which would have been used had such allowances been computed under the method described in (b) above.
              (4) Where the depreciation method is followed, adequate property records must be maintained. The period of useful service (service life) established in each case for usable capital assets must be determined on a realistic basis which takes into consideration such factors as type of construction, nature of the equipment used, technological developments in the particular research area, and the renewal and replacement policies followed for the individual items or classes of assets involved. Where the depreciation method is introduced for application to assets acquired in prior years, the annual charges therefrom must not exceed the amounts that would have resulted had the depreciation method been in effect from the date of acquisition of such assets.
              (5) Depreciation on idle or excess facilities shall not be allowed except on such facilities as are reasonably necessary for standby purposes.
              (6) Where an institution elects to go on a depreciation basis for a particular class of assets, no depreciation, rental or use charge may be allowed on any such assets that would be viewed as fully depreciated; provided, however, that reasonable use charges may be negotiated for any such assets if warranted after taking into consideration the cost of the facility or item involved, the estimated useful life remaining at time of negotiation, the actual replacement policy followed in the light of service lives used for calculating depreciation, the effect of any increased maintenance charges or decreased efficiency due to age, and any other factors pertinent to the utilization of the facility or item for the purpose contemplated.
              (7) Hospitals which choose a depreciation allowance for assets purchased prior to 1966 based on a percentage of operating costs in lieu of normal depreciation for purposes of reimbursement under Pub. L. 89-97 (Medicare) shall utilize that method for determining depreciation applicable to organized research.
              The operating costs to be used are the lower of the hospital's 1965 operating costs or the hospital's current year's allowable costs. The percent to be applied is 5 percent starting with the year 1966-67, with such percentage being uniformity reduced by one-half percent each succeeding year. The allowance based on operating costs is in addition to regular depreciation on assets acquired after 1965. However, the combined amount of such allowance on pre-1966 assets and the allowance for actual depreciation on assets acquired after 1965 may not exceed 6 percent of the hospital's allowable cost for the current year. After total depreciation has been computed, allocation methods are used to determine the share attributable to organized research.
              For purposes of this section, Operating Costs means the total costs incurred by the hospital in operating the institution, and includes patient care, research, and other activities. Allowable Costs means operating costs less unallowable costs as defined in these principles; by the application of allocation methods to the total amount of such allowable costs, the share attributable to Federally-sponsored research is determined.
              A hospital which elects to use this procedure under Pub. L. 89-97 and subsequently changes to an actual depreciation basis on pre-1966 assets in accordance with the option afforded under the Medicare program shall simultaneously change to an actual depreciation basis for organized research.
              Where the hospital desires to change to actual depreciation but either has no historical cost records or has incomplete records, the determination of historical cost could be made through appropriate means involving expert consultation with the determination being subject to review and approval by the Department of Health and Human Services.

              (8) Where the use allowance method is followed, the use allowance for buildings and improvements will be computed at an annual rate not exceeding two percent of acquisition cost. The use allowance for equipment will be computed at an annual rate not exceeding six and two-thirds percent of acquisition cost of usable equipment in those cases where the institution maintains current records with respect to such equipment on hand. Where the institution's records reflect only the cost (actual or estimated) of the original complement of equipment, the use allowance will be computed at an annual rate not exceeding ten percent of such cost. Original complement for this purpose means the complement of equipment initially placed in buildings to perform the functions currently being performed in such buildings; however, where a permanent change in the function of a building takes place, a redetermination of the original complement of equipment may be made at that time to establish a new original complement. In those cases where no equipment records are maintained, the institution will justify a reasonable estimate of the acquisition cost of usable equipment which may be used to compute the use allowance at an annual rate not exceeding six and two-thirds percent of such estimate.
              (9) Depreciation and/or use charges should usually be allocated to research and other activities as an indirect cost.
              j. Employee morale, health, and welfare costs and credits.
              
              The costs of house publications, health or first-aid benefits, recreational activities, employees' counseling services, and other expenses incurred in accordance with the hospital's established practice or custom for the improvement of working conditions, employer-employee relations, employee morale, and employee performance, are allowable. Such costs will be equitably apportioned to all activities of the hospital. Income generated from any of these activities will be credited to the cost thereof unless such income has been irrevocably set over to employee welfare organizations.
              k. Entertainment costs.
              
              Except as pertains to j. above, costs incurred for amusement, social activities, entertainment, and any items relating thereto, such as meals, lodging, rentals, transportation, and gratuities are unallowable.
              l. Equipment and other facilities.
              
              The cost of equipment or other facilities are allowable on a direct charge basis where such purchases are approved by the sponsoring agency concerned or provided for by the terms of the research agreement.
              m. Fines and penalties.
              
              Costs resulting from violations of, or failure of the institution to comply with federal, state and local laws and regulations are unallowable except when incurred as a result of compliance with specific provisions of the research agreement, or instructions in writing from the awarding agency.
              n. Insurance and indemnification.
              
              (1) Costs of insurance required or approved and maintained pursuant to the research agreement are allowable.
              (2) Costs of other insurance maintained by the hospital in connection with the general conduct of its activities are allowable subject to the following limitations: (i) Types and extent and cost of coverage must be in accordance with sound institutional practice; (ii) costs of insurance or of any contributions to any reserve covering the risk of loss of or damage to government owned property are unallowable except to the extent that the Government has specifically required or approved such costs; and (iii) costs of insurance on the lives of officers or trustees are unallowable except where such insurance is part of an employee plan which is not unduly restricted.
              (3) Contributions to a reserve for an approved self-insurance program are allowable to the extent that the types of coverage, extent of coverage, and the rates and premiums would have been allowed had insurance been purchased to cover the risks. Such contributions are subject to prior approval of the Government.
              (4) Actual losses which could have been covered by permissible insurance (through an approved self-insurance program or otherwise) are unallowable unless expressly provided for in the research agreement, except that costs incurred because of losses not covered under nominal deductible insurance coverage provided in keeping with sound management practice as well as minor losses not covered by insurance such as spoilage, breakage and disappearance of small hand tools which occur in the ordinary course of operations are allowable.
              o. Interest, fund raising and investment management costs.
              
              (1) Costs incurred for interest on borrowed capital or temporary use of endowment funds, however represented, are unallowable.
              (2) Costs of organized fund raising, including financial campaigns, endowment drives, solicitation of gifts and bequests, and similar expenses incurred solely to raise capital or obtain contributions are not allowable.
              (3) Costs of investment counsel and staff and similar expenses incurred solely to enhance income from investments are not allowable.
              (4) Costs related to the physical custody and control of monies and securities are allowable.
              p. Labor relations costs.
              
              Costs incurred in maintaining satisfactory relations between the hospital and its employees, including costs of labor management committees, employees' publications, and other related activities are allowable.
              q. Losses on research agreements or contracts.
              
              Any excess of costs over income under any agreement or contract of any nature is unallowable. This includes, but is not limited to, the hospital's contributed portion by reason of cost-sharing agreements, under-recoveries through negotiation of flat amounts for overhead, or legal or administrative limitations.
              r. Maintenance and repair costs.
              
              (1) Costs necessary for the upkeep of property (including government property unless otherwise provided for), which neither add to the permanent value of the property nor appreciably prolong its intended life, but keep it in an efficient operating condition, are to be treated as follows:
              i. Normal maintenance and repair costs are allowable;
              ii. Extraordinary maintenance and repair costs are allowable, provided they are allocated to the periods to which applicable for purposes of determining research costs.

              (2) Expenditures for plant and equipment, including rehabilitation thereof, which according to generally accepted accounting principles as applied under the hospital's established policy, should be capitalized and subjected to depreciation, are allowable only on a depreciation basis.
              s. Material costs.
              
              Costs incurred for purchased materials, supplies and fabricated parts directly or indirectly related to the research agreement, are allowable. Purchases made specifically for the research agreement should be charged thereto at their actual prices after deducting all cash discounts, trade discounts, rebates, and allowances received by the institution. Withdrawals from general stores or stockrooms should be charged at their cost under any recognized method of pricing stores withdrawals conforming to sound accounting practices consistently followed by the hospital. Incoming transportation charges are a proper part of material cost. Direct material cost should include only the materials and supplies actually used for the performance of the research agreement, and due credit should be given for any excess materials retained or returned to vendors. Due credit should be given for all proceeds or value received for any scrap resulting from work under the research agreement. Where government donated or furnished material is used in performing the research agreement, such material will be used without charge.
              t. Memberships, subscriptions and professional activity costs.
              
              (1) Costs of the hospital's membership in civic, business, technical and professional organizations are allowable.
              (2) Costs of the hospital's subscriptions to civic, business, professional and technical periodicals are allowable.
              (3) Costs of meetings and conferences, when the primary purpose is the dissemination of technical information, are allowable. This includes costs of meals, transportation, rental of facilities, and other items incidental to such meetings or conferences.
              u. Organization costs.
              
              Expenditures such as incorporation fees, attorneys' fees, accountants' fees, brokers' fees, fees to promoters and organizers in connection with (1) organization or reorganization of a hospital, or (2) raising capital, are unallowable.
              v. Other business expenses.
              
              Included in this item are such recurring expenses as registry and transfer charges resulting from changes in ownership of securities issued by the hospital, cost of shareholders meetings preparation and publication of reports to shareholders, preparation and submission of required reports and forms to taxing and other regulatory bodies, and incidental costs of directors and committee meetings. The above and similar costs are allowable when allocated on an equitable basis.
              w. Patient care.
              
              The cost of routine and ancillary or special services to research patients is an allowable direct cost of research agreements.
              (1) Routine services shall include the costs of the regular room, dietary and nursing services, minor medical and surgical supplies and the use of equipment and facilities for which a separate charge is not customarily made.
              (2) Ancillary or special services are the services for which charges are customarily made in addition to routine services, such as operating rooms, anesthesia, laboratory, BMR-EKG, etc.
              (3) Patient care, whether expressed as a rate or an amount, shall be computed in a manner consistent with the procedures used to determine reimbursable costs under Pub. L. 89-97 (Medicare Program) as defined under the “Principles of Reimbursement For Provider Costs” published by the Social Security Administration of the Department of Health and Human Services. The allowability of specific categories of cost shall be in accordance with those principles rather than the principles for research contained herein. In the absence of participation in the Medicare program by a hospital, all references to the Medicare program in these principles shall be construed as meaning the Medicaid program.
              i. Once costs have been recognized as allowable, the indirect costs or general service center's cost shall be allocated (stepped-down) to special service centers, and all patient and nonpatient costs centers based upon actual services received or benefiting these centers.

              ii. After allocation, routine and ancillary costs shall be apportioned to scatter-bed research patients on the same basis as is used to apportion costs to Medicare patients, i.e. using either the departmental method or the combination method, as those methods are defined by the Social Security Administration; except that final settlement shall be on a grant-by-grant basis. However, to the extent that the Social Security Administration has recognized any other method of cost apportionment, that method generally shall also be recognized as applicable to the determination of research patient care costs.

              iii. A cost center must be established on Medicare reimbursement forms for each discrete-bed unit grant award received by a hospital. Routine costs should be stepped-down to this line item(s) in the normal course of stepping-down costs under Medicare/Medicaid requirements. However, in stepping-down routine costs, consideration must be given to preventing a step-down of those costs to discrete-bed unit line items that have already been paid for directly by the grant, such as bedside nursing costs. Ancillary costs allocable to research discrete-bed units shall be determined and proposed in accordance with paragraph w.(3).ii.
              
              (4) Where federally sponsored research programs provide specifically for the direct reimbursement of nursing, dietary, and other services, appropriate adjustment must be made to patient care costs to preclude duplication and/or misallocation of costs.
              x. Patent costs.
              
              Costs of preparing disclosures, reports and other documents required by the research agreement and of searching the art to the extent necessary to make such invention disclosures are allowable. In accordance with the clauses of the research agreement relating to patents, costs of preparing documents and any other patent costs, in connection with the filing of a patent application where title is conveyed to the Government, are allowable. (See also paragraph I.2.jj.)
              y. Pension plan costs.
              
              Costs of the hospital's pension plan which are incurred in accordance with the established policies of the institution are allowable, provided such policies meet the test of reasonableness and the methods of cost allocation are not discriminatory, and provided appropriate adjustments are made for credits or gains arising out of normal and abnormal employee turnover or any other contingencies that can result in forfeitures by employees which inure to the benefit of the hospital.
              z. Plan security costs.
              
              Necessary expenses incurred to comply with government security requirements including wages, uniforms and equipment of personnel engaged in plant protection are allowable.
              aa. Pre-research agreement costs.
              
              Costs incurred prior to the effective date of the research agreement, whether or not they would have been allowable thereunder if incurred after such date, are unallowable unless specifically set forth and identified in the research agreement.
              bb. Professional services costs.
              
              (1) Costs of professional services rendered by the members of a particular profession who are not employees of the hospital are allowable subject to (2) and (3) below when reasonable in relation to the services rendered and when not contingent upon recovery of the costs from the Government. Retainer fees to be allowable must be reasonably supported by evidence of services rendered.
              (2) Factors to be considered in determining the allowability of costs in a particular case include (i) the past pattern of such costs, particularly in the years prior to the award of government research agreements on the institution's total activity; (ii) the nature and scope of managerial services expected of the institution's own organizations; and (iii) whether the proportion of government work to the hospital's total activity is such as to influence the institution in favor of incurring the cost, particularly where the services rendered are not of a continuing nature and have little relationship to work under government research agreements.
              (3) Costs of legal, accounting and consulting services, and related costs incurred in connection with organization and reorganization or the prosecution of claims against the Government are unallowable. Costs of legal, accounting and consulting services, and related costs incurred in connection with patent infringement litigation are unallowable unless otherwise provided for in the research agreement.
              cc. Profits and losses on disposition of plant equipment, or other assets.
              
              Profits or losses of any nature arising from the sale or exchange of plant, equipment, or other capital assets, including sales or exchange of either short- or long-term investments, shall be excluded in computing research agreement costs.
              dd. Proposal costs.
              
              Proposal costs are the costs of preparing bids or proposals on potential government and non-government research agreements or projects, including the development of technical data and cost data necessary to support the institution's bids or proposals. Proposal costs of the current accounting period of both successful and unsuccessful bids and proposals normally should be treated as indirect costs and allocated currently to all activities of the institution, and no proposal costs of past accounting periods will be allocable in the current period to the government research agreement. However, the institution's established practices may be to treat proposal costs by some other recognized method. Regardless of the methods used, the results obtained may be accepted only if found to be reasonable and equitable.
              ee. Public information services costs.
              
              Costs of news releases pertaining to specific research or scientific accomplishment are unallowable unless specifically authorized by the sponsoring agency.
              ff. Rearrangement and alteration costs.
              
              Costs incurred for ordinary or normal rearrangement and alteration of facilities are allowable. Special rearrangement and alteration costs incurred specifically for a project are allowable only as a direct charge when such work has been approved in advance by the sponsoring agency concerned.
              gg. Reconversion costs.
              
              Costs incurred in the restoration or rehabilitation of the institution's facilities to approximately the same condition existing immediately prior to commencement of government research agreement work, fair wear and tear excepted, are allowable.
              hh. Recruiting costs.
              

              (1) Subject to (2), (3), and (4) below, and provided that the size of the staff recruited and maintained is in keeping with workload requirements, costs of “help wanted” advertising, operating costs of an employment office necessary to secure and maintain an adequate staff, costs of operating an aptitude and educational testing program, travel costs of employees while engaged in recruiting personnel, travel costs of applicants for interviews for prospective employment, and relocation costs incurred incident to recruitment of new employees are allowable to the extent that such costs are incurred pursuant to a well-managed recruitment program. Where an institution uses employment agencies, costs not in excess of standard commercial rates for such services are allowable.
              (2) In publications, costs of help wanted advertising that includes color, includes advertising material for other than recruitment purposes, or is excessive in size (taking into consideration recruitment purposes for which intended and normal institutional practices in this respect) are unallowable.
              (3) Costs of help wanted advertising, special emoluments; fringe benefits, and salary allowances incurred to attract professional personnel from other institutions that do not meet the test of reasonableness or do not conform with the established practices of the institution are unallowable.
              (4) Where relocation costs incurred incident to recruitment of a new employee have been allowed either as an allocable direct or indirect cost, and the newly hired employee resigns for reasons within his control within twelve months after hire, the institution will be required to refund or credit such relocations costs as were charged to the Government.
              ii. Rental costs (including sale and lease-back of facilities).
              
              (1) Rental costs of land, building, and equipment and other personal property are allowable if the rates are reasonable in light of such factors as rental costs of comparable facilities and market conditions in the area, the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the facilities leased, options available, and other provisions of the rental agreement. Application of these factors, in situations where rentals are extensively used, may involve among other considerations comparison of rental costs with the amount which the hospital would have received had it owned the facilities.
              (2) Charges in the nature of rent between organizations having a legal or other affiliation or arrangement such as hospitals, medical schools, foundations, etc., are allowable to the extent such charges do not exceed the normal costs of ownership such as depreciation, taxes, insurance, and maintenance, provided that no part of such costs shall duplicate any other allowed costs.
              (3) Unless otherwise specifically provided in the agreement, rental costs specified in sale and lease-back agreements incurred by hospitals through selling plant facilities to investment organizations such as insurance companies or to private investors, and concurrently leasing back the same facilities are allowable only to the extent that such rentals do not exceed the amount which the hospital would have received had it retained legal title to the facilities.
              jj. Royalties and other costs for use of patents.
              
              Royalties on a patent or amortization of the cost of acquiring a patent or invention or rights thereto necessary for the proper performance of the research agreement and applicable to tasks or processes thereunder are allowable unless the Government has a license or the right to free use of the patent, the patent has been adjudicated to be invalid, or has been administratively determined to be invalid, the patent is considered to be unenforceable, or the patent has expired.
              kk. Severance pay.
              
              (1) Severance pay is compensation in addition to regular salaries and wages which is paid by a hospital to employees whose services are being terminated. Costs of severance pay are allowable only to the extent that such payments are required by law, by employer-employee agreement, by established policy that constitutes in effect an implied agreement on the institution's part, or by circumstances of the particular employment.
              (2) Severance payments that are due to normal, recurring turnover, and which otherwise meet the conditions of (a) above may be allowed provided the actual costs of such severance payments are regarded as expenses applicable to the current fiscal year and are equitably distributed among the institution's activities during that period.
              (3) Severance payments that are due to abnormal or mass terminations are of such conjectural nature that allowability must be determined on a case-by-case basis. However, the Government recognizes its obligation to participate to the extent of its fair share in any specific payment.
              ll. Specialized service facilities operated by a hospital.
              
              (1) The costs of institutional services involving the use of highly complex and specialized facilities such as electronic computers and reactors are allowable provided the charges therefor meet the conditions of (2) or (3) below, and otherwise take into account any items of income or federal financing that qualify as applicable credits under paragraph C.5.

              (2) The costs of such hospital services normally will be charged directly to applicable research agreements based on actual usage or occupancy of the facilities at rates that (i) are designed to recover only actual costs of providing such services, and (ii) are applied on a nondiscriminatory basis as between organized research and other work of the hospital including commercial or accommodation sales and usage by the hospital for internal purposes. This would include use of such facilities as radiology, laboratories, maintenance men used for a special purpose, medical art, photography, etc.
              (3) In the absence of an acceptable arrangement for direct costing as provided in (2) above, the costs incurred for such institutional services may be assigned to research agreements as indirect costs, provided the methods used achieve substantially the same results. Such arrangements should be worked out in coordination with all government users of the facilities in order to assure equitable distribution of the indirect costs.
              mm. Special administrative costs.
              
              Costs incurred for general public relations activities, catalogs, alumni activities, and similar services are unallowable.
              nn. Staff and/or employee benefits.
              
              (1) Staff and/or employee benefits in the form of regular compensation paid to employees during periods of authorized absences from the job such as for annual leave, sick leave, military leave and the like are allowable provided such costs are absorbed by all hospital activities including organized research in proportion to the relative amount of time or effort actually devoted to each.
              (2) Staff benefits in the form of employer contributions or expenses for Social Security taxes, employee insurance, Workmen's Compensation insurance, the Pension Plan (see paragraph I.2.y.), hospital costs or remission of hospital charges to the extent of costs for individual employees or their families, and the like are allowable provided such benefits are granted in accordance with established hospital policies, and provided such contributions and other expenses whether treated as indirect costs or an increment of direct labor costs are distributed to particular research agreements and other activities in a manner consistent with the pattern of benefits accruing to the individuals or groups of employees whose salaries and wages are chargeable to such research agreements and other activities.
              oo. Taxes.
              
              (1) In general, taxes which the hospital is required to pay and which are paid or accrued in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and payments made to local governments in lieu of taxes which are commensurate with the local government services received are allowable except for (i) taxes from which exemptions are available to the hospital directly or which are available to the hospital based on an exemption afforded the Government and in the latter case when the sponsoring agency makes available the necessary exemption certificates, (ii) special assessments on land which represent capital improvements, and (iii) Federal Income Taxes.
              (2) Any refund of taxes, interest, or penalties, and any payment to the hospital of interest thereon attributable to taxes, interest or penalties, which were allowed as research agreement costs will be credited or paid to the Government in the manner directed by the Government provided any interest actually paid or credited to a hospital incident to a refund of tax, interest, and penalty will be paid or credited to the Government only to the extent that such interest accrued over the period during which the hospital had been reimbursed by the Government for the taxes, interest, and penalties.
              pp. Transportation costs.
              
              Costs incurred for inbound freight, express, cartage, postage and other transportation services relating either to goods purchased, in process, or delivered are allowable. When such costs can readily be identified with the items involved, they may be charged directly as transportation costs or added to the cost of such items. Where identification with the material received cannot readily be made, inbound transportation costs may be charged to the appropriate indirect cost accounts if the institution follows a consistent equitable procedure in this respect. Outbound freight, if reimbursable under the terms of the research agreement, should be treated as a direct cost.
              qq. Travel costs.
              
              (1) Travel costs are the expenses for transportation, lodging, subsistence, and related items incurred by employees who are in travel status on official business of the hospital. Such costs may be charged on an actual basis, on a per diem or mileage basis in lieu of actual costs incurred, or on a combination of the two provided the method used is applied to an entire trip and not to selected days of the trip, and results in charges consistent with those normally allowed by the institution in its regular operations.
              (2) Travel costs are allowable subject to (3) and (4) below when they are directly attributable to specific work under a research agreement or when they are incurred in the normal course of administration of the hospital or a department or research program thereof.
              (3) The difference in cost between first class air accommodations and less than first class air accommodations is unallowable except when less than first class air accommodations are not reasonably available to meet necessary mission requirements such as where less than first class accommodations would (i) require circuitous routing, (ii) require travel during unreasonable hours, (iii) greatly increase the duration of the flight, (iv) result in additional costs which would offset the transportation savings, or (v) offer accommodations which are not reasonably adequate for the medical needs of the traveler.
              (4) Costs of personnel movements of a special or mass nature are allowable only when authorized or approved in writing by the sponsoring agency or its authorized representative.
              rr. Termination costs applicable to contracts.
                
              
              (1) Contract terminations generally give rise to the incurrence of costs or to the need for special treatment of costs which would not have arisen had the contract not been terminated. Items peculiar to termination are set forth below. They are to be used in conjunction with all other provisions of these principles in the case of contract termination.
              (2) The cost of common items of material reasonably usable on the hospital's other work will not be allowable unless the hospital submits evidence that it could not retain such items at cost without sustaining a loss. In deciding whether such items are reasonably usable on other work of the institution, consideration should be given to the hospital's plans for current scheduled work or activities including other research agreements. Contemporaneous purchases of common items by the hospital will be regarded as evidence that such items are reasonably usable on the hospital's other work. Any acceptance of common items as allowable to the terminated portion of the contract should be limited to the extent that the quantities of such items on hand, in transit, and on order are in excess of the reasonable quantitative requirement of other work.
              (3) If in a particular case, despite all reasonable efforts by the hospital, certain costs cannot be discontinued immediately after the effective date of termination, such costs are generally allowable within the limitations set forth in these principles, except that any such costs continuing after termination due to the negligent or willful failure of the hospital to discontinue such costs will be considered unacceptable.
              (4) Loss of useful value of special tooling and special machinery and equipment is generally allowable, provided (i) such special tooling, machinery or equipment is not reasonably capable of use in the other work of the hospital; (ii) the interest of the Government is protected by transfer of title or by other means deemed appropriate by the contracting officer; and (iii) the loss of useful value as to any one terminated contract is limited to that portion of the acquisition cost which bears the same ratio to the total acquisition cost as the terminated portion of the contract bears to the entire terminated contract and other government contracts for which the special tooling, special machinery or equipment was acquired.
              (5) Rental costs under unexpired leases are generally allowable where clearly shown to have been reasonably necessary for the performance of the terminated contract, less the residual value of such leases, if (i) the amount of such rental claimed does not exceed the reasonable use value of the property leased for the period of the contract and such further period as may be reasonable; and (ii) the hospital makes all reasonable efforts to terminate, assign, settle, or otherwise reduce the cost of such lease. There also may be included the cost of alterations of such leased property, provided such alterations were necessary for the performance of the contract and of reasonable restoration required by the provisions of the lease.
              (6) Settlement expenses including the following are generally allowable: (i) Accounting, legal, clerical, and similar costs reasonably necessary for the preparation and presentation to contracting officers of settlement claims and supporting data with respect to the terminated portion of the contract and the termination and settlement of subcontracts; and (ii) reasonable costs for the storage, transportation, protection, and disposition of property provided by the Government or acquired or produced by the institution for the contract.
              (7) Subcontractor claims including the allocable portion of claims which are common to the contract and to other work of the contractor are generally allowable.
              ss. Voluntary services.
              
              The value of voluntary services provided by sisters or other members of religious orders is allowable provided that amounts do not exceed that paid other employees for similar work. Such amounts must be identifiable in the records of the hospital as a legal obligation of the hospital. This may be reflected by an agreement between the religious order and the hospital supported by evidence of payments to the order.
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. X
              Appendix X to Part 75—Data Collection Form (SF-SAC)
              The Data Collection Form SF-SAC is available on the FAC Web site.
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3019, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. XI
              Appendix XI to Part 75—Compliance Supplement

              The compliance supplement is available on the OMB Web site: (e.g., for 2013 here: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/)
              [79 FR 75889, Dec. 19, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 3019, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 75, App. XII
              Appendix XII to Part 75—Award Term and Conditions for Recipient Integrity and Performance Matters
              A. Reporting of Matters Related to Recipient Integrity and Performance
              1. General Reporting Requirement

              If the total value of your currently active grants, cooperative agreements, and procurement contracts from all Federal awarding agencies exceeds $10,000,000 for any period of time during the period of performance of this Federal award, then you as the recipient during that period of time must maintain the currency of information reported to the System for Award Management (SAM) that is made available in the designated integrity and performance system (currently the Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System (FAPIIS)) about civil, criminal, or administrative proceedings described in paragraph 2 of this award term and condition. This is a statutory requirement under section 872 of Public Law 110-417, as amended (41 U.S.C. 2313). As required by section 3010 of Public Law 111-212, all information posted in the designated integrity and performance system on or after April 15, 2011, except past performance reviews required for Federal procurement contracts, will be publicly available.
              2. Proceedings About Which You Must Report
              Submit the information required about each proceeding that:
              a. Is in connection with the award or performance of a grant, cooperative agreement, or procurement contract from the Federal Government;
              b. Reached its final disposition during the most recent five year period; and
              c. If one of the following:
              (1) A criminal proceeding that resulted in a conviction, as defined in paragraph 5 of this award term and condition;
              (2) A civil proceeding that resulted in a finding of fault and liability and payment of a monetary fine, penalty, reimbursement, restitution, or damages of $5,000 or more;
              (3) An administrative proceeding, as defined in paragraph 5 of this award term and condition, that resulted in a finding of fault and liability and your payment of either a monetary fine or penalty of $5,000 or more or reimbursement, restitution, or damages in excess of $100,000; or
              (4) Any other criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding if:
              (i) It could have led to an outcome described in paragraph 2.c.(1), (2), or (3) of this award term and condition;
              (ii) It had a different disposition arrived at by consent or compromise with an acknowledgement of fault on your part; and
              (iii) The requirement in this award term and condition to disclose information about the proceeding does not conflict with applicable laws and regulations.
              3. Reporting Procedures
              Enter in the SAM Entity Management area the information that SAM requires about each proceeding described in paragraph 2 of this award term and condition. You do not need to submit the information a second time under assistance awards that you received if you already provided the information through SAM because you were required to do so under Federal procurement contracts that you were awarded.
              4. Reporting Frequency
              During any period of time when you are subject to this requirement in paragraph 1 of this award term and condition, you must report proceedings information through SAM for the most recent five year period, either to report new information about any proceeding(s) that you have not reported previously or affirm that there is no new information to report. Recipients that have Federal contract, grant, and cooperative agreement awards with a cumulative total value greater than $10,000,000 must disclose semiannually any information about the criminal, civil, and administrative proceedings.
              5. Definitions
              For purposes of this award term and condition:

              a. Administrative proceeding means a non-judicial process that is adjudicatory in nature in order to make a determination of fault or liability (e.g., Securities and Exchange Commission Administrative proceedings, Civilian Board of Contract Appeals proceedings, and Armed Services Board of Contract Appeals proceedings). This includes proceedings at the Federal and State level but only in connection with performance of a Federal contract or grant. It does not include audits, site visits, corrective plans, or inspection of deliverables.
              b. Conviction, for purposes of this award term and condition, means a judgment or conviction of a criminal offense by any court of competent jurisdiction, whether entered upon a verdict or a plea, and includes a conviction entered upon a plea of nolo contendere.
              c. Total value of currently active grants, cooperative agreements, and procurement contracts includes—
              (1) Only the Federal share of the funding under any Federal award with a recipient cost share or match; and
              (2) The value of all expected funding increments under a Federal award and options, even if not yet exercised
              B. [Reserved]
              [81 FR 3019, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 77
          PART 77—REMEDIAL ACTIONS APPLICABLE TO LETTER OF CREDIT ADMINISTRATION
          
            Sec.
            77.1
            Purpose.
            77.2
            Scope.
            77.3
            Conditions that may give rise to remedial actions.
            77.4
            Remedial actions.
            77.5
            Remedial action procedures.
            
            77.6
            Emergency procedures.
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301.
          
          
            Source:
            50 FR 781, Jan. 7, 1985, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 77.1
            Purpose.
            Letters of credit with the United States Treasury, issued by the Department to States or other grantees and contractors, are a convenient means for disbursing Federal funds to recipients of grant awards or contracts (recipient organizations) under the programs of this and other Executive Departments. The sound and efficient operation of the letter-of-credit system is dependent in large part upon the honesty, good faith, and responsible financial management of recipient organizations that receive funds pursuant to letters of credit. This part sets forth conditions that may prompt the Department to seek remedial action against a recipient organization operating under a letter of credit and the procedures that will be used to reach a final decision regarding the taking of remedial actions against a recipient organization.
          
          
            § 77.2
            Scope.
            The regulations in this part apply to all recipient organizations under any program administered by the Department through which the organization receives Federal funds under a letter of credit.
          
          
            § 77.3
            Conditions that may give rise to remedial actions.
            If the Department determines that any of the following conditions is present in a recipient organization's administration of a letter of credit, it may take remedial actions against the organization:
            (a) A recipient organization draws Federal funds through its letter of credit in excess of the aggregate grant award or contract authority currently available to it.
            (b) A recipient organization draws Federal funds for a particular program in excess of currently available grant award or contract authority for that program, even though the organization may not have exceeded its aggregate grant award or contract authority.
            (c) A recipient organization fails to file timely all reports and other data required by the Department in connection with its grant awards, contracts, or letter of credit.
            (d) A recipient organization accumulates, through its letter of credit or otherwise, excess amounts of Federal funds relative to its actual and immediate disbursement requirements.
            (e) A recipient organization's cash management system fails to comply with generally accepted accounting principles or Departmental regulations or demonstrates irregularities, misrepresentations, fraud, or abuse in its operation.
          
          
            § 77.4
            Remedial actions.
            If, after the conclusion of the procedures set forth in § 77.5 or § 77.6 the Department finds that one or more of the conditions set forth in § 77.3 is or has been present, the Department may take the following remedial actions against a recipient organization's use of its letter of credit:
            (a) The Department may place special limits, restrictions, or controls upon the recipient organization's use of its letter of credit.
            (b) The Department may require more frequent or more detailed financial reporting from the recipient organization.
            (c) The Department may suspend, reduce, or terminate the recipient organization's use of its letter of credit.
          
          
            § 77.5
            Remedial action procedures.
            Except as provided in § 77.6, the Department will use the following procedures whenever it seeks the remedial action specified in § 77.4.
            (a) Notice. Prior to taking remedial action, the Department will provide the recipient organization written notice of its intended action setting forth both the legal and factual reasons therefor. Notice may be provided by certified or express mail, TWX, telegram, delivery, or similar means.
            (b) Opportunity to respond. (1) The recipient organization has 30 days after receipt of the notice in which to submit to the Department a written statement setting forth any legal and factual reasons why it believes the proposed remedial action would be inappropriate. If no response is received by the Department within the 30-day period, the Department may make the proposed remedial action effective immediately. If a response opposing the taking of remedial action is received from the recipient organization within the 30-day period, no remedial action will be taken until a final decision has been reached under paragraph (c) of this section. (2) The Department may prepare a written reply to the recipient organization's response. Any such reply will be forwarded to the deciding official together with the notice sent to the recipient organization and the organization's response, and a copy of the reply will be served on the recipient organization.
            (c) Departmental decision. The Department's decision to take remedial action under this part will be made by an official of the Department who had no involvement with the initial determination to seek remedial action. The deciding official may affirm, reverse, or modify the initial determination. In making the decision, the official will consider only the notice provided by the Department, the recipient organization's statement, the Department's reply, together with any other documents attached to them, and statements at any informal conference held pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section. The official's decision will be provided to the recipient organization in writing and will constitute the Department's final administrative action on the matter.
            (d) Informal conference. If, in the judgment of the official designated to make a final decision, it would materially enhance his ability to resolve the matters in dispute, he may convene an informal conference to question or hear an oral presentation by the parties. If an informal conference is convened it will be transcribed.
            (e) Effect of decision. The decision in a proceeding under this section affects only the recipient organization's obligations related to its letter of credit and does not determine the organization's ultimate liability with respect to improperly spent funds or other misconduct.
          
          
            § 77.6
            Emergency procedures.
            (a) Should the Department determine that it cannot adequately protect assets of the Federal government available to a recipient organization under its letter of credit without taking remedial action prior to the procedures specified in § 77.5, it may immediately take remedial action subject to the subsequent completion of those procedures.
            (b) Where the Department has taken remedial action as described in paragraph (a) of this section, it will notify the recipient organization orally of the remedial action within one business day of its imposition and in writing within seven business days of its imposition. The written notice will conform to that described in § 77.5(a).
            (c) After receipt of the written notice, the recipient organization will have the same opportunity to respond as described in § 77.5(b)(1).
            (d) The Department will issue a final decision in writing no later than twenty days following receipt of any response submitted by the recipient organization.
          
        
        
          Pt. 78
          PART 78—CONDITIONS FOR WAIVER OF DENIAL OF FEDERAL BENEFITS
          
            Sec.
            78.1
            Applicability.
            78.2
            Definitions.
            78.3
            Benefits not denied to rehabilitated offenders.
          
          
            Authority:
            Section 5301 of Pub. L. 100-690, the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, 102 Stat. 4310, 21 U.S.C. 853a.
          
          
            Source:
            56 FR 29592, June 28, 1991, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 78.1
            Applicability.
            This part is applicable to any decision to deny Federal benefits, under authority of 21 U.S.C. 853a, to an individual convicted of a Federal or State offense involving distribution or possession of a controlled substance as defined by the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 802.
          
          
            
            § 78.2
            Definitions.
            For the purposes of denying Federal benefits under 21 U.S.C. 853a:
            (a) Deemed to be rehabilitated means that an individual has abstained from the illicit use of a controlled substance for the period of at least 180 days immediately prior to and including the date of sentencing provided that such abstinence is documented by the results of periodic urine drug testing conducted during that period; and provided further that such drug testing is conducted using an immunoassay test approved by the Food and Drug Administration for commercial distribution or, in the case of a State offense, either using an immunoassay test approved by the Food and Drug Administration for commercial distribution or pursuant to standards approved by the State.
            (b) Long-term treatment program or long-term drug treatment program means any drug abuse treatment program of 180 days or more where the provider has been accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Organizations, the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities, or the Council on Accreditation of Services for Families and Children, or licensed or otherwise approved by the State to provide drug abuse treatment.
          
          
            § 78.3
            Benefits not denied to rehabilitated offenders.
            (a) No individual convicted of any Federal or State offense involving the distribution of controlled substances shall be denied Federal benefits relating to long-term drug treatment programs for addiction under 21 U.S.C. 853a(a)(2) if:
            (1) The individual declares himself or herself to be an addict and submits to a long-term treatment program for addiction as defined by § 78.2(b), provided that in the determination of the sentencing court there is a reasonable body of evidence to substantiate the individual's declaration that such individual is an addict; or
            (2) The individual is, in the determination of the sentencing court, deemed to be rehabilitated as defined by § 78.2(a).
            (b) No individual convicted of any Federal or State offense involving the possession of controlled substances shall be denied any Federal benefit, or otherwise subject to penalties and conditions, under 21 U.S.C. 853a(b)(2) if:
            (1) The individual declares himself or herself to be an addict and submits to a long-term treatment program for addiction as defined by § 78.2(b), provided that in the determination of the sentencing court there is a reasonable body of evidence to substantiate the individual's declaration that such individual is an addict; or
            (2) The individual is, in the determination of the sentencing court, deemed to be rehabilitated as defined by § 78.2(a).
          
        
        
          Pt. 79
          PART 79—PROGRAM FRAUD CIVIL REMEDIES
          
            Sec.
            79.1
            Basis and purpose.
            79.2
            Definitions.
            79.3
            Basis for civil penalties and assessments.
            79.4
            Investigation.
            79.5
            Review by the reviewing official.
            79.6
            Prerequisites for issuing a complaint.
            79.7
            Complaint.
            79.8
            Service of complaint.
            79.9
            Answer.
            79.10
            Default upon failure to file an answer.
            79.11
            Referral of complaint and answer to the ALJ.
            79.12
            Notice of hearing.
            79.13
            Parties to the hearing.
            79.14
            Separation of functions.
            79.15
            Ex parte contacts.
            79.16
            Disqualification of reviewing official or ALJ.
            79.17
            Rights of parties.
            79.18
            Authority of the ALJ.
            79.19
            Prehearing conferences.
            79.20
            Disclosure of documents.
            79.21
            Discovery.
            79.22
            Exchange of witness lists, statements and exhibits.
            79.23
            Subpoenas for attendance at hearing.
            79.24
            Protective order.
            79.25
            Fees.
            79.26
            Form, filing and service of papers.
            79.27
            Computation of time.
            79.28
            Motions.
            79.29
            Sanctions.
            79.30
            The hearing and burden of proof.
            79.31
            Determining the amount of penalties and assessments.
            79.32
            Location of hearing.
            79.33
            Witnesses.
            79.34
            Evidence.
            79.35
            The record.
            79.36
            Post-hearing briefs.
            79.37
            Initial decision.
            
            79.38
            Reconsideration of initial decision.
            79.39
            Appeal to authority head.
            79.40
            Stays ordered by the Department of Justice.
            79.41
            Stay pending appeal.
            79.42
            Judicial review.
            79.43
            Collection of civil penalties and assessments.
            79.44
            Right to administrative offset.
            79.45
            Deposit in Treasury of United States.
            79.46
            Compromise or settlement.
            79.47
            Limitations.
          
          
            Authority:
            31 U.S.C. 3801-3812.
          
          
            Source:
            53 FR 11659, Apr. 8, 1988, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 79.1
            Basis and purpose.
            (a) Basis. This part implements the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1986, Pub. L. 99-509, §§ 6101-6104, 100 Stat. 1874 (October 21, 1986), to be codified at 31 U.S.C. 3801-3812, 31 U.S.C. 3809 of the statute requires each authority head to promulgate regulations necessary to implement the provisions of the statute.
            (b) Purpose. This part (1) establishes administrative procedures for imposing civil penalties and assessments against persons who make, submit, or present, or cause to be made, submitted, or presented, false, fictitious, or fraudulent claims or written statements to authorities or to their agents, and (2) specifies the hearing and appeal rights of persons subject to allegations of liability for such penalties and assessments.
          
          
            § 79.2
            Definitions.
            
              ALJ means an Administrative Law Judge in the authority appointed pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3105 or detailed to the authority pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3344.
            
              Authority means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              Authority head means the Departmental Grant Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              Benefit means, in the context of statement, anything of value, including but not limited to any advantage, preference, privilege, license, permit, favorable decision, ruling, status, or loan guarantee.
            
              Claim means any request, demand, or submission—
            (a) Made to the authority for property, services, or money (including money representing grants, loans, insurance, or benefits);
            (b) Made to a recipient of property, services, or money from the authority or to a party to a contract with the authority—
            (1) For property or services if the United States—
            (i) Provided such property or services;
            (ii) Provided any portion of the funds for the purchase of such property or services; or
            (iii) Will reimburse such recipient or party for the purchase of such property or services; or
            (2) For the payment of money (including money representing grants, loans, insurance, or benefits) if the United States—
            (i) Provided any portion of the money requested or demanded; or
            (ii) Will reimburse such recipient or party for any portion of the money paid on such request or demand: or
            (c) Made to the authority which has the effect of decreasing an obligation to pay or account for property, services, or money.
            
              Complaint means the administrative complaint served by the reviewing official on the defendant under § 79.7.
            
              Defendant means any person alleged in a complaint under § 79.7 to be liable for a civil penalty or assessment under § 79.3.
            
              Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              Government means the United States Government.
            
              Individual means a natural person.
            
              Initial decision means the written decision of the ALJ required by § 79.10 or § 79.37, and includes a revised initial decision issued following a remand or a motion for reconsideration.
            
              Investigating official means the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services or an officer or employee of the Office of the Inspector General designated by the Inspector General and serving in a position for which the rate of basic pay is not less than the minimum rate of basic pay for grade GS-16 under the General Schedule.
            
              Knows or has reason to know, means that a person, with respect to a claim or statement—
            
            (a) Has actual knowledge that the claim or statement is false, fictitious, or fraudulent;
            (b) Acts in deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of the claim or statement; or
            (c) Acts in reckless disregard of the truth or falsity of the claim or statement.
            
              Makes, wherever it appears, shall include the terms presents, submits, and causes to be made, presented, or submitted. As the context requires, making or made, shall likewise include the corresponding forms of such terms.
            
              Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or private organization, and includes the plural of that term.
            
              Representative means an attorney who is a member in good standing of the bar of any State, Territory, or possession of the United States or of the District of Columbia or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
            
              Reviewing official means the General Counsel of the Department or his or her designee who is—
            (a) Not subject to supervision by, or required to report to, the investigating official;
            (b) Not employed in the organizational unit of the authority in which the investigating official is employed; and
            (c) Serving in a position for which the rate of basic pay is not less than the minimum rate of basic pay for grade GS-16 under the General Schedule.
            
              Statement means any representation, certification, affirmation, document, record, or accounting or bookkeeping entry made—
            (a) With respect to a claim or to obtain the approval or payment of a claim (including relating to eligibility to make a claim); or
            (b) With respect to (including relating to eligibility for)—
            (1) A contract with, or a bid or proposal for a contract with; or
            (2) A grant, loan, or benefit from, the authority, or any State, political subdivision of a State, or other party, if the United States Government provides any portion of the money or property under such contract or for such grant, loan, or benefit, or if the Government will reimburse such State, political subdivision, or party for any portion of the money or property under such contract or for such grant, loan, or benefit,
          
          
            § 79.3
            Basis for civil penalties and assessments.
            (a) Claims. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, any person who makes a claim that the person knows or has reason to know—
            (i) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent;
            (ii) Includes, or is supported by, any written statement which asserts a material fact which is false, fictitious, or fraudulent;
            (iii) Includes, or is supported by, any written statement that—
            (A) Omits a material fact;
            (B) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent as a result of such omission; and
            (C) Is a statement in which the person making such statement has a duty to include such material fact; or
            (iv) Is for payment for the provision of property or services which the person has not provided as claimed, shall be subject, in addition to any other remedy that may be prescribed by law, to a civil penalty of not more than $5,500 1
               for each such claim.
            
              
                1 The amounts specified in this section are updated annually, as adjusted in accordance with the Federal Civil Monetary Penalty Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-140), as amended by the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015 (section 701 of Pub. L. 114-74). Annually adjusted amounts are published at 45 CFR part 102.
            
            (2) Each voucher, invoice, claim form, or other individual request or demand for property, services, or money constitutes a separate claim.
            (3) A claim shall be considered made to the authority, recipient, or party when such claim is actually made to an agent, fiscal intermediary, or other entity, including any State or political subdivision thereof, acting for or on behalf of the authority, recipient, or party.

            (4) Each claim for property, services, or money is subject to a civil penalty regardless of whether such property, services, or money is actually delivered or paid.
            
            (5) If the Government has made any payment (including transferred property or provided services) on a claim, a person subject to a civil penalty under paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall also be subject to an assessment of not more than twice the amount of such claim or that portion thereof that is determined to be in violation of paragraph (a)(1). Such assessment shall be in lieu of damages sustained by the Government because of such claim.
            (b) Statements. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, any person who makes a written statement that—
            (i) The person knows or has reason to know—
            (A) Asserts a material fact which is false, factitious, or fraudulent; or
            (B) Is false, factitious, or fraudulent because it omits a material fact that the person making the statement has a duty to include in such statement; and
            (ii) Contains, or is accompanied by, an express certification or affirmation of the truthfulness and accuracy of the contents of the statement, shall be subject, in addition to any other remedy that may be prescribed by law, to a civil penalty of not more than $5,500 2
               for each such statement.
            
              
                2 The amounts specified in this section are updated annually, as adjusted in accordance with the Federal Civil Monetary Penalty Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-140), as amended by the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015 (section 701 of Pub. L. 114-74). Annually adjusted amounts are published at 45 CFR part 102.
            
            (2) Each representation, certification, or affirmation constitutes a separate statement.
            (3) A statement shall be considered made to the authority when such statement is actually made to an agent, fiscal intermediary, or other entity, including any State or political subdivision thereof, acting for or on behalf of the authority.
            (c) Applications for certain benefits. (1) In the case of any claim or statement made by any individual relating to any of the benefits listed in paragraph (c)(2) of this section received by such individual, such individual may be held liable for penalties and assessments under this section only if such claim or statement is made by such individual in making application for such benefits with respect to such individual's eligibility to receive such benefits.

            (2) For purposes of paragraph (c) of this section, the term benefits means—
            (i) Benefits under the supplemental security income program under title XVI of the Social Security Act;
            (ii) Old age, survivors, and disability insurance benefits under title II of the Social Security Act;
            (iii) Benefits under title XVIII of the Social Security Act;
            (iv) Aid to families with dependent children under a State plan approved under section 402(a) of the Social Security Act;
            (v) Medical assistance under a State plan approved under section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act;
            (vi) Benefits under title XX of the Social Security Act;
            (vii) Benefits under section 336 of the Older Americans Act; or,
            (viii) Benefits under the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981, which are intended for the personal use of the individual who receives the benefits or for a member of the individual's family.
            (d) No proof of specific intent to defraud is required to establish liability under this section.
            (e) In any case in which it is determined that more than one person is liable for making a claim or statement under this section, each such person may be held liable for a civil penalty.
            (f) In any case in which it is determined that more than one person is liable for making a claim under this section on which the Government has made payment (including transferred property or provided services), an assessment may be imposed against any such person or jointly and severally against any combination of such persons.
            [53 FR 11659, Apr. 8, 1988, as amended at 61 FR 52301, Oct. 7, 1996; 81 FR 61565, Sept. 6, 2016]
          
          
            § 79.4
            Investigation.

            (a) If an investigating official concludes that a subpoena pursuant to the authority conferred by 31 U.S.C. 3804(a) is warranted—
            
            (1) The subpoena so issued shall notify the person to whom it is addressed of the authority under which the subpoena is issued and shall identify the records or documents sought;
            (2) The investigating official may designate a person to act on his or her behalf to receive the documents sought; and
            (3) The person receiving such subpoena shall be required to tender to the investigating official, or the person designated to receive the documents, a certification that—
            (i) The documents sought have been produced;
            (ii) Such documents are not available and the reasons therefor; or
            (iii) Such documents suitably identified, have been withheld based upon the assertion of an identified privilege.
            (b) If the investigating official concludes that an action under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act may be warranted, the investigating official shall submit a report containing the findings and conclusions of such investigation to the reviewing official.
            (c) Nothing in this section shall preclude or limit an investigating official's discretion to refer allegations directly to the Department of Justice for suit under the False Claims Act or other civil relief, or to defer or postpone a report or referral to the reviewing official to avoid interference with a criminal investigation or prosecution.
            (d) Nothing in this section modifies any responsibility of an investigating official to report violations of criminal law to the Attorney General.
          
          
            § 79.5
            Review by the reviewing official.
            (a) If, based on the report of the investigating official under § 79.4(b), the reviewing official determines that there is adequate evidence to believe that a person is liable under § 79.3, the reviewing official shall transmit to the Attorney General a written notice of the reviewing official's attention to issue a complaint under § 79.7.
            (b) Such notice shall include—
            (1) A statement of the reviewing official's reasons for issuing a complaint;
            (2) A statement specifying the evidence that supports the allegations of liability;
            (3) A description of the claims or statements upon which the allegations of liability are based;
            (4) An estimate of the amount of money, or the value of property, services, or other benefits, requested or demanded in violation of § 79.3 of this part;
            (5) A statement of any exculpatory or mitigating circumstances that may relate to the claims or statements known by the reviewing official or the investigating official; and
            (6) A statement that there is a reasonable prospect of collecting an appropriate amount of penalties and assessments.
          
          
            § 79.6
            Prerequisites for issuing a complaint.
            (a) The reviewing official may issue a complaint under § 79.7 only if—
            (1) The Department of Justice approves the issuance of a complaint in a written statement described in 31 U.S.C. 3803(b)(1), and
            (2) In the case of allegations of liability under § 79.3(a) with respect to a claim, the reviewing official determines that, with respect to such claim or a group of related claims submitted at the same time such claim is submitted (as defined in paragraph (b) of this section), the amount of money, or the value of property or services, demanded or requested in violation of § 79.3(a) does not exceed $150,000.
            (b) For the purposes of this section, a related group of claims submitted at the same time shall include only those claims arising from the same transaction (e.g., grant, loan, application, or contract) that are submitted simultaneously as part of a single request, demand, or submission.
            (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the reviewing official's authority to join in a single complaint against a person claims that are unrelated or were not submitted simultaneously, regardless of the amount of money, or the value of property or services, demanded or requested.
          
          
            § 79.7
            Complaint.

            (a) On or after the date the Department of Justice approves the issuance of a complaint in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3803(b)(1), the reviewing official may serve a complaint on the defendant, as provided in § 79.8.
            (b) The complaint shall state—
            (1) The allegations of liability against the defendant, including the statutory basis for liability, an identification of the claims or statements that are the basis for the alleged liability, and the reasons why liability allegedly arises from such claims or statements;
            (2) The maximum amount of penalties and assessments for which the defendant may be held liable;
            (3) Instructions for filing an answer to request a hearing, including a specific statement of the defendant's right to request a hearing by filing an answer and to be represented by a representative; and
            (4) That failure to file an answer as set forth in § 79.9 will result in the imposition of the maximum amount of penalties and assessments without right to appeal, as provided in § 79.10.
            (c) At the same time the reviewing official serves the complaint, he or she shall serve the defendant with a copy of these regulations.
          
          
            § 79.8
            Service of complaint.
            (a) Service of a complaint must be made by certified or registered mail or by delivery in any manner authorized by Rule 4(d) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Service is complete upon receipt.
            (b) Proof of service, stating the name and address of the person on whom the complaint was served, and the manner and date of service, may be made by—
            (1) Affidavit of the individual serving the complaint by delivery;
            (2) A United States Postal Service return receipt card acknowledging receipt; or
            (3) Written acknowledgment of receipt by the defendant or his or her representative.
          
          
            § 79.9
            Answer.
            (a) The defendant may request a hearing by filing an answer with the reviewing official within 30 days of service of the complaint. An answer shall be deemed to be a request for hearing.
            (b) In the answer, the defendant—
            (1) Shall admit or deny each of the allegations of liability made in the complaint;
            (2) Shall state any defense on which the defendant intends to rely;
            (3) May state any reasons why the defendant contends that the penalties and assessments should be less than the statutory maximum; and
            (4) Shall state the name, address, and telephone number of the person authorized by the defendant to act as defendant's representative, if any.
            (c) If the defendant is unable to file an answer meeting the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section within the time provided, the defendant, before that time expires, may file with the reviewing official a general answer denying liability and requesting a hearing, and a request for an extension of time within which to file an answer meeting the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. As provided in § 79.11, the reviewing official shall file promptly with the ALJ the complaint, the general answer denying liability, and the request for an extension of time. For good cause shown, the ALJ may grant the defendant up to 30 additional days within which to file an answer meeting the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.
          
          
            § 79.10
            Default upon failure to file an answer.
            (a) If the defendant does not file an answer within the time prescribed in § 79.9(a), the reviewing official may refer the complaint to the ALJ.
            (b) Upon the referral of the complaint, the ALJ shall promptly serve on the defendant in the manner prescribed in § 79.8, a notice that an initial decision will be issued under this section.
            (c) The ALJ shall assume the facts alleged in the complaint to be true and, if such facts establish liability under § 79.3, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision imposing the maximum amount of penalties and assessments allowed under the statute.

            (d) Except as otherwise provided in this section, by failing to file a timely answer, the defendant waives any right to further review of the penalties and assessments imposed under paragraph (c) of this section, and the initial decision shall become final and binding upon the parties 30 days after it is issued.
            (e) If, before such an initial decision becomes final, the defendant files a motion with the ALJ seeking to reopen on the grounds that extraordinary circumstances prevented the defendant from filing an answer, the initial decision shall be stayed pending the ALJ's decision on the motion.
            (f) If, on such motion, the defendant can demonstrate extraordinary circumstances excusing the failure to file a timely answer, the ALJ shall withdraw the initial decision in paragraph (c) of this section, if such a decision has been issued, and shall grant the defendant an opportunity to answer the complaint.
            (g) A decision of the ALJ denying a defendant's motion under paragraph (e) of this section is not subject to reconsideration under § 79.38.
            (h) The defendant may appeal to the authority head the decision denying a motion to reopen by filing a notice of appeal with the authority head within 15 days after the ALJ denies the motion. The timely filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the initial decision until the authority head decides the issue.
            (i) If the defendant files a timely notice of appeal with the authority head, the ALJ shall forward the record of the proceeding to the authority head.
            (j) The authority head shall decide expeditiously whether extraordinary circumstances excuse the defendant's failure to file a timely answer based solely on the record before the ALJ.
            (k) If the authority head decides that extraordinary circumstances excuse the defendant's failure to file a timely answer, the authority head shall remand the case to the ALJ with instructions to grant the defendant an opportunity to answer.
            (l) If the authority head decides that the defendant's failure to file a timely answer is not excused, the authority head shall reinstate the initial decision of the ALJ, which shall become final and binding upon the parties 30 days after the authority head issues such decision.
          
          
            § 79.11
            Referral of complaint and answer to the ALJ.
            Upon receipt of an answer, the reviewing official shall file the complaint and answer with the ALJ.
          
          
            § 79.12
            Notice of hearing.
            (a) When the ALJ receives the complaint and answer, the ALJ shall promptly serve a notice of hearing upon the defendant in the manner prescribed by § 79.8. At the same time, the ALJ shall send a copy of such notice to the representative for the Government.
            (b) Such notice shall include—
            (1) The tentative time and place, and the nature of the hearing;
            (2) The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held;
            (3) The matters of fact and law to be asserted;
            (4) A description of the procedures for the conduct of the hearing;
            (5) The name, address, and telephone number of the representative of the Government and of the defendant, if any; and
            (6) Such other matters as the ALJ deems appropriate.
          
          
            § 79.13
            Parties to the hearing.
            (a) The parities to the hearing shall be the defendant and the authority.
            (b) Pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3730(c)(5), a private plaintiff under the False Claims Act may participate in these proceedings to the extent authorized by the provisions of that Act.
          
          
            § 79.14
            Separation of functions.
            (a) The investigating official, the reviewing official, and any employee or agent of the authority who takes part in investigating, preparing, or presenting a particular case may not, in such case or a factually related case—
            (1) Participate in the hearing as the ALJ;
            (2) Participate or advise in the initial decision or the review of the initial decision by the authority head, except as a witness or a representative in public proceedings; or

            (3) Make the collection of penalties and assessments under 31 U.S.C. 3806.
            
            (b) The ALJ shall not be responsible to, or subject to the supervision or direction of, the investigating official or the reviewing official.
            (c) Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, the representative for the Government may be employed anywhere in the authority, including in the offices of either the investigating official or the reviewing official.
          
          
            § 79.15
            Ex parte contacts.
            No party or person (except employees of the ALJ's office) shall communciate in any way with the ALJ on any matter at issue in a case, unless on notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. This provision does not prohibit a person or party from inquiring about the status of a case or asking routine questions concerning administrative functions or procedures.
          
          
            § 79.16
            Disqualification of reviewing official or ALJ.
            (a) A reviewing official or ALJ in a particular case may disqualify himself or herself at any time.
            (b) A party may file with the ALJ a motion for disqualification of a reviewing official or an ALJ. Such motion shall be accompanied by an affidavit alleging personal bias or other reason for disqualification.
            (c) Such motion and affidavit shall be filed promptly upon the party's discovery of reasons requiring disqualification, or such objections shall be deemed waived.
            (d) Such affidavit shall state specific facts that support the party's belief that personal bias or other reason for disqualification exists and the time and circumstances of the party's discovery of such facts. It shall be accompanied by a certificate of the representative of record that it is made in good faith.
            (e) Upon the filing of such a motion and affidavit, the ALJ shall proceed no further in the case until he or she resolves the matter of disqualification in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section.
            (f)(1) If the ALJ determines that a reviewing official is disqualified, the ALJ shall dismiss the complaint without prejudice.
            (2) If the ALJ disqualifies himself or herself, the case shall be reassigned promptly to another ALJ.
            (3) If the ALJ denies a motion to disqualify, the authority head may determine the matter only as part of his or her review of the initial decision upon appeal, if any.
          
          
            § 79.17
            Rights of parties.
            Except as otherwise limited by this part, all parties may—
            (a) Be accompanied, represented, and advised by a representative;
            (b) Participate in any conference held by the ALJ;
            (c) Conduct discovery;
            (d) Agree to stipulations of fact or law, which shall be made part of the record;
            (e) Present evidence relevant to the issues at the hearing;
            (f) Present and cross-examine witnesses;
            (g) Present oral arguments at the hearing as permitted by the ALJ; and
            (h) Submit written briefs and proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law after the hearing.
          
          
            § 79.18
            Authority of the ALJ.
            (a) The ALJ shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing, avoid delay, maintain order, and assure that a record of the proceeding is made.
            (b) The ALJ has the authority to—
            (1) Set and change the date, time, and place of the hearing upon reasonable notice to the parties;
            (2) Continue or recess the hearing in whole or in part for a reasonable period of time;
            (3) Hold conferences to identify or simplify the issues, or to consider other matters that may aid in the expeditious disposition of the proceeding;
            (4) Administer oaths and affirmations;
            (5) Issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at depositions or at hearings;
            (6) Rule on motions and other procedural matters;
            (7) Regulate the scope and timing of discovery;

            (8) Regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of representatives and parties;
            
            (9) Examine witnesses;
            (10) Receive, rule on, exclude, or limit evidence;
            (11) Upon motion of a party, take official notice of facts;
            (12) Upon motion of a party, decide cases, in whole or in part, by summary judgment where there is no disputed issue of material fact;
            (13) Conduct any conference, argument, or hearing on motions in person or by telephone; and
            (14) Exercise such other authority as is necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the ALJ under this part.
            (c) The ALJ does not have the authority to find Federal statutes or regulations invalid.
          
          
            § 79.19
            Prehearing conferences.
            (a) The ALJ may schedule prehearing conferences as appropriate.
            (b) Upon the motion of any party, the ALJ shall schedule at least one prehearing conference at a reasonable time in advance of the hearing.
            (c) The ALJ may use prehearing conferences to discuss the following:
            (1) Simplication of the issues;
            (2) The necessity or desirability of amendments to the pleadings, including the need for a more definite statement;
            (3) Stipulations and admissions of fact__, or as to the contents and authenticity of documents;
            (4) Whether the parties can agree to submission of the case on a stipulated record;
            (5) Whether a party chooses to waive appearance at an oral hearing and to submit only documentary evidence (subject to the objection of other parties) and written argument;
            (6) Limitation of the number of witnesses;
            (7) Scheduling dates for the exchange of witness lists and of proposed exhibits;
            (8) Discovery;
            (9) The time and place for the hearing; and
            (10) Such other matters as may tend to expedite the fair and just disposition of the proceedings.
            (d) The ALJ may issue an order containing all matters agreed upon by the parties or ordered by the ALJ at a prehearing conference.
          
          
            § 79.20
            Disclosure of documents.
            (a) Upon written request to the reviewing official, the defendant may review any relevant and material documents, transcripts, records, and other materials that relate to the allegations set out in the complaint and upon which the findings and conclusions of the investigating official under § 79.4(b) are based, unless such documents are subject to a privilege under Federal law. Upon payment of fees for duplication, the defendant may obtain copies of such documents.
            (b) Upon written request to the reviewing official, the defendant also may obtain a copy of all exculpatory information in the possession of the reviewing official or investigating official relating to the allegations in the complaint, even if it is contained in a document that would otherwise be privileged. If the document would otherwise be privileged, only that portion containing exculpatory information must be disclosed.
            (c) The notice sent to the Attorney General from the reviewing official as described in § 79.5 is not discoverable under any circumstances.
            (d) The defendant may file a motion to compel disclosure of the documents subject to the provisions of this section. Such a motion may only be filed with the ALJ following the filing of an answer pursuant to § 79.9.
          
          
            § 79.21
            Discovery.
            (a) The following types of discovery are authorized:
            (1) Requests for production of documents for inspection and copying;
            (2) Requests for admission of the contents or authenticity of any relevant document or of the truth of any revelant fact;
            (3) Written interrogatories; and
            (4) Depositions.

            (b) For the purpose of this section and §§ 79.22 and 79.23, the term documents includes information, documents, reports, answers, records, accounts, papers, and other data and documentary evidence. Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to require the creation of a document.

            (c) Unless mutually agreed to by the parties, discovery is available only as ordered by the ALJ. The ALJ shall regulate the timing of discovery.
            (d) Motions for discovery. (1) A party seeking discovery may file a motion with the ALJ. Such a motion shall be accompanied by a copy of the requested discovery, or in the case of depositions, a summary of the scope of the proposed deposition.
            (2) Within ten days of service, a party may file an opposition to the motion and/or a motion for protective order as provided in § 79.24.
            (3) The ALJ may grant a motion for discovery only if he or she finds that the discovery sought—
            (i) Is necessary for the expeditious, fair, and reasonable consideration of the issues;
            (ii) Is not unduly costly or burdensome;
            (iii) Will not unduly delay the proceeding; and
            (iv) Does not seek privileged information.
            (4) The burden of showing that discovery should be allowed is on the party seeking discovery.
            (5) The ALJ may grant discovery subject to a protective order under § 79.24.
            (e) Depositions. (1) If a motion for deposition is granted, the ALJ shall issue a subpoena for the deponent, which may require the deponent to produce documents. The subpoena shall specify the time and place at which the deposition will be held.
            (2) The party seeking to depose shall serve the subpoena in the manner prescribed in § 79.8.
            (3) The deponent may file with the ALJ a motion to quash the subpoena or a motion for a protective order within ten days of service.
            (4) The party seeking to depose shall provide for the taking of a verbatim transcript of the deposition, which it shall make available to all other parties for inspection and copying.
            (f) Each party shall bear its own costs of discovery.
          
          
            § 79.22
            Exchange of witness lists, statements and exhibits.
            (a) At least 15 days before the hearing or at such other time as may be ordered by the ALJ, the parties shall exchange witness lists, copies of prior statements of proposed witnesses, and copies of proposed hearing exhibits, including copies of any written statements that the party intends to offer in lieu of live testimony in accordance with § 79.33(b). At the time the above documents are exchanged, any party that intends to rely on the transcript of deposition testimony in lieu of live testimony at the hearing, if permitted by the ALJ, shall provide each party with a copy of the specific pages of the transcript it intends to introduce into evidence.
            (b) If a party objects, the ALJ shall not admit into evidence the testimony of any witness whose name does not appear on the witness list or any exhibit not provided to the opposing party as provided above unless the ALJ finds good cause for the failure or that there is no prejudice to the objecting party.
            (c) Unless another party objects within the time set by the ALJ, documents exchanged in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section shall be deemed to be authentic for the purpose of admissibility at the hearing.
          
          
            § 79.23
            Subpoenas for attendance at hearing.
            (a) A party wishing to procure the appearance and testimony of any individual at the hearing may request that the ALJ issue a subpoena.
            (b) A subpoena requiring the attendance and testimony of an individual may also require the individual to produce documents at the hearing.
            (c) A party seeking a subpoena shall file a written request therefor not less than 15 days before the date fixed for the hearing unless otherwise allowed by the ALJ for good cause shown. Such request shall specify any documents to be produced and shall designate the witnesses and describe the address and location thereof with sufficient particularity to permit such witnesses to be found.
            (d) The subpoena shall specify the time and place at which the witness is to appear and any documents the witness is to produce.

            (e) The party seeking the subpoena shall serve it in the manner prescribed in § 79.8, except that a subpoena on a party or upon an individual under the control of a party may be served as prescribed in § 79.26(b).
            
            (f) A party or the individual to whom the subpoena is directed may file with the ALJ a motion to quash the subpoena within ten days after service or on or before the time specified in the subpoena for compliance if it is less than ten days after service.
          
          
            § 79.24
            Protective order.
            (a) A party or a prospective witness or deponent may file a motion for a protective order with respect to discovery sought by an opposing party or with respect to the hearing, seeking to limit the availability or disclosure of evidence.
            (b) In issuing a protective order, the ALJ may make any order which justice requires to protect a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense, including one or more of the following:
            (1) That the discovery not be had;
            (2) That the discovery may be had only on specified terms and conditions, including a designation of the time or place;
            (3) That the discovery may be had only through a method of discovery other than that requested:
            (4) That certain matters not be inquired into, or that the scope of discovery be limited to certain matters;
            (5) That discovery be conducted with no one present except persons designated by the ALJ;
            (6) That the contents of discovery or evidence be sealed;
            (7) That a deposition after being sealed be opened only by order of the ALJ;
            (8) That a trade secret or other confidential research, development, commercial information, or facts pertaining to any criminal investigation, proceeding, or other administrative investigation not be disclosed or be disclosed only in a designated way; or
            (9) That the parties simultaneously file specified documents or information enclosed in sealed envelopes to be opened as directed by the ALJ.
          
          
            § 79.25
            Fees.
            The party requesting a subpoena shall pay the cost of the fees and mileage of any witness subpoenaed in the amounts that would be payable to a witness in a proceeding in United States District Court. A check for witness fees and mileage shall accompany the subpoena when served, except that when a subpoena is issued on behalf of the authority, a check for witness fees and mileage need not accompany the subpoena.
          
          
            § 79.26
            Form, filing and service of papers.
            (a) Form. (1) Documents filed with the ALJ shall include an original and two copies.

            (2) Every pleading and paper filed in the proceeding shall contain a caption setting forth the title of the action, the case number assigned by the ALJ, and a designation of the paper (e.g., motion to quash subpoena).
            (3) Every pleading and paper shall be signed by, and shall contain the address and telephone number of, the party or the person on whose behalf the paper was filed, or his or her representative.
            (4) Papers are considered filed when they are mailed. Date of mailing may be established by a certificate from the party or its representative or by proof that the document was sent by certified or registered mail.
            (b) Service. A party filing a document with the ALJ shall, at the time of filing, serve a copy of such document on every other party. Service upon any party of any document other than those required to be served as prescribed in § 79.8 shall be made by delivering a copy or by placing a copy of the document in the United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the party's last known address. When a party is represented by a representative, service shall be made upon such representative in lieu of the actual party.
            (c) Proof of service. A certificate of the individual serving the document by personal delivery or by mail, setting forth the manner of service, shall be proof of service.
          
          
            § 79.27
            Computation of time.

            (a) In computing any period of time under this part or in an order issued thereunder, the time begins with the day following the act, event, or default, and includes the last day of the period, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday observed by the Federal government, in which event it includes the next business day.
            (b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, when the period of time allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays observed by the Federal government shall be excluded from the computation.
            (c) Where a document has been served or issued by placing it in the mail, an additional five calendar days will be added to the time permitted for any response.
          
          
            § 79.28
            Motions.
            (a) Any application to the ALJ for an order or ruling shall be by motion. Motions shall state the relief sought, the authority relied upon, and the facts alleged, and shall be filed with the ALJ and served on all other parties.
            (b) Except for motions made during a prehearing conference or at the hearing, all motions shall be in writing. The ALJ may require that oral motions be reduced to writing.
            (c) Within 15 days after a written motion is served, or such other time as may be fixed by the ALJ, any party may file a response to such motion.
            (d) The ALJ may not grant a written motion before the time for filing responses thereto has expired, except upon consent of the parties or following a hearing on the motion, but may overrule or deny such motion without awaiting a response.
            (e) The ALJ shall make a reasonable effort to dispose of all outstanding motions prior to the beginning of the hearing.
          
          
            § 79.29
            Sanctions.
            (a) The ALJ may sanction a person, including any party or representative, for—
            (1) Failing to comply with an order, rule, or procedure governing the proceeding;
            (2) Failing to prosecute or defend an action; or
            (3) Engaging in other misconduct that interferes with the speedy, orderly, or fair conduct of the hearing.
            (b) Any such sanction, including but not limited to those listed in paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of this section, shall reasonably relate to the severity and nature of the failure or misconduct.
            (c) When a party fails to comply with an order, including an order for taking a deposition, the production of evidence within the party's control, or a request for admission, the ALJ may—
            (1) Draw an inference in favor of the requesting party with regard to the information sought;
            (2) In the case of requests for admission, deem each matter of which an admission is requested to be admitted;
            (3) Prohibit the party failing to comply with such order from introducing evidence concerning, or otherwise relying upon, testimony relating to the information sought; and
            (4) Strike any part of the pleadings or other submissions of the party failing to comply with such request.
            (d) If a party fails to prosecute or defend an action under this part commenced by service of a notice of hearing, the ALJ may dismiss the action or may issue an initial decision imposing penalties and assessments.
            (e) The ALJ may refuse to consider any motion, request, response, brief or other document which is not filed in a timely fashion.
          
          
            § 79.30
            The hearing and burden of proof.
            (a) The ALJ shall conduct a hearing on the record in order to determine whether the defendant is liable for a civil penalty or assessment under § 79.3 and, if so, the appropriate amount of any such civil penalty or assessment considering any aggravating or mitigating factors.
            (b) The authority shall prove defendant's liability and any aggravating factors by a preponderance of the evidence.
            (c) The defendant shall prove any affirmative defenses and any mitigating factors by a preponderance of the evidence.
            (d) The hearing shall be open to the public unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ for good cause shown.
          
          
            
            § 79.31
            Determining the amount of penalties and assessments.
            (a) In determining an appropriate amount of civil penalties and assessments, the ALJ and the authority head, upon appeal, should evaluate any circumstances that mitigate or aggravate the violation and should articulate in their opinions the reasons that support the penalties and assessments they impose. Because of the intangible costs of fraud, the expense of investigating such conduct, and the need to deter others who might be similarly tempted, ordinarily double damages and a significant civil penalty should be imposed.
            (b) Although not exhaustive, the following factors are among those that may influence the ALJ and the authority head in determining the amount of penalties and assessments to impose with respect to the misconduct (i.e., the false, fictitious, or fraudulent claims or statements) charged in the complaint:
            (1) The number of false, fictitious, or fraudulent claims or statements;
            (2) The time period over which such claims or statements were made;
            (3) The degree of the defendant's culpability with respect to the misconduct;
            (4) The amount of money or the value of the property, services, or benefit falsely claimed;
            (5) The value of the Government's actual loss as a result of the misconduct, including foreseeable consequential damages and the costs of investigation;
            (6) The relationship of the amount imposed as civil penalties to the amount of the Government's loss;
            (7) The potential or actual impact of the misconduct upon national defense, public health or safety, or public confidence in the management of Government programs and operations, including particularly the impact on the intended beneficiaries of such programs;
            (8) Whether the defendant has engaged in a pattern of the same or similar misconduct;
            (9) Whether the defendant attempted to conceal the misconduct;
            (10) The degree to which the defendant has involved others in the misconduct or in concealing it;
            (11) Where the misconduct of employees or agents is imputed to the defendant, the extent to which the defendant's practices fostered or attempted to preclude such misconduct;
            (12) Whether the defendant cooperated in or obstructed an investigation of the misconduct;
            (13) Whether the defendant assisted in identifying and prosecuting other wrongdoers;
            (14) The complexity of the program or transaction, and the degree of the defendant's sophistication with respect to it, including the extent of the defendant's prior participation in the program or in similar transactions;
            (15) Whether the defendant has been found, in any criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding, to have engaged in similar misconduct or to have dealt dishonestly with the Government of the United States or of a State, directly or indirectly; and
            (16) The need to deter the defendant and others from engaging in the same or similar misconduct.
            (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ALJ or the authority head from considering any other factors that in any given case may mitigate or aggravate the offense for which penalties and assessments are imposed.
          
          
            § 79.32
            Location of hearing.
            (a) The hearing may be held—
            (1) In any judicial district of the United States in which the defendant resides or transacts business;
            (2) In any judicial district of the United States in which the claim or statement in issue was made; or
            (3) In such other place as may be agreed upon by the defendant and the ALJ.
            (b) Each party shall have the opportunity to present argument with respect to the location of the hearing.
            (c) The hearing shall be held at the place and at the time ordered by the ALJ.
          
          
            § 79.33
            Witnesses.

            (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, testimony at the hearing shall be given orally by witnesses under oath or affirmation.
            
            (b) At the discretion of the ALJ, testimony may be admitted in the form of a written statement or deposition. Any such written statement must be provided to all other parties along with the last known address of such witness, in a manner which allows sufficient time for other parties to subpoena such witness for cross-examination at the hearing. Prior written statements of witnesses proposed to testify at the hearing and deposition transcripts shall be exchanged as provided in § 79.22(a).
            (c) The ALJ shall exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of interrogating witnesses and presenting evidence so as to (1) make the interrogation and presentation effective for the ascertainment of the truth, (2) avoid needless consumption of time, and (3) protect witnesses from harassment or undue embarrassment.
            (d) The ALJ shall permit the parties to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
            (e) At the discretion of the ALJ, a witness may be cross-examined on matters relevant to the proceeding without regard to the scope of his or her direct examination. To the extent permitted by the ALJ, cross-examination on matters outside the scope of direct examination shall be conducted in the manner of direct examination and may proceed by leading questions only if the witness is a hostile witness, an adverse party, or a witness identified with an adverse party.
            (f) Upon motion of any party, the ALJ shall order witnesses excluded so that they cannot hear the testimony of other witnesses. This rule does not authorize exclusion of—
            (1) A party who is an individual;
            (2) In the case of a party that is not an individual, an officer or employee of the party appearing for the entity pro se or designated by the party's representative; or
            (3) An individual whose presence is shown by a party to be essential to the presentation of its case, including an individual employed by the Government engaged in assisting the representative for the Government.
          
          
            § 79.34
            Evidence.
            (a) The ALJ shall determine the admissibility of evidence.

            (b) Except as provided in this part, the ALJ shall not be bound by the Federal Rules of Evidence. However, the ALJ may apply the Federal Rules of Evidence where appropriate, e.g., to exclude unreliable evidence.
            (c) The ALJ shall exclude irrelevant and immaterial evidence.
            (d) Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or by considerations of undue delay or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
            (e) Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if it is privileged under Federal law.
            (f) Evidence concerning offers of compromise or settlement shall be inadmissible to the extent provided in Rule 408 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.
            (g) The ALJ shall permit the parties to introduce rebuttal witnesses and evidence.
            (h) All documents and other evidence offered or taken for the record shall be open to examination by all parties, unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ pursuant to § 79.24.
          
          
            § 79.35
            The record.
            (a) The hearing will be recorded and transcribed. Transcripts may be obtained following the hearing from the ALJ at a cost not to exceed the actual cost of duplication.
            (b) The transcript of testimony, exhibits and other evidence admitted at the hearing, and all papers and requests filed in the proceeding constitute the record for the decision by the ALJ and the authority head.
            (c) The record may be inspected and copied (upon payment of a reasonable fee) by anyone, unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ pursuant to § 79.24.
          
          
            § 79.36
            Post-hearing briefs.

            The ALJ may require the parties to file post-hearing briefs. In any event, any party may file a post-hearing brief. The ALJ shall fix the time for filing such briefs, not to exceed 60 days from the date the party receives the transcript of the hearing or, if applicable, the stipulated record. Such briefs may be accompanied by proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. The ALJ may permit the parties to file reply briefs.
          
          
            § 79.37
            Initial decision.
            (a) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision based only on the record, which shall contain findings of fact, conclusions of law, and the amount of any penalties and assessments imposed.
            (b) The findings of fact shall include a finding on each of the following issues:
            (1) Whether the claims or statements identified in the complaint, or any portions thereof, violate § 79.3;
            (2) If the person is liable for penalties or assessments, the appropriate amount of any such penalties or assessments considering any mitigating or aggravating factors that he or she finds in the case, such as those described in § 79.31.
            (c) The ALJ shall promptly serve the initial decision on all parties within 90 days after the time for submission of post-hearing briefs and reply briefs (if permitted) has expired. The ALJ shall at the same time serve all parties with a statement describing the right of any defendant determined to be liable for a civil penalty or assessment to file a motion for reconsideration with the ALJ or a notice of appeal with the authority head. If the ALJ fails to meet the deadline contained in this paragraph, he or she shall notify the parties of the reason for the delay and shall set a new deadline.
            (d) Unless the initial decision of the ALJ is timely appealed to the authority head, or a motion for reconsideration of the initial decision is timely filed, the initial decision shall constitute the final decision of the authority head and shall be final and binding on the parties 30 days after it is issued by the ALJ.
          
          
            § 79.38
            Reconsideration of initial decision.
            (a) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, any party may file a motion for reconsideration of the initial decision within 20 days of receipt of the initial decision. If service was made by mail, receipt will be presumed to be five days from the date of mailing in the absence of contrary proof.
            (b) Every such motion must set forth the matters claimed to have been erroneously decided and the nature of the alleged errors. Such motion shall be accompanied by a supporting brief.
            (c) Responses to such motions shall be allowed only upon request of the ALJ.
            (d) No party may file a motion for reconsideration of an initial decision that has been revised in response to a previous motion for reconsideration.
            (e) The ALJ may dispose of a motion for reconsideration by denying it or by issuing a revised initial decision.
            (f) If the ALJ denies a motion for reconsideration, the initial decision shall constitute the final decision of the authority head and shall be final and binding on the parties 30 days after the ALJ denies the motion, unless the initial decision is timely appealed to the authority head in accordance with § 79.39.
            (g) If the ALJ issues a revised initial decision, that decision shall constitute the final decision of the authority head and shall be final and binding on the parties 30 days after it is issued, unless it is timely appealed to the authority head in accordance with § 79.39.
          
          
            § 79.39
            Appeal to authority head.
            (a) Any defendant who has filed a timely answer and who is determined in an initial decision to be liable for a civil penalty or assessment may appeal such decision to the authority head by filing a notice of appeal with the authority head in accordance with this section.
            (b)(1) A notice of appeal may be filed at any time within 30 days after the ALJ issues an initial decision. However, if another party files a motion for reconsideration under § 79.38, consideration of the appeal shall be stayed automatically pending resolution of the motion for reconsideration.
            (2) If a motion for reconsideration is timely filed, a notice of appeal must be filed within 30 days after the ALJ denies the motion or issues a revised initial decision, whichever applies.

            (3) If no motion for reconsideration is timely filed, a notice of appeal must be filed within 30 days after the ALJ issues the initial decision.
            (4) The authority head may extend the initial 30-day period for an additional 30-days if the defendant files with the authority head a request for an extension within the initial 30 day period and shows good cause.
            (c) If the defendant files a timely notice of appeal with the authority head, and the time for filing motions for reconsideration under § 79.38 has expired, the ALJ shall forward the record of the proceeding to the authority head.
            (d) A notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a written brief specifying exceptions to the initial decision and reasons supporting the exceptions.
            (e) The representative for the Government may file a brief in opposition to exceptions within 30 days of receiving the notice of appeal and accompanying brief.
            (f) There is no right to appear personally before the authority head.
            (g) There is no right to appeal any interlocutory ruling by the ALJ.
            (h) In reviewing the initial decision, the authority head shall not consider any objection that was not raised before the ALJ unless a demonstration is made of extraordinary circumstances causing the failure to raise the objection.
            (i) If any party demonstrates to the satisfaction of the authority head that additional evidence not presented at such hearing is material and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to present such evidence at such hearing, the authority head shall remand the matter to the ALJ for consideration of such additional evidence.
            (j) The authority head may affirm, reduce, reverse, compromise, remand, or settle any penalty or assessment determined by the ALJ in any initial decision.
            (k) The authority head shall promptly serve each party to the appeal with a copy of the decision of the authority head and a statement describing the right of any person determined to be liable for a penalty or assessment to seek judicial review.
            (l) Unless a petition for review is filed as provided in 31 U.S.C. 3805 after a defendant has exhausted all administrative remedies under this part and within 60 days after the date on which the authority head serves the defendant with a copy of the authority head's decision, a determination that a defendant is liable under § 79.3 is final and is not subject to judicial review.
          
          
            § 79.40
            Stays ordered by the Department of Justice.
            If at any time the Attorney General or an Assistant Attorney General designated by the Attorney General transmits to the authority head a written finding that continuation of the administrative process described in this part with respect to a claim or statement may adversely affect any pending or potential criminal or civil action related to such claim or statement, the authority head shall stay the process immediately. The authority head may order the process resumed only upon receipt of the written authorization of the Attorney General.
          
          
            § 79.41
            Stay pending appeal.
            (a) An initial decision is stayed automatically pending disposition of a motion for reconsideration or of an appeal to the authority head.
            (b) No administrative stay is available following a final decision of the authority head.
          
          
            § 79.42
            Judicial review.
            Section 3805 of title 31, United States Code, authorizes judicial review by an appropriate United States District Court of a final decision of the authority head imposing penalties or assessments under this part and specifies the procedures for such review.
          
          
            § 79.43
            Collection of civil penalties and assessments.
            Sections 3806 and 3808(b) of title 31, United States Code, authorize actions for collection of civil penalties and assessments imposed under this part and specify the procedures for such actions.
          
          
            § 79.44
            Right to administrative offset.

            The amount of any penalty or assessment which has become final, or for which a judgment has been entered under § 79.42 or § 79.43, or any amount agreed upon in a compromise or settlement under § 79.46, may be collected by administrative offset under 31 U.S.C. 3716, except that an administrative offset may not be made under this subsection against a refund of an overpayment of Federal taxes, then or later owing by the United States to the defendant.
          
          
            § 79.45
            Deposit in Treasury of United States.
            All amounts collected pursuant to this part shall be deposited as miscellaneous receipts in the Treasury of the United States, except as provided in 31 U.S.C. 3806(g).
          
          
            § 79.46
            Compromise or settlement.
            (a) Parties may make offers of compromise or settlement at any time.
            (b) The reviewing official has the exclusive authority to compromise or settle a case under this part at any time after the date on which the reviewing official is permitted to issue a complaint and before the date on which the ALJ issues an initial decision.
            (c) The authority head has exclusive authority to compromise or settle a case under this part at any time after the date on which the ALJ issues an initial decision, except during the pendency of any review under § 79.42 or during the pendency of any action to collect penalties and assessments under § 79.43.
            (d) The Attorney General has exclusive authority to compromise or settle a case under this part during the pendency of any review under § 79.42 or of any action to recover penalties and assessments under 31 U.S.C. 3806.
            (e) The investigating official may recommend settlement terms to the reviewing official, the authority head, or the Attorney General, as appropriate. The reviewing official may recommend settlement terms to the authority head, or the Attorney General, as appropriate.
            (f) Any compromise or settlement must be in writing.
          
          
            § 79.47
            Limitations.
            (a) The notice of hearing with respect to a claim or statement must be served in the manner specified in § 79.8 within 6 years after the date on which such claim or statement is made.
            (b) If the defendant fails to file a timely answer, service of a notice under § 79.10(b) shall be deemed a notice of hearing for purposes of this section.
            (c) The statute of limitations may be extended by agreement of the parties.
          
        
        
          Pt. 80
          PART 80—NONDISCRIMINATION UNDER PROGRAMS RECEIVING FEDERAL ASSISTANCE THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES EFFECTUATION OF TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964
          
            Sec.
            80.1
            Purpose.
            80.2
            Application of this regulation.
            80.3
            Discrimination prohibited.
            80.4
            Assurances required.
            80.5
            Illustrative application.
            80.6
            Compliance information.
            80.7
            Conduct of investigations.
            80.8
            Procedure for effecting compliance.
            80.9
            Hearings.
            80.10
            Decisions and notices.
            80.11
            Judicial review.
            80.12
            Effect on other regulations; forms and instructions.
            80.13
            Definitions.
            Appendix A to Part 80—Federal Financial Assistance to Which These Regulations Apply
            Appendix B to Part 80—Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 602, 78 Stat. 252; 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1.
          
          
            § 80.1
            Purpose.
            The purpose of this part is to effectuate the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (hereafter referred to as the “Act”) to the end that no person in the United States shall; on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department of Health and Human Services.
            (Sec. 601, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 38 FR 17982, July 5, 1973]
          
          
            
            § 80.2
            Application of this regulation.

            This regulation applies to any program to which Federal financial assistance is authorized to be extended to a recipient under a law administered by the Department, including the Federal financial assistance listed in appendix A to this part. It applies to money paid, property transferred, or other Federal financial assistance extended after the effective date of the regulation pursuant to an application approved prior to such effective date. This regulation does not apply to (a) any Federal financial assistance by way of insurance or guaranty contracts, (b) money paid, property transferred, or other assistance extended before the effective date of this regulation, (c) the use of any assistance by any individual who is the ultimate beneficiary under any such program, or (d) any employment practice, under any such program, or any employer, employment agency, or labor organization, except to the extent described in § 80.3. The fact that a type of Federal assistance is not listed in appendix A to this part shall not mean, if title VI of the Act is otherwise applicable, that a program is not covered. Federal financial assistance under statutes now in force or hereinafter enacted may be added to this list by notice published in the Federal Register.
            
            (Secs. 602, 604, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252, 253 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, 2000d-3))
            [38 FR 17979, July 5, 1973, as amended at 70 FR 24318, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            § 80.3
            Discrimination prohibited.
            (a) General. No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program to which this part applies.
            (b) Specific discriminatory actions prohibited. (1) A recipient under any program to which this part applies may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, on ground of race, color, or national origin:
            (i) Deny an individual any service, financial aid, or other benefit provided under the program;
            (ii) Provide any service, financial aid, or other benefit to an individual which is different, or is provided in a different manner, from that provided to others under the program;
            (iii) Subject an individual to segregation or separate treatment in any matter related to his receipt of any service, financial aid, or other benefit under the program;
            (iv) Restrict an individual in any way in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others receiving any service, financial aid, or other benefit under the program;
            (v) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether he satisfies any admission, enrollment, quota, eligibility, membership or other requirement or condition which individuals must meet in order to be provided any service, financial aid, or other benefit provided under the program;
            (vi) Deny an individual an opportunity to participate in the program through the provision of services or otherwise or afford him an opportunity to do so which is different from that afforded others under the program (including the opportunity to participate in the program as an employee but only to the extent set forth in paragraph (c) of this section).
            (vii) Deny a person the opportunity to participate as a member of a planning or advisory body which is an integral part of the program.

            (2) A recipient, in determining the types of services, financial aid, or other benefits, or facilities which will be provided under any such program, or the class of individuals to whom, or the situations in which, such services, financial aid, other benefits, or facilities will be provided under any such program, or the class of individuals to be afforded an opportunity to participate in any such program, may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination because of their race, color, or national origin, or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program as respect individuals of a particular race, color, or national origin.
            
            (3) In determining the site or location of a facilities, an applicant or recipient may not make selections with the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under any programs to which this regulation applies, on the ground of race, color, or national origin; or with the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Act or this regulation.
            (4) As used in this section, the services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under a program receiving Federal financial assistance shall be deemed to include any service, financial aid, or other benefits provided in or through a facility provided with the aid of Federal financial assistance.
            (5) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination in this paragraph and paragraph (c) of this section does not limit the generality of the prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
            (6)(i) In administering a program regarding which the recipient has previously discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, or national origin, the recipient must take affirmative action to overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
            (ii) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination, a recipient in administering a program may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, or national origin.
            (c) Employment practices. (1) Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance to a program to which this regulation applies is to provide employment, a recipient may not (directly or through contractual or other arrangements) subject an individual to discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in its employment practices under such program (including recruitment or recruitment advertising, employment, layoff or termination, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and use of facilities), including programs where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is (i) to reduce the employment of such individuals or to help them through employment to meet subsistence needs, (ii) to assist such individuals through employment to meet expenses incident to the commencement or continuation of their education or training, (iii) to provide work experience which contributes to the education or training of such individuals, or (iv) to provide remunerative activity to such individuals who because of handicaps cannot be readily absorbed in the competive labor market. The following, under existing laws, have one of the above objectives as a primary objective:
            (a) Projects under the Public Works Acceleration Act, Pub. L. 87-658, 42 U.S.C. 2641-2643.
            (b) Work-study under the Vocational Education Act of 1963, as amended, 20 U.S.C. 1371-1374.
            (c) Programs assisted under laws listed in appendix A to this part as respects employment opportunities provided thereunder, or in facilities provided thereunder, which are limited, or for which preference is given, to students, fellows, or other persons in training for the same or related employments.
            (d) Assistance to rehabilitation facilities under the Vocational Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. 32-34, 41a and 41b.
            (2) The requirements applicable to construction employment under any such program shall be those specified in or pursuant to Part III of Executive Order 11246 or any Executive order which supersedes it.

            (3) Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is not to provide employment, but discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in the employment practices of the recipient or other persons subject to the regulation tends, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, to exclude individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to discrimination under any program to which this regulation applies, the foregoing provisions of this paragraph (c) shall apply to the employment practices of the recipient or other persons subject to the regulation, to the extent necessary to assure equality of opportunity to, and nondiscriminatory treatment of, beneficiaries.
            
            (d) Indian Health and Cuban Refugee Services. An individual shall not be deemed subjected to discrimination by reason of his exclusion from benefits limited by Federal law to individuals of a particular race, color, or national origin different from his.
            (e) Medical emergencies. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a recipient of Federal financial assistance shall not be deemed to have failed to comply with paragraph (a) of this section if immediate provision of a service or other benefit to an individual is necessary to prevent his death or serious impairment of his health, and such service or other benefit cannot be provided except by or through a medical institution which refuses or fails to comply with paragraph (a) of this section.
            (Secs. 601, 602, 604, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252, 253 (42 U.S.C. 2000d, 2000d-1, 2000d-3))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 38 FR 17979, 17982, July 5, 1973; 70 FR 24318, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            § 80.4
            Assurances required.
            (a) General. (1) Every application for Federal financial assistance to which this part applies, except an application to which paragraph (b) of this section applies, and every application for Federal financial assistance to provide a facility shall, as a condition to its approval and the extension of any Federal financial assistance pursuant to the application, contain or be accompanied by an assurance that the program will be conducted or the facility operated in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part. In the case of an application for Federal financial assistance to provide real property or structures thereon, the assurance shall obligate the recipient, or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the real property or structures are used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits. In the case of personal property the assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which he retains ownership or possession of the property. In all other cases the assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended pursuant to the application. The responsible Department official shall specify the form of the foregoing assurances in the program, and the extent to which like assurances will be required of subgrantees, contractors and subcontractors, transferees, successors in interest, and other participants in the program. Any such assurance shall include provisions which give the United States a right to seek its judicial enforcement.

            (2) Where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of a transfer of real property or interest therein from the Federal Government the instrument effecting or recording the transfer shall contain a covenant running with the land to assure nondiscrimination for the period during which the real property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits. Where no transfer of property is involved but property is improved with Federal financial assistance, the recipient shall agree to include such a covenant to any subsequent transfer of the property. Where the property is obtained from the Federal Government, such covenant may also include a condition coupled with a right to be reserved by the Department to revert title to the property in the event of a breach of the covenant where, in the discretion of the responsible Department official, such a condition and right of reverter is appropriate to the statute under which the real property is obtained and to the nature of the grant and the grantee. In the event a transferee of real property proposes to mortgage or otherwise encumber the real property as security for financing construction of new, or improvement of existing, facilities on such property for the purposes for which the property was transferred, the responsible Department official may agree, upon request of the transferee and if necessary to accomplish such financing, and upon such conditions as he deems appropriate, to forbear the exercise of such right to revert title for so long as the lien of such mortgage or other encumbrance remains effective.
            (b) Continuing Federal financial assistance. Every application by a State or a State agency for continuing Federal financial assistance to which this regulation applies (including the Federal financial assistance listed in part 2 of appendix A to this part) shall as a condition to its approval and the extension of any Federal financial assistance pursuant to the application (1) contain or be accompanied by a statement that the program is (or, in the case of a new program, will be) conducted in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this regulation, and (2) provide or be accompanied by provision for such methods of administration for the program as are found by the responsible Department official to give reasonable assurance that the applicant and all recipients of Federal financial assistance under such program will comply with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this regulation.
            (c) Elementary and secondary schools. The requirements of paragraph (a) or (b) of this section with respect to any elementary or secondary school or school system shall be deemed to be satisfied if such school or school system (1) is subject to a final order of a court of the United States for the desegregation of such school or school system, and provides an assurance that it will comply with such order, including any future modification of such order, or (2) submits a plan for the desegregation of such school or school system which the responsible Department official determines is adequate to accomplish the purposes of the Act and this part, at the earliest practicable time, and provides reasonable assurance that it will carry out such plan; in any case of continuing Federal financial assistance the responsible Department official may reserve the right to redetermine, after such period as may be specified by him, the adequacy of the plan to accomplish the purposes of the Act and the regulations in this part. In any case in which a final order of a court of the United States for the desegregation of such school or school system is entered after submission of such a plan, such plan shall be revised to conform to such final order, including any future modification of such order.
            (d) Assurance from institutions. (1) In the case of any application for Federal financial assistance to an institution of higher education (including assistance for construction, for research, for special training project, for student loans or for any other purpose), the assurance required by this section shall extend to admission practices and to all other practices relating to the treatment of students.
            (2) The assurance required with respect to an institution of higher education, hospital, or any other institution, insofar as the assurance relates to the institution's practices with respect to admission or other treatment of individuals as students, patients, or clients of the institution or to the opportunity to participate in the provision of services or other benefits to such individuals, shall be applicable to the entire institution.
            (Secs. 601, 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d, 2000d-1); sec. 182, 80 Stat. 1209 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-5))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14555, Oct. 19, 1967; 38 FR 17980, 17982, July 5, 1973; 70 FR 24318, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            § 80.5
            Illustrative application.
            The following examples will illustrate the programs aided by Federal financial assistance of the Department. (In all cases the discrimination prohibited is discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin prohibited by Title VI of the Act and this regulation, as a condition of the receipt of Federal financial assistance).

            (a) In federally assisted programs for the provision of health or welfare services, discrimination in the selection or eligibility of individuals to receive the services, and segregation or other discriminatory practices in the manner of providing them, are prohibited. This prohibition extends to all facilities and services provided by the grantee or, if the grantee is a State, by a political subdivision of the State. It extends also to services purchased or otherwise obtained by the grantee (or political subdivision) from hospitals, nursing homes, schools, and similar institutions for beneficiaries of the program, and to the facilities in which such services are provided, subject, however, to the provisions of § 80.3(e).
            (b) In federally-affected area assistance (Pub. L. 815 and Pub. L. 874) for construction aid and for general support of the operation of elementary or secondary schools, or in more limited support to such schools such as for the acquisition of equipment, the provision of vocational education, or the provision of guidance and counseling services, discrimination by the recipient school district in any of its elementary or secondary schools in the admission of students, or in the treatment of its students in any aspect of the educational process, is prohibited. In this and the following illustrations the prohibition of discrimination in the treatment of students or other trainees includes the prohibition of discrimination among the students or trainees in the availability or use of any academic, dormitory, eating, recreational, or other facilities of the grantee or other recipient.
            (c) In a research, training, demonstration, or other grant to a university for activities to be conducted in a graduate school, discrimination in the admission and treatment of students in the graduate school is prohibited, and the prohibition extends to the entire university.
            (d) In a training grant to a hospital or other nonacademic institution, discrimination is prohibited in the selection of individuals to be trained and in their treatment by the grantee during their training. In a research or demonstration grant to such an institution discrimination is prohibited with respect to any educational activity and any provision of medical or other services and any financial aid to individuals incident to the program.
            (e) In grants to assist in the construction of facilities for the provision of health, educational or welfare services, assurances will be required that services will be provided without discrimination, to the same extent that discrimination would be prohibited as a condition of Federal operating grants for the support of such services. Thus, as a condition of grants for the construction of academic, research, or other facilities at institutions of higher education, assurances will be required that there will be no discrimination in the admission or treatment of students. In case of hospital construction grants the assurance will apply to patients, to interns, residents, student nurses, and other trainees, and to the privilege of physicians, dentists, and other professionally qualified persons to practice in the hospital, and will apply to the entire facility for which, or for a part of which, the grant is made, and to facilities operated in connection therewith.
            (f) Upon transfers of real or personal surplus property for health or educational uses, discrimination is prohibited to the same extent as in the case of grants for the construction of facilities or the provision of equipment for like purposes.
            (g) Each applicant for a grant for the construction of educational television facilities is required to provide an assurance that it will, in its broadcast services, give due consideration to the interests of all significant racial or ethnic groups within the population to be served by the applicant.
            (h) A recipient may not take action that is calculated to bring about indirectly what this regulation forbids it to accomplish directly. Thus, a State, in selecting or approving projects or sites for the construction of public libraries which will receive Federal financial assistance, may not base its selections or approvals on criteria which have the effect of defeating or of substantially impairing accomplishments of the objectives of the Federal assistance as respects individuals of a particular race, color or national origin.

            (i) In some situations, even though past discriminatory practices attributable to a recipient or applicant have been abandoned, the consequences of such practices continue to impede the full availability of a benefit. If the efforts required of the applicant or recipient under § 80.6(d), to provide information as to the availability of the program or activity and the rights of beneficiaries under this regulation, have failed to overcome these consequences, it will become necessary under the requirement stated in (i) of § 80.3(b) (6) for such applicant or recipient to take additional steps to make the benefits fully available to racial and nationality groups previously subject to discrimination. This action might take the form, for example, of special arrangements for obtaining referrals or making selections which will insure that groups previously subjected to discrimination are adequately served.
            (j) Even though an applicant or recipient has never used discriminatory policies, the services and benefits of the program or activity it administers may not in fact be equally available to some racial or nationality groups. In such circumstances, an applicant or recipient may properly give special consideration to race, color, or national origin to make the benefits of its program more widely available to such groups, not then being adequately served. For example, where a university is not adequately serving members of a particular racial or nationality group, it may establish special recruitment policies to make its program better known and more readily available to such group, and take other steps to provide that group with more adequate service.
            (Secs. 601, 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d, 2000d-1))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964; 29 FR 16988, Dec. 11, 1964, as amended at 38 FR 17980, 17982, July 5, 1973; 70 FR 24318, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            § 80.6
            Compliance information.
            (a) Cooperation and assistance. The responsible Department official shall to the fullest extent practicable seek the cooperation of recipients in obtaining compliance with this part and shall provide assistance and guidance to recipients to help them comply voluntarily with this part.
            (b) Compliance reports. Each recipient shall keep such records and submit to the responsible Department official or his designee timely, complete and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in such form and containing such information, as the responsible Department official or his designee may determine to be necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is complying with this part. For example, recipients should have available for the Department racial and ethnic data showing the extent to which members of minority groups are beneficiaries of and participants in federally-assisted programs. In the case in which a primary recipient extends Federal financial assistance to any other recipient, such other recipient shall also submit such compliance reports to the primary recipient as may be necessary to enable the primary recipient to carry out its obligations under this part.
            (c) Access to sources of information. Each recipient shall permit access by the responsible Department official or his designee during normal business hours to such of its books, records, accounts, and other sources of information, and its facilities as may be pertinent to ascertain compliance with this part. Where any information required of a recipient is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, institution or person and this agency, institution or person shall fail or refuse to furnish this information the recipient shall so certify in its report and shall set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information. Asserted considerations of privacy or confidentiality may not operate to bar the Department from evaluating or seeking to enforce compliance with this part. Information of a confidential nature obtained in connection with compliance evaluation or enforcement shall not be disclosed except where necessary in formal enforcement proceedings or where otherwise required by law.
            (d) Information to beneficiaries and participants. Each recipient shall make available to participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such information regarding the provisions of this regulation and its applicability to the program for which the recipient receives Federal financial assistance, and make such information available to them in such manner, as the responsible Department official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by the Act and this regulation.
            (Secs. 601, 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d, 2000d-1))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14555, Oct. 19, 1967; 38 FR 17981, 17982, July 5, 1973; 70 FR 24318, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            
            § 80.7
            Conduct of investigations.
            (a) Periodic compliance reviews. The responsible Department official or his designee shall from time to time review the practices of recipients to determine whether they are complying with this part.
            (b) Complaints. Any person who believes himself or any specific class of individuals to be subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part may by himself or by a representative file with the responsible Department official or his designee a written complaint. A complaint must be filed not later than 180 days from the date of the alleged discrimination, unless the time for filing is extended by the responsible Department official or his designee.
            (c) Investigations. The responsible Department official or his designee will make a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, report, complaint, or any other information indicates a possible failure to comply with this part. The investigation should include, where appropriate, a review of the pertinent practices and policies of the recipient, the circumstances under which the possible noncompliance with this part occurred, and other factors relevant to a determination as to whether the recipient has failed to comply with this part.
            (d) Resolution of matters. (1) If an investigation pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section indicates a failure to comply with this part, the responsible Department official or his designee will so inform the recipient and the matter will be resolved by informal means whenever possible. If it has been determined that the matter cannot be resolved by informal means, action will be taken as provided for in § 80.8.
            (2) If an investigation does not warrant action pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) of this section the responsible Department official or his designee will so inform the recipient and the complainant, if any, in writing.
            (e) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by section 601 of the Act or this part, or because he has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under this part. The identity of complainants shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any investigation, hearing, or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.
            (Secs. 601, 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d, 2000d-1))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 38 FR 17981, 17982, July 5, 1973]
          
          
            § 80.8
            Procedure for effecting compliance.
            (a) General. If there appears to be a failure or threatened failure to comply with this regulation, and if the noncompliance or threatened noncompliance cannot be corrected by informal means, compliance with this part may be effected by the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance or by any other means authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not limited to, (1) a reference to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance or other contractual undertaking, and (2) any applicable proceeding under State or local law.
            (b) Noncompliance with § 80.4. If an applicant fails or refuses to furnish an assurance required under § 80.4 or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with a requirement imposed by or pursuant to that section Federal financial assistance may be refused in accordance with the procedures of paragraph (c) of this section. The Department shall not be required to provide assistance in such a case during the pendency of the administrative proceedings under such paragraph except that the Department shall continue assistance during the pendency of such proceedings where such assistance is due and payable pursuant to an application therefor approved prior to the effective date of this part.
            (c) Termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance. No order suspending, terminating or refusing to grant or continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective until (1) the responsible Department official has advised the applicant or recipient of his failure to comply and has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means, (2) there has been an express finding on the record, after opportunity for hearing, of a failure by the applicant or recipient to comply with a requirement imposed by or pursuant to this part, (3) the expiration of 30 days after the Secretary has filed with the committee of the House and the committee of the Senate having legislative jurisdiction over the program involved, a full written report of the circumstances and the grounds for such action. Any action to suspend or terminate or to refuse to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance shall be limited to the particular political entity, or part thereof, or other applicant or recipient as to whom such a finding has been made and shall be limited in its effect to the particular program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found.
            (d) Other means authorized by law. No action to effect compliance by any other means authorized by law shall be taken until (1) the responsible Department official has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means, (2) the recipient or other person has been notified of its failure to comply and of the action to be taken to effect compliance, and (3) the expiration of at least 10 days from the mailing of such notice to the recipient or other person. During this period of at least 10 days additional efforts shall be made to persuade the recipient or other person to comply with the regulation and to take such corrective action as may be appropriate.
            (Secs. 601, 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d, 2000d-1; sec. 182, 80 Stat. 1209; (42 U.S.C. 2000d-5))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14556, Oct. 19, 1967; 38 FR 17982, July 5, 1973]
          
          
            § 80.9
            Hearings.
            (a) Opportunity for hearing. Whenever an opportunity for a hearing is required by § 80.8(c), reasonable notice shall be given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the affected applicant or recipient. This notice shall advise the applicant or recipient of the action proposed to be taken, the specific provision under which the proposed action against it is to be taken, and the matters of fact or law asserted as the basis for this action, and either (1) fix a date not less than 20 days after the date of such notice within which the applicant or recipient may request of the responsible Department official that the matter be scheduled for hearing or (2) advise the applicant or recipient that the matter in question has been set down for hearing at a stated place and time. The time and place so fixed shall be reasonable and shall be subject to change for cause. The complainant, if any, shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit written information and argument for the record. The failure of an applicant or recipient to request a hearing for which a date has been set shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to a hearing under section 602 of the Act and § 80.8(c) of this regulation and consent to the making of a decision on the basis of such information as may be filed as the record.
            (b) Time and place of hearing. Hearings shall be held at the offices of the Department in Washington, DC, at a time fixed by the responsible Department official unless he determines that the convenience of the applicant or recipient or of the Department requires that another place be selected. Hearings shall be held before a hearing examiner designated in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 3105 and 3344 (section 11 of the Administrative Procedure Act).
            (c) Right to counsel. In all proceedings under this section, the applicant or recipient and the Department shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
            (d) Procedures, evidence, and record. (1) The hearing, decision, and any administrative review thereof shall be conducted in conformity with sections 5-8 of the Administrative Procedure Act, and in accordance with such rules of procedure as are proper (and not inconsistent with this section) relating to the conduct of the hearing, giving of notices subsequent to those provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, taking of testimony, exhibits, arguments and briefs, requests for findings, and other related matters. Both the Department and the applicant or recipient shall be entitled to introduce all relevant evidence on the issues as stated in the notice for hearing or as determined by the officer conducting the hearing at the outset of or during the hearing. Any person (other than a Government employee considered to be on official business) who, having been invited or requested to appear and testify as a witness on the Government's behalf, attends at a time and place scheduled for a hearing provided for by this part, may be reimbursed for his travel and actual expenses of attendance in an amount not to exceed the amount payable under the standardized travel regulations to a Government employee traveling on official business.
            (2) Technical rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted pursuant to this part, but rules or principles designed to assure production of the most credible evidence available and to subject testimony to test by cross-examination shall be applied where reasonably necessary by the officer conducting the hearing. The hearing officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. All documents and other evidence offered or taken for the record shall be open to examination by the parties and opportunity shall be given to refute facts and arguments advanced on either side of the issues. A transcript shall be made of the oral evidence except to the extent the substance thereof is stipulated for the record. All decisions shall be based upon the hearing record and written findings shall be made.
            (e) Consolidated or Joint Hearings. In cases in which the same or related facts are asserted to constitute noncompliance with this regulation with respect to two or more Federal statutes, authorities, or other means by which Federal financial assistance is extended, to which this part applies, or noncompliance with this part and the regulations of one or more other Federal departments or agencies issued under Title VI of the Act, the responsible Department official may, by agreement with such other departments or agencies where applicable, provide for the conduct of consolidated or joint hearings, and for the application to such hearings of rules of procedures not inconsistent with this part. Final decisions in such cases, insofar as this regulation is concerned, shall be made in accordance with § 80.10.
            (Sec. 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14555, Oct. 19, 1967; 38 FR 17981, 17982, July 5, 1973; 70 FR 24318, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            § 80.10
            Decisions and notices.
            (a) Decisions by hearing examiners. After a hearing is held by a hearing examiner such hearing examiner shall either make an initial decision, if so authorized, or certify the entire record including his recommended findings and proposed decision to the reviewing authority for a final decision, and a copy of such initial decision or certification shall be mailed to the applicant or recipient and to the complainant, if any. Where the initial decision referred to in this paragraph or in paragraph (c) of this section is made by the hearing examiner, the applicant or recipient or the counsel for the Department may, within the period provided for in the rules of procedure issued by the responsible Department official, file with the reviewing authority exceptions to the initial decision, with his reasons therefor. Upon the filing of such exceptions the reviewing authority shall review the initial decision and issue its own decision thereof including the reasons therefor. In the absence of exceptions the initial decision shall constitute the final decision, subject to the provisions of paragraph (e) of this section.
            (b) Decisions on record or review by the reviewing authority. Whenever a record is certified to the reviewing authority for decision or it reviews the decision of a hearing examiner pursuant to paragraph (a) or (c) of this section, the applicant or recipient shall be given reasonable opportunity to file with it briefs or other written statements of its contentions, and a copy of the final decision of the reviewing authority shall be given in writing to the applicant or recipient and to the complainant, if any.
            
            (c) Decisions on record where a hearing is waived. Whenever a hearing is waived pursuant to § 80.9(a) the reviewing authority shall make its final decision on the record or refer the matter to a hearing examiner for an initial decision to be made on the record. A copy of such decision shall be given in writing to the applicant or recipient, and to the complainant, if any.
            (d) Rulings required. Each decision of a hearing examiner or reviewing authority shall set forth a ruling on each finding, conclusion, or exception presented, and shall identify the requirement or requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part with which it is found that the applicant or recipient has failed to comply.
            (e) Review in certain cases by the Secretary. If the Secretary has not personally made the final decision referred to in paragraph (a), (b), or (c) of this section, a recipient or applicant or the counsel for the Department may request the Secretary to review a decision of the Reviewing Authority in accordance with rules of procedure issued by the responsible Department official. Such review is not a matter of right and shall be granted only where the Secretary determines there are special and important reasons therefor. The Secretary may grant or deny such request, in whole or in part. He may also review such a decision upon his own motion in accordance with rules of procedure issued by the responsible Department official. In the absence of a review under this paragraph, a final decision referred to in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall become the final decision of the Department when the Secretary transmits it as such to Congressional committees with the report required under section 602 of the Act. Failure of an applicant or recipient to file an exception with the Reviewing Authority or to request review under this paragraph shall not be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies for the purpose of obtaining judicial review.
            (f) Content of orders. The final decision may provide for suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or continue Federal financial assistance, in whole or in part, to which this regulation applies, and may contain such terms, conditions, and other provisions as are consistent with and will effectuate the purposes of the Act and this regulation, including provisions designed to assure that no Federal financial assistance to which this regulation applies will thereafter be extended under such law or laws to the applicant or recipient determined by such decision to be in default in its performance of an assurance given by it pursuant to this regulation, or to have otherwise failed to comply with this regulation unless and until it corrects its noncompliance and satisfies the responsible Department official that it will fully comply with this regulation.
            (g) Post-termination proceedings. (1) An applicant or recipient adversely affected by an order issued under paragraph (f) of this section shall be restored to full eligibility to receive Federal financial assistance if it satisfies the terms and conditions of that order for such eligibility or if it brings itself into compliance with this part and provides reasonable assurance that it will fully comply with this part. An elementary or secondary school or school system which is unable to file an assurance of compliance with § 80.3 shall be restored to full eligibility to receive Federal financial assistance, if it files a court order or a plan for desegregation which meets the requirements of § 80.4(c), and provides reasonable assurance that it will comply with the court order or plan.
            (2) Any applicant or recipient adversely affected by an order entered pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section may at any time request the responsible Department official to restore fully its eligibility to receive Federal financial assistance. Any such request shall be supported by information showing that the applicant or recipient has met the requirements of paragraph (g)(1) of this section. If the responsible Department official determines that those requirements have been satisfied, he shall restore such eligibility.

            (3) If the responsible Department official denies any such request, the applicant or recipient may submit a request for a hearing in writing, specifying why it believes such official to have been in error. It shall thereupon be given an expeditious hearing, with a decision on the record, in accordance with rules of procedure issued by the responsible Department official. The applicant or recipient will be restored to such eligibility if it proves at such hearing that it satisfied the requirements of paragraph (g)(1) of this section. While proceedings under this paragraph are pending, the sanctions imposed by the order issued under paragraph (f) of this section shall remain in effect.
            (Sec. 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14555, Oct. 19, 1967; 38 FR 17981, 17982, July 5, 1973]
          
          
            § 80.11
            Judicial review.
            Action taken pursuant to section 602 of the Act is subject to judicial review as provided in section 603 of the Act.
            (Sec. 603, 78 Stat. 253, (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14556, Oct. 19, 1967]
          
          
            § 80.12
            Effect on other regulations; forms and instructions.
            (a) Effect on other regulations. All regulations, orders, or like directions heretofore issued by any officer of the Department which impose requirements designed to prohibit any discrimination against individuals on the ground of race, color, or national origin under any program to which this regulation applies, and which authorize the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance to any applicant for or recipient of assistance for failure to comply with such requirements, are hereby superseded to the extent that such discrimination is prohibited by this regulation, except that nothing in this regulation shall be deemed to relieve any person of any obligation assumed or imposed under any such superseded regulation, order, instruction, or like direction prior to the effective date of this regulation. Nothing in this regulation, however, shall be deemed to supersede any of the following (including future amendments thereof): (1) The “Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration,” issued jointly by the Secretaries of Defense, of Health and Human Services, and of Labor, 45 CFR part 70; (2) Executive Order 11063 and regulations issued thereunder, or any other regulations or instructions, insofar as such Order, regulations, or instructions prohibit discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in any program or situation to which this regulation is inapplicable, or prohibit discrimination on any other ground; or (3) requirements for Emergency School Assistance as published in 35 FR 13442 and codified as 45 CFR part 181.
            (b) Forms and instructions. The responsible Department official shall issue and promptly make available to interested persons forms and detailed instructions and procedures for effectuating this part.
            (c) Supervision and coordination. The responsible Department official may from time to time assign to officials of the Department, or to officials of other departments or agencies of the Government with the consent of such departments or agencies, responsibilities in connection with the effectuation of the purposes of Title VI of the Act and this regulation (other than responsibility for review as provided in § 80.10(e)), including the achievements of effective coordination and maximum uniformity within the Department and within the Executive Branch of the Government in the application of Title VI and this regulation to similar programs and in similar situations. Any action taken, determination made, or requirement imposed by an official of another Department or Agency acting pursuant to an assignment of responsibility under this subsection shall have the same effect as though such action had been taken by the responsible official of this Department.
            (Sec. 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-10))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14555, Oct. 19, 1967; 38 FR 17981, 17982, July 5, 1973]
          
          
            § 80.13
            Definitions.
            As used in this part—
            (a) The term Department means the Department of Health and Human Services, and includes each of its operating agencies and other organizational units.
            
            (b) The term Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
            (c) The term responsible Department official means the Secretary or, to the extent of any delegation by the Secretary of authority to act in his stead under any one or more provisions of this part, any person or persons to whom the Secretary has heretofore delegated, or to whom the Secretary may hereafter delegate such authority.
            (d) The term reviewing authority means the Secretary, or any person or persons (including a board or other body specially created for that purpose and also including the responsible Department official) acting pursuant to authority delegated by the Secretary to carry out responsibilities under § 80.10 (a) through (d).
            (e) The term United States means the States of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, and the territories and possessions of the United States, and the term State means any one of the foregoing.
            (f) The term Federal financial assistance includes (1) grants and loans of Federal funds, (2) the grant or donation of Federal property and interests in property, (3) the detail of Federal personnel, (4) the sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or transient basis), Federal property or any interest in such property without consideration or at a nominal consideration, or at a consideration which is reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient, or in recognition of the public interest to be served by such sale or lease to the recipient, and (5) any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance.
            (g) The term program or activity and the term program mean all of the operations of—
            (1)(i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
            (ii) The entity of such State or local government that distributes Federal financial assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
            (2)(i) A college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or
            (ii) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 7801), system of vocational education, or other school system;
            (3)(i) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
            (A) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
            (B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
            (ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
            (4) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3) of this section; any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
            (h) The term facility includes all or any portion of structures, equipment, or other real or personal property or interests therein, and the provision of facilities includes the construction, expansion, renovation, remodeling, alteration or acquisition of facilities.
            (i) The term recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any State or political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient, including any successor, assign, or transferee thereof, but such term does not include any ultimate beneficiary.
            (j) The term primary recipient means any recipient which is authorized or required to extend Federal financial assistance to another recipient.
            (k) The term applicant means one who submits an application, request, or plan required to be approved by a Department official, or by a primary recipient, as a condition to eligibility for Federal financial assistance, and the term application means such an application, request, or plan.
            (Secs. 602, 606, Civil Rights Act of 1964, (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, 2000d-4a))
            [29 FR 16298, Dec. 4, 1964; 29 FR 16988, Dec. 11, 1964, as amended at 32 FR 14555, Oct. 19, 1967; 38 FR 17982, July 5, 1973; 70 FR 24318, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            Pt. 80, App. A
            Appendix A to Part 80—Federal Financial Assistance to Which These Regulations Apply
            Part 1. Assistance other than Continuing Assistance to States
            1. Loans for acquisition of equipment for academic subjects, and for minor remodeling (20 U.S.C. 445).
            2. Construction of facilities for institutions of higher education (20 U.S.C. 701-758).
            3. School Construction in federally-affected and in major disaster areas (20 U.S.C. 631-647).
            4. Construction of educational broadcast facilities (47 U.S.C. 390-399).
            5. Loan service of captioned films and educational media; research on, and production and distribution of, educational media for the handicapped, and training of persons in the use of such media for the handicapped (20 U.S.C. 1452).
            6. Demonstration residential vocational education schools (20 U.S.C. 1321).
            7. Research and related activities in education of handicapped children (20 U.S.C. 1441).
            8. Educational research, dissemination and demonstration projects; research training; and construction under the Cooperation Research Act (20 U.S.C. 331-332(b)).
            9. Research in teaching modern foreign languages (20 U.S.C. 512).
            10. Training projects for manpower development and training (42 U.S.C. 2601, 2602, 2610a-2610c).
            11. Research and training projects in Vocational Education (20 U.S.C. 1281(a), 1282-1284).
            12. Allowances to institutions training NDEA graduate fellows (20 U.S.C. 461-465).
            13. Grants for training in librarianship (20 U.S.C. 1031-1033).
            14. Grants for training personnel for the education of handicapped children (20 U.S.C. 1431).
            15. Allowances for institutions training teachers and related educational personnel in elementary and secondary education, or post-secondary vocational education (20 U.S.C. 1111-1118).
            16. Recruitment, enrollment, training and assignment of Teacher Corps personnel (20 U.S.C. 1101-1107a).
            17. Operation and maintenance of schools in Federally-affected and in major disaster areas (20 U.S.C. 236-241; 241-1; 242-244).
            18. Grants or contracts for the operation of training institutes for elementary or secondary school personnel to deal with special educational problems occasioned by desegregation (42 U.S.C. 2000c-3).
            19. Grants for in-service training of teachers and other schools personnel and employment of specialists in desegregation problems (42 U.S.C. 2000c-4).
            20. Higher education students loan program (Title II, National Defense Education Act, 20 U.S.C. 421-429).
            21. Educational Opportunity grants and assistance for State and private programs of low-interest insured loans and State loans to students in institutions of higher education (Title IV, Higher Education Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C. 1061-1087).
            22. Grants and contracts for the conduct of Talent Search, Upward Bound, and Special Services Programs (20 U.S.C. 1068).
            23. Land-grant college aid (7 U.S.C. 301-308; 321-326; 328-331).
            24. Language and area centers (Title VI, National Defense Education Act, 20 U.S.C. 511).
            25. American Printing House for the Blind (20 U.S.C. 101-105).
            26. Future Farmers of America (36 U.S.C. 271-391) and similar programs.
            27. Science clubs (Pub. L. 85-875, 20 U.S.C. 2, note).
            28. Howard University (20 U.S.C. 121-129).
            29. Gallaudet College (31 D.C. Code, Ch. 10).
            30. Establishment and operation of a model secondary school for the deaf by Gallaudet College (31 D.C. Code 1051-1053; 80 Stat. 1027-1028).
            31. Faculty development programs, workshops and institutes (20 U.S.C. 1131-1132).
            32. National Technical Institute for the Deaf (20 U.S.C. 681-685).
            33. Institutes and other programs for training educational personnel (Parts D, E, and F, Title V, Higher Education Act of 1965) (20 U.S.C. 1119-1119c-4).
            34. Grants and contracts for research and demonstration projects in librarianship (20 U.S.C. 1034).
            35. Acquisition of college library resources (20 U.S.C. 1021-1028).
            36. Grants for strengthening developing institutions of higher education (20 U.S.C. 1051-1054); National Fellowships for teaching at developing institutions (20 U.S.C. 1055), and grants to retired professors to teach at developing institutions (20 U.S.C. 1056).

            37. College Work-Study Program (42 U.S.C. 2751-2757).
            
            38. Financial assistance for acquisition of higher education equipment, and minor remodeling (20 U.S.C. 1121-1129).
            39. Grants for special experimental demonstration projects and teacher training in adult education (20 U.S.C. 1208).
            40. Grant programs for advanced and undergraduate international studies (20 U.S.C. 1171-1176; 22 U.S.C. 2452(b)).
            41. Experimental projects for developing State leadership or establishment of special services (20 U.S.C. 865).
            42. Grants to and arrangements with State educational and other agencies to meet special educational needs of migratory children of migratory agricultural workers (20 U.S.C. 241e(c)).
            43. Grants by the Commissioner of Education to local educational agencies for supplementary educational centers and services; guidance, counseling, and testing (20 U.S.C. 841-844; 844b).
            44. Resource centers for improvement of education of handicapped children (20 U.S.C. 1421) and centers and services for deaf-blind children (20 U.S.C. 1422).
            45. Recruitment of personnel and dissemination of information on education of handicapped (20 U.S.C. 1433).
            46. Grants for research and demonstrations relating to physical education or recreation for handicapped children (20 U.S.C. 1442) and training of physical educators and recreation personnel (20 U.S.C. 1434).
            47. Dropout prevention projects (20 U.S.C. 887).
            48. Bilingual education programs (20 U.S.C. 880b-880b-6).
            49. Grants to agencies and organizations for Cuban refugees (22) U.S.C. 2601(b)(4).
            50. Grants and contracts for special programs for children with specific learning disabilities including research and related activities, training and operating model centers (20 U.S.C. 1461).
            51. Curriculum development in vocational and technical education (20 U.S.C. 1391).
            52. Establishment, including construction, and operation of a National Center on Educational Media and Materials for the Handicapped (20 U.S.C. 1453).
            53. Grants and contracts for the development and operation of experimental preschool and early education programs for handicapped (20 U.S.C. 1423).
            54. Grants to public or private non-profit agencies to carry on the Follow Through Program in kindergarten and elementary schools (42 U.S.C. 2809 (a)(2)).
            55. Grants for programs of cooperative education and grants and contracts for training and research in cooperative education (20 U.S.C. 1087a-1087c).
            56. Grants and contracts to encourage the sharing of college facilities and resources (network for knowledge) (20 U.S.C. 1133-1133b).
            57. Grants, contracts, and fellowships to improve programs preparing persons for public service and to attract students to public service (20 U.S.C. 1134-1134b).
            58. Grants for the improvement of graduate programs (20 U.S.C. 1135-1135c).
            59. Contracts for expanding and improving law school clinical experience programs (20 U.S.C. 1136-1136b).
            60. Exemplary programs and projects in vocational education (20 U.S.C. 1301-1305).
            61. Grants to reduce borrowing cost for construction of residential schools and dormitories (20 U.S.C. 1323).
            62. Project grants and contracts for research and demonstration relating to new or improved health facilities and services (section 304, PHS Act, 42 U.S.C. 242b).
            63. Grants for construction or modernization of emergency rooms of general hospitals (Title VI, Part C, PHS Act, 42 U.S.C. 291j).
            64. Institutional and special projects grants to schools of nursing (sections 805-808, PHS Act, 42 U.S.C. 296d-296g).
            65. Grants for construction and initial staffing of facilities for prevention and treatment of alcoholism (section 241-2, Community Mental Health Centers Act (42 U.S.C. 2688 f and g).
            66. Grants for construction and initial staffing of specialized facilities for the treatment of alcoholics requiring care in such facilities (section 243, Community Mental Health Centers Act, 42 U.S.C. 2688h).
            67. Special project grants for training programs, evaluation of existing treatment programs, and conduct of significant programs relating to treatment of alcoholics (section 246, Community Mental Health Centers Act, 42 U.S.C. 2688j-1).
            68. Grants for construction and initial staff of treatment facilities for narcotic addicts (section 251, Community Mental Health Centers Act, 42 U.S.C. 2688m).
            69. Special project grants for training programs, evaluation of existing treatment programs, and conduct of significant programs relating to treatment of narcotics addicts (section 252, Community Mental Health Centers Act, 42 U.S.C. 2688n-1).
            70. Grants for consultation services for Community Mental Health Centers, alcoholism prevention and treatment facilities for narcotic addicts, and facilities for mental health of children (section 264, Community Mental Health Centers Act, 42 U.S.C. 2688r).
            71. Grants for construction and initial staff of facilities for mental health of children (section 271, Community Mental Health Centers Act, 42 U.S.C. 2688u).
            72. Special project grants for training programs and evaluation of existing treatment program relating to mental health of children (section 272, Community Mental Health Centers Act, 42 U.S.C. 2688x).

            73. Grants and loans for construction and modernization of medical facilities in the District of Columbia (Pub. L. 90-457; 82 Stat. 631-3).
            74. Teaching facilities for nurse training (sections. 801-804, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 296-296c).
            75. Teaching facilities for allied health professions personnel (section 791, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 295h).
            76. Mental retardation research facilities (Title VI, Part D, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 295-395e).
            77. George Washington University Hospital construction (76 Stat. 83, Pub. L. 87-460, May 31, 1962).
            78. Research projects, including conferences, communication activities and primate or other center grants (sections 301, 303, 304, and 308, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 241, 242a, 242b, and 242f).
            79. General research support (section 301(d), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 241).
            80. Mental Health demonstrations and administrative studies (section 303(a)(2), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 242a).
            81. Migratory workers health services (section 310, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 242h).
            82. Immunization programs (section 317, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 247b).
            83. Health research training projects and fellowship grants (sections 301, 433, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 242, 289c).
            84. Categorical (heart, cancer, etc.) grants for training, traineeships or fellowships (sections 303, 433, etc., Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 242a, 289c, etc.).
            85. Advanced professional nurse traineeships (section 821, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 297).
            86. Department projects under Appalachian Regional Development Act (40 U.S.C. App. A).
            87. Grants to institutions for traineeships for professional public health personnel section 306, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 242d).
            88. Grants for graduate or specialized training in public health (section 309, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 242g).
            89. Health professions school student loan program (Title VII, Part C, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 294-294(k)).
            90. Grants for provision in schools of public health of training, consultation and technical assistance in the field of public health and in the administration of state or local public health programs (section 309(c)), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 242(g)(c)).
            91. Project grants for training, studies, or demonstrations looking metropolitan area, or other local area plans for health services (section 314(c), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 246(c)).
            92. Project grants for training, studies, or demonstrations looking toward the development of improved comprehensive health planning (section 314(c), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 246(c)).
            93. Project grants for health services development (section 314(e), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 246(e)).
            94. Institutional and special grants to health professions schools (Title VII, Part E, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 295f-295f-4).
            95. Improvement grants to centers for allied health professions (section 792, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 295h-1).
            96. Scholarship grants to health professions schools (Title VII, Part F, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 295h-1).
            97. Scholarship grants to schools of nursing (Title VIII, Part D, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 198c-298c-6).
            98. Traineeships for advanced training of allied health professions personnel (section 793, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 295h-2).
            99. Contracts to encourage full utilization of nursing educational talent (section 868, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 298c-7).
            100. Grants to community mental health centers for the compensation of professional and technical personnel for the initial operation of new centers or of new services in centers (Community Mental Health Centers Act, Part B, 42 U.S.C. 2688-2688d).
            101. Grants for the planning, construction, equipment and operation of multicounty demonstration health projects in the Appalachian region (section 202 of Appalachian Regional Development Act, Pub. L. 89-4, as amended, Pub. L. 90-103 40 U.S.C. App. 202).
            102. Education, research, training, and demonstrations in the fields of heart disease, cancer, stroke and related diseases (sections 900-110, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 299a-j).
            103. Assistance to medical libraries (sections 390-399, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 280b-280b-9).
            104. Nursing student loans (sections 822-828. Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 297a-g).
            105. Hawaii leprosy payments (section 331, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 255).
            106. Heart disease laboratories and related facilities for patient care (section 412(d), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 287a(d)).
            107. Grants for construction of hospitals serving Indians (Pub. L. 85-151, 42 U.S.C. 2005).
            108. Indian Sanitation Facilities (Pub. L. 86-121, 42 U.S.C. 2004a).
            109. Research projects relating to maternal and child health services and crippled children's services (42 U.S.C. 712).
            110. Maternal and child health special project grants to State agencies and institutions of higher learning (42 U.S.C. 703(s)).

            111. Maternity and infant care and family planning services; special project grants to local health agencies and other organizations (42 U.S.C. 708).
            
            112. Special project grants to State agencies and institutions of higher learning for crippled children's services (42 U.S.C. 704(2)).
            113. Special project grants for health of school and preschool children (42 U.S.C. 709) and for dental health of children (42 U.S.C. 710).
            114. Grants to institutions of higher learning for training personnel for health care and related services for mothers and children (42 U.S.C. 711).
            115. Grants and contracts for the conduct of research, experiments, or demonstrations relating to the developments, utilization, quality, organization, and financing of services, facilities, and resources of hospitals, long-term care facilities, for other medical facilities (section 304, Public Health Service Act, as amended by Pub. L. 90-174, 42 U.S.C. 242b).
            116. Health research facilities (Title VII Part A, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 292-292j).
            117. Teaching facilities for health professions personnel (Title VII, Part B, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 293-293h).
            118. Project grants and contracts for research, development, training, and studies in the field of electronic product radiation (section 356, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 263d).
            119. Project grants and contracts for research, studies, demonstrations, training, and education relating to coal mine health (section 501, Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, Public Law 91-173).
            120. Surplus real and related personal property disposal (40 U.S.C. 484(k)).
            121. Supplementary medical insurance benefits for the aged (Title XVIII, Part A, Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 1395c-1395i-2).
            122. Issuance of rent-free permits for vending stands, credit unions, employee associations, etc. (20 U.S.C. 107-107f; 45 CFR Part 20; section 25, 12 U.S.C. 1170).
            123. Grants for special vocational rehabilitation projects (29 U.S.C. 34(a)(1)).
            124. Experimental, pilot or demonstration projects to promote the objectives of Title I, X, XIV, XVI, or XIX or Part A of Title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315).
            125. Social Security and welfare cooperative research or demonstration projects (42 U.S.C. 1310).
            126. Child welfare research, training, or demonstration projects (42 U.S.C. 626).
            127. Training projects (Title VI, Older Americans Act, 42 U.S.C. 3041-3042).
            128. Grants for expansion of vocational rehabilitation services (29 U.S.C. 34(a)(2) (A)).
            129. Grants for construction of rehabilitation facilities (29 U.S.C. 41a(a)-(e)) and for initial staffing of rehabilitation facilities (29 U.S.C. 41a(f)).
            130. Project development grants for rehabilitation facilities (29 U.S.C. 41a(g)(2)).
            131. Rehabilitation Facility improvement grants (29 U.S.C. 41b(b)).
            132. Agreement for the establishment and operation of a national center for deaf-blind youths and adults (29 U.S.C. 42a).
            133. Project grants for services for migratory agricultural workers (29 U.S.C. 42b).
            134. Grants for initial staffing of community mental retardation facilities (42 U.S.C. 2678-2678d).
            135. Grants for training welfare personnel and for expansion and development of undergraduate and graduate social work programs (42 U.S.C. 906, 908).
            136. Research and development projects concerning older Americans (42 U.S.C. 3031-3032).
            137. Grants to States for training of nursing home administrators (42 U.S.C. 1396g (e)).
            138. Contracts or jointly financed cooperative arrangements with industry (29 U.S.C. 34(a)(2)(B)).
            139. Project grants for new careers in rehabilitation (29 U.S.C. 34(a)(2)(C)).
            140. Children of low-income families (20 U.S.C. 241a-241m).
            141. Grants for training (29 U.S.C. 37(a) (2)).
            142. Grants for projects for training services (29 U.S.C. 41b(a)).
            143. Grants for comprehensive juvenile delinquency planning (42 U.S.C. 3811).
            144. Grants for project planning in juvenile delinquency (42 U.S.C. 3812).
            145. Grants for juvenile delinquency rehabilitative services projects (42 U.S.C. 3822, 3842).
            146. Grants for juvenile delinquency preventive service projects (42 U.S.C. 3861).
            147. Grants for training projects in juvenile delinquency fields (42 U.S.C. 3861).
            148. Grants for development of improved techniques and practices in juvenile delinquency services (42 U.S.C. 3871).
            149. Grants for technical assistance in juvenile delinquency services (42 U.S.C. 3872).
            150. Grants for State technical assistance to local units in juvenile delinquency services (42 U.S.C. 3873).
            151. Grants for public service centers projects (42 U.S.C. 2744).
            152. Grants to public or private non-profit agencies to carry on the Project Headstart Program (42 U.S.C. 2809(a)(1)).
            153. Project grants for new careers for the handicapped (29 U.S.C. 34(a)(2)(D)).
            154. Construction, demonstration, and training grants for university-affiliated facilities for persons with developmental disabilities (42 U.S.C. 2661-2666).
            Part 2. Continuing Assistance to State

            1. Grants to States for public library services and construction, interlibrary cooperation and specialized State library services for certain State institutions and the physically handicapped (20 U.S.C. 351-355).
            
            2. Grants to States for strengthening instruction in academic subjects (20 U.S.C. 441-444).
            3. Grants to States for vocational education (20 U.S.C. 1241-1264).
            4. Arrangements with State education agencies for training under the Manpower Development and Training Act (42 U.S.C. 2601-2602, 2610a).
            5. Grants to States to assist in the elementary and secondary education of children of low-income families (20 U.S.C. 241a-241m).
            6. Grants to States to provide for school library resources, textbooks and other instructional materials for pupils and teachers in elementary and secondary schools (20 U.S.C. 821-827).
            7. Grants to States to strengthen State departments of education (20 U.S.C. 861-870).
            8. Grants to States for community service programs (20 U.S.C. 1001-1011).
            9. Grants to States for adult basic education and related research, teacher training and special projects (20 U.S.C. 1201-1211).
            10. Grants to State educational agencies for supplementary educational centers and services, and guidance, counseling and testing (20 U.S.C. 841-847).
            11. Grants to States for research and training in vocational education (20 U.S.C. 1281(b)).
            12. Grants to States for exemplary programs and projects in vocational education (20 U.S.C. 1301-1305).
            13. Grants to States for residential vocational education schools (20 U.S.C. 1321).
            14. Grants to States for consumer and homemaking education (20 U.S.C. 1341).
            15. Grants to States for cooperative vocational educational program (20 U.S.C. 1351-1355).
            16. Grants to States for vocational workstudy programs (20 U.S.C. 1371-1374).
            17. Grants to States to attract and qualify teachers to meet critical teaching shortages (20 U.S.C. 1108-1110c).
            18. Grants to States for education of handicapped children (20 U.S.C. 1411-1414).
            19. Grants for administration of State plans and for comprehensive planning to determine construction needs of institutions of higher education (20 U.S.C. 715(b)).
            20. Grants to States for comprehensive health planning (section 314(a), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 246(a)).
            21. Grants to States for establishing and maintaining adequate public health services (section 314(d), Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 246(d)).

            22. Grants, loans, and loan guarantees with interest subsidies for hospital and medical facilities (Title VI, Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 291 et seq.).
            23. Grants to States for community mental health centers construction (Community Mental Health Centers Act, Part A, 42 U.S.C. 2681-2687).
            24. Cost of rehabilitation services (Title II, Social Security Act section 222(d); 42 U.S.C. 422(d)).
            25. Surplus personal property disposal donations for health and educational purposes through State agencies (40 U.S.C. 484(j)).
            26. Grants for State and community programs on aging (Title III, Older Americans Act, 42 U.S.C. 3021-3025).
            27. Grants to States for planning, provision of services, and construction and operation of facilities for persons with developmental disabilities (42 U.S.C. 2670-2677c).
            28. Grants to States for vocational rehabilitation services (29 U.S.C. 32); for innovation of vocational rehabilitation services (29 U.S.C. 33); and for rehabilitation facilities planning (29 U.S.C. 41a(g)(1)).
            29. Designation of State licensing agency for blind operators of vending stands (20 U.S.C. 107-107f).

            30. Grants to States for old-age assistance (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.); aid to families with dependent children (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.); child-welfare services (42 U.S.C. 620 et seq.); aid to the blind (42 U.S.C. 1201 et seq.); aid to the permanently and totally disabled (42 U.S.C. 1351 et seq.); aid to the aged, blind, or disabled (42 U.S.C. 1381 et seq.); medical assistance (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
            31. Grants to States for maternal and child health and crippled children's services (42 U.S.C. 701-707); for special projects for maternal and infant care (42 U.S.C. 708).
            32. Grants to States for juvenile delinquency preventive and rehabilitative services (42 U.S.C. 3841).
            [38 FR 17982, July 5, 1973; 40 FR 18173, Apr. 25, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
          
          
            Pt. 80, App. B
            Appendix B to Part 80—Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs
            I. Scope and Coverage
            a. application of guidelines
            These Guidelines apply to recipients of any Federal financial assistance from the Department of Health and Human Services that offer or administer programs of vocational education or training. This includes State agency recipients.
            b. definition of recipient
            The definition of recipient of Federal financial assistance is established by Department regulations implementing title VI, title IX, and section 504 (45 CFR 80.13(i), 86.2(h), 84.3(f).
            For the purposes of title VI:
            
            The term recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any State or political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient, for any program, including any successor, assignee, or transferee thereof, but such term does not include any ultimate beneficiary [e.g., students] under any such program. (45 CFR 80.13(i)).
            For the purpose of title IX:
            
              Recipient means any State or political subdivision thereof, or any instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any person to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and which operates an education program or activity which receives or benefits from such assistance, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee thereof. (45 CFR 86.2(h)).
            For the purposes of section 504:
            
              Recipient means any State or its political subdivision, any instrumentality of a State or its political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any person to which Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient, including any successor, assignee, or transferee of a recipient, but excluding the ultimate beneficiary of the assistance. (45 CFR 84.3(f)).
            c. examples of recipients covered by these guidelines
            The following education agencies, when they provide vocational education, are examples of recipients covered by these Guidelines:
            1. The board of education of a public school district and its administrative agency.
            2. The administrative board of a specialized vocational high school serving students from more than one school district.
            3. The administrative board of a technical or vocation school that is used exclusively or principally for the provision of vocational education to persons who have completed or left high school (including persons seeking a certificate or an associate degree through a vocational program offered by the school) and who are available for study in preparation for entering the labor market.
            4. The administrative board of a postsecondary institution, such as a technical institute, skill center, junior college, community college, or four year college that has a department or division that provides vocational education to students seeking immediate employment, a certificate or an associate degree.
            5. The administrative board of a proprietary (private) vocational education school.
            6. A State agency recipient itself operating a vocational education facility.
            d. examples of schools to which these guidelines apply
            The following are examples of the types of schools to which these Guidelines apply.
            1. A junior high school, middle school, or those grades of a comprehensive high school that offers instruction to inform, orient, or prepare students for vocational education at the secondary level.
            2. A vocational education facility operated by a State agency.
            3. A comprehensive high school that has a department exclusively or principally used for providing vocational education; or that offers at least one vocational program to secondary level students who are available for study in preparation for entering the labor market; or that offers adult vocational education to persons who have completed or left high school and who are available for study in preparation for entering the labor market.
            4. A comprehensive high school, offering the activities described above, that receives students on a contract basis from other school districts for the purpose of providing vocational education.
            5. A specialized high school used exclusively or principally for the provision of vocational education, that enrolls students from one or more school districts for the purpose of providing vocational education.
            6. A technical or vocational school that primarily provides vocational education to persons who have completed or left high school and who are available for study in preparation for entering the labor market, including students seeking an associate degree or certificate through a course of vocational instruction offered by the school.
            7. A junior college, a community college, or four-year college that has a department or division that provides vocational education to students seeking immediate employment, an associate degree or a certificate through a course of vocational instruction offered by the school.

            8. A proprietary school, licensed by the State, that offers vocational education.
            
            
              Note:

              Subsequent sections of these Guidelines may use the term secondary vocational education center in referring to the institutions described in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 above or the term postsecondary vocational education center in referring to institutions described in paragraphs 6 and 7 above or the term vocational education center in referring to any or all institutions described above.
            
            
            II. Responsibilities Assigned Only to State Agency Recipients
            a. responsibilities of all state agency recipients
            State agency recipients, in addition to complying with all other provisions of the Guidelines relevant to them, may not require, approve of, or engage in any discrimination or denial of services on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap in performing any of the following activities:
            1. Establishment of criteria or formulas for distribution of Federal or State funds to vocational education programs in the State;
            2. Establishment of requirements for admission to or requirements for the administration of vocational education programs;
            3. Approval of action by local entities providing vocational education. (For example, a State agency must ensure compliance with section IV of these Guidelines if and when it reviews a vocational education agency decision to create or change a geographic service area.);
            4. Conducting its own programs. (For example, in employing its staff it may not discriminate on the basis of sex or handicap.)
            b. state agencies performing oversight responsibilities

            The State agency responsible for the administration of vocational education programs must adopt a compliance program to prevent, identify and remedy discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex or handicap by its subrecipients. (A subrecipient, in this context, is a local agency or vocational education center that receives financial assistance through a State agency.) This compliance program must include:
            1. Collecting and analyzing civil rights related data and information that subrecipients compile for their own purposes or that are submitted to State and Federal officials under existing authorities;
            2. Conducting periodic compliance reviews of selected subrecipients (i.e., an investigation of a subrecipient to determine whether it engages in unlawful discrimination in any aspect of its program); upon finding unlawful discrimination, notifying the subrecipient of steps it must take to attain compliance and attempting to obtain voluntary compliance;
            3. Providing technical assistance upon request to subrecipients. This will include assisting subrecipients identify unlawful discrimination and instructing them in remedies for and prevention of such discrimination;
            4. Periodically reporting its activities and findings under the foregoing paragraphs, including findings of unlawful discrimination under paragraph 2, immediately above, to the Office for Civil Rights.
            State agencies are not required to terminate or defer assistance to any subrecipient. Nor are they required to conduct hearings. The responsibilities of the Office for Civil Rights to collect and analyze data, to conduct compliance reviews, to investigate complaints and to provide technical assistance are not diminished or attenuated by the requirements of Section II of the Guidelines.
            c. statement of procedures and practices
            Within one year from the publication of these Guidelines in final form, each State agency recipient performing oversight responsibilities must submit to the Office for Civil Rights the methods of administration and related procedures it will follow to comply with the requirements described in paragraphs A and B immediately above. The Department will review each submission and will promptly either approve it, or return it to State officials for revision.
            III. Distribution of Federal Financial Assistance and Other Funds for Vocational Education
            a. agency responsibilities
            Recipients that administer grants for vocational education must distribute Federal, State, or local vocational education funds so that no student or group of students is unlawfully denied an equal opportunity to benefit from vocational education on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap.
            b. distribution of funds
            Recipients may not adopt a formula or other method for the allocation of Federal, State, or local vocational education funds that has the effect of discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. However, a recipient may adopt a formula or other method of allocation that uses as a factor race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap [or an index or proxy for race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap e.g., number of persons receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children or with limited English speaking ability] if the factor is included to compensate for past discrimination or to comply with those provisions of the Vocational Education Amendments of 1976 designed to assist specified protected groups.
            c. example of a pattern suggesting unlawful discrimination

            In each State it is likely that some local recipients will enroll greater proportions of minority students in vocational education than the State-wide proportion of minority students in vocational education. A funding formula or other method of allocation that results in such local recipients receiving per-pupil allocations of Federal or State vocational education funds lower than the State-wide average per-pupil allocation will be presumed unlawfully discriminatory.
            d. distribution through competitive grants or contracts
            Each State agency that establishes criteria for awarding competitive vocational education grants or contracts must establish and apply the criteria without regard to the race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap of any or all of a recipient's students, except to compensate for past discrimination.
            e. application processes for competitive or discretionary grants
            State agencies must disseminate information needed to satisfy the requirements of any application process for competitive or discretionary grants so that all recipients, including those having a high percentage of minority or handicapped students, are informed of and able to seek funds. State agencies that provide technical assistance for the completion of the application process must provide such assistance without discrimination against any one recipient or class of recipients.
            f. alteration of fund distribution to provide equal opportunity
            If the Office for Civil Rights finds that a recipient's system for distributing vocational education funds unlawfully discriminates on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap, it will require the recipient to adopt an alternative nondiscriminatory method of distribution. The Office for Civil Rights may also require the recipient to compensate for the effects of its past unlawful discrimination in the distribution of funds.
            IV. Access and Admission of Students to Vocational Education Programs
            a. recipient responsibilities
            Criteria controlling student eligibility for admission to vocational education schools, facilities and programs may not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. A recipient may not develop, impose, maintain, approve, or implement such discriminatory admissions criteria.
            b. site selection for vocational schools
            State and local recipients may not select or approve a site for a vocational education facility for the purpose or with the effect of excluding, segregating, or otherwise discriminating against students on the basis of race, color, or national origin. Recipients must locate vocational education facilities at sites that are readily accessible to both nonminority and minority communities, and that do not tend to identify the facility or program as intended for nonminority or minority students.
            c. eligibility for admission to vocational education centers based on residence

            Recipients may not establish, approve or maintain geographic boundaries for a vocational education center service area or attendance zone, (hereinafter service area), that unlawfully exclude students on the basis of race, color, or national origin. The Office for Civil Rights will presume, subject to rebuttal, that any one or combination of the following circumstances indicates that the boundaries of a given service area are unlawfully constituted:
            1. A school system or service area contiguous to the given service area, contains minority or nonminority students in substantially greater proportion than the given service area;
            2. A substantial number of minority students who reside outside the given vocational education center service area, and who are not eligible for the center reside, nonetheless, as close to the center as a substantial number of non-minority students who are eligible for the center;
            3. The over-all vocational education program of the given service area in comparison to the over-all vocational education program of a contiguous school system or service area enrolling a substantially greater proportion of minority students: (a) Provides its students with a broader range of curricular offerings, facilities and equipment; or (b) provides its graduates greater opportunity for employment in jobs: (i) For which there is a demonstrated need in the community or region; (ii) that pay higher entry level salaries or wages; or (iii) that are generally acknowledged to offer greater prestige or status.
            d. additions and renovations to existing vocational education facilities
            A recipient may not add to, modify, or renovate the physical plant of a vocational education facility in a manner that creates, maintains, or increases student segregation on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap.
            e. remedies for violations of site selection and geographic service area requirements

            If the conditions specified in paragraphs IV, A, B, C, or D, immediately above, are found and not rebutted by proof of nondiscrimination, the Office for Civil rights will require the recipient(s) to submit a plan to remedy the discrimination. The following are examples of steps that may be included in the plan, where necessary to overcome the discrimination: (1) Redrawing of the boundaries of the vocational education center's service area to include areas unlawfully excluded and/or to exclude areas unlawfully included; (2) provision of transportation to students residing in areas unlawfully excluded; (3) provision of additional programs and services to students who would have been eligible for attendance at the vocational education center but for the discriminatory service area or site selection; (4) reassignment of students; and (5) construction of new facilities or expansion of existing facilities.
            f. eligibility for admission to secondary vocational education centers based on numerical limits imposed on sending schools
            A recipient may not adopt or maintain a system for admission to a secondary vocational education center or program that limits admission to a fixed number of students from each sending school included in the center's service area if such a system disproportionately excludes students from the center on the basis of race, sex, national origin or handicap. (Example: Assume 25 percent of a school district's high school students are black and that most of those black students are enrolled in one high school; the white students, 75 percent of the district's total enrollment, are generally enrolled in the five remaining high schools. This paragraph prohibits a system of admission to the secondary vocational education center that limits eligibility to a fixed and equal number of students from each of the district's six high schools.)
            g. remedies for violation of eligibility based on numerical limits requirements
            If the Office for Civil Rights finds a violation of paragraph F, above, the recipient must implement an alternative system of admissions that does not disproportionately exclude students on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap.
            h. eligibility for admission to vocational education centers, branches or annexes based upon student option
            A vocational education center, branch or annex, open to all students in a service area and predominantly enrolling minority students or students of one race, national origin or sex, will be presumed unlawfully segregated if: (1) It was established by a recipient for members of one race, national origin or sex; or (2) it has since its construction been attended primarily by members of one race, national origin or sex; or (3) most of its program offerings have traditionally been selected predominantely by members of one race, national origin or sex.
            i. remedies for facility segregation under student option plans
            If the conditions specified in paragraph IV-H are found and not rebutted by proof of nondiscrimination, the Office for Civil Rights will require the recipient(s) to submit a plan to remedy the segregation. The following are examples of steps that may be included in the plan, where necessary to overcome the discrimination:
            (1) elimination of program duplication in the segregated facility and other proximate vocational facilities; (2) relocation or “clustering” of programs or courses; (3) adding programs and courses that traditionally have been identified as intended for members of a particular race, national origin or sex to schools that have traditionally served members of the other sex or traditionally served persons of a different race or national origin; (4) merger of programs into one facility through school closings or new construction; (5) intensive outreach recruitment and counseling; (6) providing free transportation to students whose enrollment would promote desegregation.
            [Paragraph J omitted]
            k. eligibility based on evaluation of each applicant under admissions criteria
            Recipients may not judge candidates for admission to vocational education programs on the basis of criteria that have the effect of disproportionately excluding persons of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. However, if a recipient can demonstrate that such criteria have been validated as essential to participation in a given program and that alternative equally valid criteria that do not have such a disproportionate adverse effect are unavailable, the criteria will be judged nondiscriminatory. Examples of admissions criteria that must meet this test are past academic performance, record of disciplinary infractions, counselors' approval, teachers' recommendations, interest inventories, high school diplomas and standardized tests, such as the Test of Adult Basic Education (TABE).

            An introductory, preliminary, or exploratory course may not be established as a prerequisite for admission to a program unless the course has been and is available without regard to race, color, national origin, sex, and handicap. However, a course that was formerly only available on a discriminatory basis may be made a prerequisite for admission to a program if the recipient can demonstrate that: (a) the course is essential to participation in the program; and (b) the course is presently available to those seeking enrollment for the first time and to those formerly excluded.
            
            l. eligibility of national origin minority persons with limited english language skills
            Recipients may not restrict an applicant's admission to vocational education programs because the applicant, as a member of a national origin minority with limited English language skills, cannot participate in and benefit from vocational instruction to the same extent as a student whose primary language is English. It is the responsibility of the recipient to identify such applicants and assess their ability to participate in vocational instruction.
            Acceptable methods of identification include: (1) Identification by administrative staff, teachers, or parents of secondary level students; (2) identification by the student in postsecondary or adult programs; and (3) appropriate diagnostic procedures, if necessary.
            Recipients must take steps to open all vocational programs to these national origin minority students. A recipient must demonstrate that a concentration of students with limited English language skills in one or a few programs is not the result of discriminatory limitations upon the opportunities available to such students.
            m. remedial action in behalf of persons with limited english language skills
            If the Office for Civil Rights finds that a recipient has denied national origin minority persons admission to a vocational school or program because of their limited English language skills or has assigned students to vocational programs solely on the basis of their limited English language skills, the recipient will be required to submit a remedial plan that insures national origin minority students equal access to vocational education programs.
            n. equal access for handicapped students
            Recipients may not deny handicapped students access to vocational education programs or courses because of architectural or equipment barriers, or because of the need for related aids and services or auxiliary aids. If necessary, recipients must: (1) Modify instructional equipment; (2) modify or adapt the manner in which the courses are offered; (3) house the program in facilities that are readily accessible to mobility impaired students or alter facilities to make them readily accessible to mobility impaired students; and (4) provide auxiliary aids that effectively make lectures and necessary materials available to postsecondary handicapped students; (5) provide related aids or services that assure secondary students an appropriate education.
            Academic requirements that the recipient can demonstrate are essential to a program of instruction or to any directly related licensing requirement will not be regarded as discriminatory. However, where possible, a recipient must adjust those requirements to the needs of individual handicapped students.
            Access to vocational programs or courses may not be denied handicapped students on the ground that employment opportunities in any occupation or profession may be more limited for handicapped persons than for non-handicapped persons.
            o. public notification
            Prior to the beginning of each school year, recipients must advise students, parents, employees and the general public that all vocational opportunities will be offered without regard to race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. Announcement of this policy of non-discrimination may be made, for example, in local newspapers, recipient publications and/or other media that reach the general public, program beneficiaries, minorities (including national origin minorities with limited English language skills), women, and handicapped persons. A brief summary of program offerings and admission criteria should be included in the announcement; also the name, address and telephone number of the person designated to coordinate Title IX and Section 504 compliance activity.
            If a recipient's service area contains a community of national origin minority persons with limited English language skills, public notification materials must be disseminated to that community in its language and must state that recipients will take steps to assure that the lack of English language skills will not be a barrier to admission and participation in vocational education programs.
            V. Counseling and Prevocational Programs
            a. recipient responsibilities
            Recipients must insure that their counseling materials and activities (including student program selection and career/employment selection), promotional, and recruitment efforts do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap.
            b. counseling and prospects for success

            Recipients that operate vocational education programs must insure that counselors do not direct or urge any student to enroll in a particular career or program, or measure or predict a student's prospects for success in any career or program based upon the student's race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. Recipients may not counsel handicapped students toward more restrictive career objectives than nonhandicapped students with similar abilities and interests. If a vocational program disproportionately enrolls male or female students, minority or nonminority students, or handicapped students, recipients must take steps to insure that the disproportion does not result from unlawful discrimination in counseling activities.
            c. student recruitment activities
            Recipients must conduct their student recruitment activities so as not to exclude or limit opportunities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. Where recruitment activities involve the presentation or portrayal of vocational and career opportunities, the curricula and programs described should cover a broad range of occupational opportunities and not be limited on the basis of the race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap of the students or potential students to whom the presentation is made. Also, to the extent possible, recruiting teams should include persons of different races, national origins, sexes, and handicaps.
            d. counseling of students with limited english-speaking ability or hearing impairments
            Recipients must insure that counselors can effectively communicate with national origin minority students with limited English language skills and with students who have hearing impairments. This requirement may be satisfied by having interpreters available.
            e. promotional activities
            Recipients may not undertake promotional efforts (including activities of school officials, counselors, and vocational staff) in a manner that creates or perpetuates stereotypes or limitations based on race, color, national origin, sex or handicap. Examples of promotional efforts are career days, parents' night, shop demonstrations, visitations by groups of prospective students and by representatives from business and industry. Materials that are part of promotional efforts may not create or perpetuate stereotypes through text or illustration. To the extent possible they should portray males or females, minorities or handicapped persons in programs and occupations in which these groups traditionally have not been represented. If a recipient's service area contains a community of national origin minority persons with limited English language skills, promotional literature must be distributed to that community in its language.
            VI. Equal Opportunity in the Vocational Education Instructional Setting
            a. accommodations for handicapped students
            Recipients must place secondary level handicapped students in the regular educational environment of any vocational education program to the maximum extent appropriate to the needs of the student unless it can be demonstrated that the education of the handicapped person in the regular environment with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily. Handicapped students may be placed in a program only after the recipient satisfies the provisions of the Department's Regulation, 45 CFR part 84, relating to evaluation, placement, and procedural safeguards. If a separate class or facility is identifiable as being for handicapped persons, the facility, the programs, and the services must be comparable to the facilities, programs, and services offered to nonhandicapped students.
            b. student financial assistance
            Recipients may not award financial assistance in the form of loans, grants, scholarships, special funds, subsidies, compensation for work, or prizes to vocational education students on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap, except to overcome the effects of past discrimination. Recipients may administer sex restricted financial assistance where the assistance and restriction are established by will, trust, bequest, or any similar legal instrument, if the overall effect of all financial assistance awarded does not discriminate on the basis of sex. Materials and information used to notify students of opportunities for financial assistance may not contain language or examples that would lead applicants to believe the assistance is provided on a discriminatory basis. If a recipient's service area contains a community of national origin minority persons with limited English language skills, such information must be disseminated to that community in its language.
            c. housing in residential postsecondary vocational education centers

            Recipients must extend housing opportunities without discrimination based on race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. This obligation extends to recipients that provide on-campus housing and/or that have agreements with providers of off-campus housing. In particular, a recipient postsecondary vocational education program that provides on-campus or off-campus housing to its nonhandicapped students must provide, at the same cost and under the same conditions, comparable convenient and accessible housing to handicapped students.
            
            d. comparable facilities
            Recipients must provide changing rooms, showers, and other facilities for students of one sex that are comparable to those provided to students of the other sex. This may be accomplished by alternating use of the same facilities or by providing separate, comparable facilities.
            Such facilities must be adapted or modified to the extent necessary to make the vocational education program readily accessible to handicapped persons.
            VII. Work Study, Cooperative Vocational Education, Job Placement, and Apprentice Training
            a. responsibilities in cooperative vocational education programs, work-study programs, and job placement programs
            A recipient must insure that: (a) It does not discriminate against its students on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap in making available opportunities in cooperative education, work study and job placement programs; and (b) students participating in cooperative education, work study and job placement programs are not discriminated against by employers or prospective employers on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap in recruitment, hiring, placement, assignment to work tasks, hours of employment, levels of responsibility, and in pay.
            If a recipient enters into a written agreement for the referral or assignment of students to an employer, the agreement must contain an assurance from the employer that students will be accepted and assigned to jobs and otherwise treated without regard to race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap.
            Recipients may not honor any employer's request for students who are free of handicaps or for students of a particular race, color, national origin, or sex. In the event an employer or prospective employer is or has been subject to court action involving discrimination in employment, school officials should rely on the court's findings if the decision resolves the issue of whether the employer has engaged in unlawful discrimination.
            b. apprentice training programs
            A recipient may not enter into any agreement for the provision or support of apprentice training for students or union members with any labor union or other sponsor that discriminates against its members or applicants for membership on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap. If a recipient enters into a written agreement with a labor union or other sponsor providing for apprentice training, the agreement must contain an assurance from the union or other sponsor: (1) That it does not engage in such discrimination against its membership or applicants for membership; and (2) that apprentice training will be offered and conducted for its membership free of such discrimination.
            VIII. Employment of Faculty and Staff
            a. employment generally
            Recipients may not engage in any employment practice that discriminates against any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of sex or handicap. Recipients may not engage in any employment practice that discriminates on the basis of race, color, or national origin if such discrimination tends to result in segregation, exclusion or other discrimination against students.
            b. recruitment
            Recipients may not limit their recruitment for employees to schools, communities, or companies disproportionately composed of persons of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap except for the purpose of overcoming the effects of past discrimination. Every source of faculty must be notified that the recipient does not discriminate in employment on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, or handicap.
            c. patterns of discrimination
            Whenever the Office for Civil Rights finds that in light of the representation of protected groups in the relevant labor market there is a significant underrepresentation or overrepresentation of protected group persons on the staff of a vocational education school or program, it will presume that the disproportion results from unlawful discrimination. This presumption can be overcome by proof that qualified persons of the particular race, color, national origin, or sex, or that qualified handicapped persons are not in fact available in the relevant labor market.
            d. salary policies
            Recipients must establish and maintain faculty salary scales and policy based upon the conditions and responsibilities of employment, without regard to race, color, national origin, sex or handicap.
            e. employment opportunities for handicapped applicants

            Recipients must provide equal employment opportunities for teaching and administrative positions to handicapped applicants who can perform the essential functions of the position in question. Recipients must make reasonable accommodation for the physical or mental limitations of handicapped applicants who are otherwise qualified unless recipients can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship.
            
            f. the effects of past discrimination
            Recipients must take steps to overcome the effects of past discrimination in the recruitment, hiring, and assignment of faculty. Such steps may include the recruitment or reassignment of qualified persons of a particular race, national origin, or sex, or who are handicapped.
            g. staff of state advisory councils of vocational education
            State Advisory Councils of Vocational Education are recipients of Federal financial assistance and therefore must comply with Section VIII of the Guidelines.
            h. employment at state operated vocational education centers through state civil-service authorities
            Where recruitment and hiring of staff for State operated vocational education centers is conducted by a State civil service employment authority, the State education agency operating the program must insure that recruitment and hiring of staff for the vocational education center is conducted in accordance with the requirements of these Guidelines.
            IX. Proprietary Vocational Education Schools
            a. recipient responsibilities
            Proprietary vocational education schools that are recipients of Federal financial assistance through Federal student assistance programs or otherwise are subject to all of the requirements of the Department's regulations and these Guidelines.
            b. enforcement authority
            Enforcement of the provisions of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 is the responsibility of the Department of Health and Human Services. However, authority to enforce Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 for proprietary vocational education schools has been delegated to the Veterans Administration.
            When the Office for Civil Rights receives a Title VI complaint alleging discrimination by a proprietary vocational education school it will forward the complaint to the Veterans Administration and cite the applicable requirements of the Department's regulations and these Guidelines. The complainant will be notified of such action.
            [44 FR 17164, Mar. 21, 1979]
          
        
        
          Pt. 81
          PART 81—PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS UNDER PART 80 OF THIS TITLE
          
            
              Subpart A—General Information
              Sec.
              81.1
              Scope of rules.
              81.2
              Records to be public.
              81.3
              Use of gender and number.
              81.4
              Suspension of rules.
            
            
              Subpart B—Appearance and Practice
              81.11
              Appearance.
              81.12
              Authority for representation.
              81.13
              Exclusion from hearing for misconduct.
            
            
              Subpart C—Parties
              81.21
              Parties; General Counsel deemed a party.
              81.22
              Amici curiae.
              81.23
              Complainants not parties.
            
            
              Subpart D—Form, Execution, Service and Filing of Documents
              81.31
              Form of documents to be filed.
              81.32
              Signature of documents.
              81.33
              Filing and service.
              81.34
              Service—how made.
              81.35
              Date of service.
              81.36
              Certificate of service.
            
            
              Subpart E—Time
              81.41
              Computation.
              81.42
              Extension of time or postponement.
              81.43
              Reduction of time to file documents.
            
            
              Subpart F—Proceedings Prior to Hearing
              81.51
              Notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing.
              81.52
              Answer to notice.
              81.53
              Amendment of notice or answer.
              81.54
              Request for hearing.
              81.55
              Consolidation.
              81.56
              Motions.
              81.57
              Responses to motions and petitions.
              81.58
              Disposition of motions and petitions.
            
            
              Subpart G—Responsibilities and Duties of Presiding Officer
              81.61
              Who presides.
              81.62
              Designation of hearing examiner.
              81.63
              Authority of presiding officer.
            
            
              Subpart H—Hearing Procedures
              81.71
              Statement of position and trial briefs.
              81.72
              Evidentiary purpose.
              81.73
              Testimony.
              81.74
              Exhibits.
              
              81.75
              Affidavits.
              81.76
              Depositions.
              81.77
              Admissions as to facts and documents.
              81.78
              Evidence.
              81.79
              Cross-examination.
              81.80
              Unsponsored written material.
              81.81
              Objections.
              81.82
              Exceptions to rulings of presiding officer unnecessary.
              81.83
              Official notice.
              81.84
              Public document items.
              81.85
              Offer of proof.
              81.86
              Appeals from ruling of presiding officer.
            
            
              Subpart I—The Record
              81.91
              Official transcript.
              81.92
              Record for decision.
            
            
              Subpart J—Posthearing Procedures, Decisions
              81.101
              Posthearing briefs: Proposed findings and conclusions.
              81.102
              Decisions following hearing.
              81.103
              Exceptions to initial or recommended decisions.
              81.104
              Final decisions.
              81.105
              Oral argument to the reviewing authority.
              81.106
              Review by the Secretary.
              81.107
              Service on amici curiae.
            
            
              Subpart K—Judicial Standards of Practice
              81.111
              Conduct.
              81.112
              Improper conduct.
              81.113
              Ex parte communications.
              81.114
              Expeditious treatment.
              81.115
              Matters not prohibited.
              81.116
              Filing of ex parte communications.
            
            
              Subpart L—Posttermination Proceedings
              81.121
              Posttermination proceedings.
            
            
              Subpart M—Definitions
              81.131
              Definitions.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301 and 45 CFR 80.9(d).
          
          
            Source:
            32 FR 15156, Nov. 2, 1967, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Information
            
              § 81.1
              Scope of rules.
              The rules of procedure in this part supplement §§ 80.9 and 80.10 of this subtitle and govern the practice for hearings, decisions, and administrative review conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services, pursuant to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (section 602, 78 Stat. 252) and part 80 of this subtitle.
            
            
              § 81.2
              Records to be public.
              All pleadings, correspondence, exhibits, transcripts, of testimony, exceptions, briefs, decisions, and other documents filed in the docket in any proceeding may be inspected and copied in the office of the Civil Rights hearing clerk. Inquiries may be made at the Central Information Center, Department of Health and Human Services, 330 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20201.
            
            
              § 81.3
              Use of gender and number.
              As used in this part, words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things, and vice versa. Words importing the masculine gender may be applied to females or organizations.
            
            
              § 81.4
              Suspension of rules.
              Upon notice to all parties, the reviewing authority or the presiding officer, with respect to matters pending before them, may modify or waive any rule in this part upon determination that no party will be unduly prejudiced and the ends of justice will thereby be served.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Appearance and Practice
            
              § 81.11
              Appearance.
              A party may appear in person or by counsel and participate fully in any proceeding. A State agency or a corporation may appear by any of its officers or by any employee it authorizes to appear on its behalf. Counsel must be members in good standing of the bar of a State, Territory, or possession of the United States or of the District of Columbia or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
            
            
              § 81.12
              Authority for representation.
              Any individual acting in a representative capacity in any proceeding may be required to show his authority to act in such capacity.
            
            
              
              § 81.13
              Exclusion from hearing for misconduct.
              Disrespectful, disorderly, or contumacious language or contemptuous conduct, refusal to comply with directions, or continued use of dilatory tactics by any person at any hearing before a presiding officer shall constitute grounds for immediate exclusion of such person from the hearing by the presiding officer.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Parties
            
              § 81.21
              Parties; General Counsel deemed a party.
              (a) The term party shall include an applicant or recipient or other person to whom a notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing has been mailed naming him a respondent.
              (b) The General Counsel of the Department of Health and Human Services shall be deemed a party to all proceedings.
            
            
              § 81.22
              Amici curiae.
              (a) Any interested person or organization may file a petition to participate in a proceeding as an amicus curiae. Such petition shall be filed prior to the prehearing conference, or if none is held, before the commencement of the hearing, unless the petitioner shows good cause for filing the petition later. The presiding officer may grant the petition if he finds that the petitioner has a legitimate interest in the proceedings, that such participation will not unduly delay the outcome, and may contribute materially to the proper disposition thereof. An amicus curiae is not a party and may not introduce evidence at a hearing.
              (b) An amicus curiae may submit a statement of position to the presiding officer prior to the beginning of a hearing, and shall serve a copy on each party. The amicus curiae may submit a brief on each occasion a decision is to be made or a prior decision is subject to review. His brief shall be filed and served on each party within the time limits applicable to the party whose position he deems himself to support; or if he does not deem himself to support the position of any party, within the longest time limit applicable to any party at that particular stage of the proceedings.
              (c) When all parties have completed their initial examination of a witness, any amicus curiae may request the presiding officer to propound specific questions to the witness. The presiding officer, in his discretion, may grant any such request if he believes the proposed additional testimony may assist materially in elucidating factual matters at issue between the parties and will not expand the issues.
            
            
              § 81.23
              Complainants not parties.
              A person submitting a complaint pursuant to § 80.7(b) of this title is not a party to the proceedings governed by this part, but may petition, after proceedings are initiated, to become an amicus curiae.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Form, Execution, Service and Filing of Documents
            
              § 81.31
              Form of documents to be filed.
              Documents to be filed under the rules in this part shall be dated, the original signed in ink, shall show the docket description and title of the proceeding, and shall show the title, if any, and address of the signatory. Copies need not be signed but the name of the person signing the original shall be reproduced. Documents shall be legible and shall not be more than 81/2 inches wide and 12 inches long.
            
            
              § 81.32
              Signature of documents.
              The signature of a party, authorized officer, employee or attorney constitutes a certificate that he has read the document, that to the best of his knowledge, information, and belief there is good ground to support it, and that it is not interposed for delay. If a document is not signed or is signed with intent to defeat the purpose of this section, it may be stricken as sham and false and the proceeding may proceed as though the document had not been filed. Similar action may be taken if scandalous or indecent matter is inserted.
            
            
              
              § 81.33
              Filing and service.
              All notices by a Department official, and all written motions, requests, petitions, memoranda, pleadings, exceptions, briefs, decisions, and correspondence to a Department official from a party, or vice versa, relating to a proceeding after its commencement shall be filed and served on all parties. Parties shall supply the original and two copies of documents submitted for filing. Filings shall be made with the Civil Rights hearing clerk at the address stated in the notice of hearing or notice of opportunity for hearing, during regular business hours. Regular business hours are every Monday through Friday (legal holidays in the District of Columbia excepted) from 9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., eastern standard or daylight saving time, whichever is effective in the District of Columbia at the time. Originals only on exhibits and transcripts of testimony need be filed. For requirements of service on amici curiae, see § 81.107.
            
            
              § 81.34
              Service—how made.
              Service shall be made by personal delivery of one copy to each person to be served or by mailing by first-class mail, properly addressed with postage prepaid. When a party or amicus has appeared by attorney or other representative, service upon such attorney or representative will be deemed service upon the party or amicus. Documents served by mail preferably should be mailed in sufficient time to reach the addressee by the date on which the original is due to be filed, and should be air mailed if the addressee is more than 300 miles distant.
            
            
              § 81.35
              Date of service.
              The date of service shall be the day when the matter is deposited in the U.S. mail or is delivered in person, except that the date of service of the initial notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing shall be the date of its delivery, or of its attempted delivery if refused.
            
            
              § 81.36
              Certificate of service.
              The original of every document filed and required to be served upon parties to a proceeding shall be endorsed with a certificate of service signed by the party making service or by his attorney or representative, stating that such service has been made, the date of service, and the manner of service, whether by mail or personal delivery.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Time
            
              § 81.41
              Computation.
              In computing any period of time under the rules in this part or in an order issued hereunder, the time begins with the day following the act, event, or default, and includes the last day of the period, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday observed in the District of Columbia, in which event it includes the next following business day. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than 7 days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded from the computation.
            
            
              § 81.42
              Extension of time or postponement.
              Requests for extension of time should be served on all parties and should set forth the reasons for the application. Applications may be granted upon a showing of good cause by the applicant. From the designation of a presiding officer until the issuance of his decision such requests should be addressed to him. Answers to such requests are permitted, if made promptly.
            
            
              § 81.43
              Reduction of time to file documents.
              For good cause, the reviewing authority or the presiding officer, with respect to matters pending before them, may reduce any time limit prescribed by the rules in this part, except as provided by law or in part 80 of this title.
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Proceedings Prior to Hearing
            
              § 81.51
              Notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing.
              Proceedings are commenced by mailing a notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing to an affected applicant or recipient, pursuant to § 80.9 of this title.
            
            
              
              § 81.52
              Answer to notice.
              The respondent, applicant or recipient may file an answer to the notice within 20 days after service thereof. Answers shall admit or deny specifically and in detail each allegation of the notice, unless the respondent party is without knowledge, in which case his answer should so state, and the statement will be deemed a denial. Allegations of fact in the notice not denied or controverted by answer shall be deemed admitted. Matters alleged as affirmative defenses shall be separately stated and numbered. Failure of the respondent to file an answer within the 20-day period following service of the notice may be deemed an admission of all matters of fact recited in the notice.
            
            
              § 81.53
              Amendment of notice or answer.
              The General Counsel may amend the notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing once as a matter of course before an answer thereto is served, and each respondent may amend his answer once as a matter of course not later than 10 days before the date fixed for hearing but in no event later than 20 days from the date of service of his original answer. Otherwise a notice or answer may be amended only by leave of the presiding officer. A respondent shall file his answer to an amended notice within the time remaining for filing the answer to the original notice or within 10 days after service of the amended notice, whichever period may be the longer, unless the presiding officer otherwise orders.
            
            
              § 81.54
              Request for hearing.
              Within 20 days after service of a notice of opportunity for hearing which does not fix a date for hearing the respondent, either in his answer or in a separate document, may request a hearing. Failure of the respondent to request a hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing and to constitute his consent to the making of a decision on the basis of such information as is available.
            
            
              § 81.55
              Consolidation.
              The responsible Department official may provide for proceedings in the Department to be joined or consolidated for hearing with proceedings in other Federal departments or agencies, by agreement with such other departments or agencies. All parties to any proceeding consolidated subsequently to service of the notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing shall be promptly served with notice of such consolidation.
            
            
              § 81.56
              Motions.
              Motions and petitions shall state the relief sought, the authority relied upon, and the facts alleged. If made before or after the hearing, these matters shall be in writing. If made at the hearing, they may be stated orally; but the presiding officer may require that they be reduced to writing and filed and served on all parties in the same manner as a formal motion. Motions, answers, and replies shall be addressed to the presiding officer, if the case is pending before him. A repetitious motion will not be entertained.
            
            
              § 81.57
              Responses to motions and petitions.
              Within 8 days after a written motion or petition is served, or such other period as the reviewing authority or the presiding officer may fix, any party may file a response thereto. An immediate oral response may be made to an oral motion.
            
            
              § 81.58
              Disposition of motions and petitions.

              The reviewing authority or the presiding officer may not sustain or grant a written motion or petition prior to expiration of the time for filing responses thereto, but may overrule or deny such motion or petition without awaiting response: Provided, however, That prehearing conferences, hearings and decisions need not be delayed pending disposition of motions or petitions. Oral motions and petitions may be ruled on immediately. Motions and petitions submitted to the reviewing authority or the presiding officer, respectively, and not disposed of in separate rulings or in their respective decisions will be deemed denied. Oral arguments shall not be held or written motions or petitions unless the presiding officer in his discretion expressly so orders.
            
          
          
            
            Subpart G—Responsibilities and Duties of Presiding Officer
            
              § 81.61
              Who presides.
              A hearing examiner assigned under 5 U.S.C. 3105 or 3344 (formerly section 11 of the Administrative Procedure Act) shall preside over the taking of evidence in any hearing to which these rules of procedure apply.
            
            
              § 81.62
              Designation of hearing examiner.
              The designation of the hearing examiner as presiding officer shall be in writing, and shall specify whether the examiner is to make an initial decision or to certify the entire record including his recommended findings and proposed decision to the reviewing authority, and may also fix the time and place of hearing. A copy of such order shall be served on all parties. After service of an order designating a hearing examiner to preside, and until such examiner makes his decision, motions and petitions shall be submitted to him. In the case of the death, illness, disqualification or unavailability of the designated hearing examiner, another hearing examiner may be designated to take his place.
            
            
              § 81.63
              Authority of presiding officer.
              The presiding officer shall have the duty to conduct a fair hearing, to take all necessary action to avoid delay, and to maintain order. He shall have all powers necessary to these ends, including (but not limited to) the power to:
              (a) Arrange and issue notice of the date, time, and place of hearings, or, upon due notice to the parties, to change the date, time, and place of hearings previously set.
              (b) Hold conferences to settle, simplify, or fix the issues in a proceeding, or to consider other matters that may aid in the expeditious disposition of the proceeding.
              (c) Require parties and amici curiae to state their position with respect to the various issues in the proceeding.
              (d) Administer oaths and affirmations.
              (e) Rule on motions, and other procedural items on matters pending before him.
              (f) Regulate the course of the hearing and conduct of counsel therein.
              (g) Examine witnesses and direct witnesses to testify.
              (h) Receive, rule on, exclude or limit evidence.
              (i) Fix the time for filing motions, petitions, briefs, or other items in matters pending before him.
              (j) Issue initial or recommended decisions.
              (k) Take any action authorized by the rules in this part or in conformance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551-559 (the Administrative Procedure Act).
            
          
          
            Subpart H—Hearing Procedures
            
              § 81.71
              Statement of position and trial briefs.
              The presiding officer may require parties and amici curiae to file written statements of position prior to the beginning of a hearing. The presiding officer may also require the parties to submit trial briefs.
            
            
              § 81.72
              Evidentiary purpose.
              (a) The hearing is directed to receiving factual evidence and expert opinion testimony related to the issues in the proceeding. Argument will not be received in evidence; rather it should be presented in statements, memoranda, or briefs, as determined by the presiding officer. Brief opening statements, which shall be limited to statement of the party's position and what he intends to prove, may be made at hearings.

              (b) Hearings for the reception of evidence will be held only in cases where issues of fact must be resolved in order to determine whether the respondent has failed to comply with one or more applicable requirements of part 80 of this title. In any case where it appears from the respondent's answer to the notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing, from his failure timely to answer, or from his admissions or stipulations in the record, that there are no matters of material fact in dispute, the reviewing authority or presiding officer may enter an order so finding, vacating the hearing date if one has been set, and fixing the time for filing briefs under § 81.101. Thereafter the proceedings shall go to conclusion in accordance with subpart J of this part. The presiding officer may allow an appeal from such order in accordance with § 81.86.
            
            
              § 81.73
              Testimony.
              Testimony shall be given orally under oath or affirmation by witnesses at the hearing; but the presiding officer, in his discretion, may require or permit that the direct testimony of any witness be prepared in writing and served on all parties in advance of the hearing. Such testimony may be adopted by the witness at the hearing, and filed as part of the record thereof. Unless authorized by the presiding officer, witnesses will not be permitted to read prepared testimony into the record. Except as provided in §§ 81.75 and 81.76, witnesses shall be available at the hearing for cross-examination.
            
            
              § 81.74
              Exhibits.
              Proposed exhibits shall be exchanged at the prehearing conference, or otherwise prior to the hearing if the presiding officer so requires. Proposed exhibits not so exchanged may be denied admission as evidence. The authenticity of all proposed exhibits exchanged prior to hearing will be deemed admitted unless written objection thereto is filed prior to the hearing or unless good cause is shown at the hearing for failure to file such written objection.
            
            
              § 81.75
              Affidavits.
              An affidavit is; not inadmissible as such. Unless the presiding officer fixes other time periods affidavits shall be filed and served on the parties not later than 15 days prior to the hearing; and not less than 7 days prior to hearing a party may file and serve written objection to any affidavit on the ground that he believes it necessary to test the truth of assertions therein at hearing. In such event the assertions objected to will not be received in evidence unless the affiant is made available for cross-examination, or the presiding officer determines that cross-examination is not necessary for the full and true disclosure of facts referred to in such assertions. Notwithstanding any objection, however, affidavits may be considered in the case of any respondent who waives a hearing.
            
            
              § 81.76
              Depositions.
              Upon such terms as may be just, for the convenience of the parties or of the Department, the presiding officer may authorize or direct the testimony of any witness to be taken by deposition.
            
            
              § 81.77
              Admissions as to facts and documents.
              Not later than 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing except for good cause shown, or prior to such earlier date as the presiding officer may order, any party may serve upon an opposing party a written request for the admission of the genuineness and authenticity of any relevant documents described in and exhibited with the request, or for the admission of the truth of any relevant matters of fact stated in the request. Each of the matters of which an admission is requested shall be deemed admitted, unless within a period designated in the request (not less than 10 days after service thereof, or within such further time as the presiding officer or the reviewing authority if no presiding officer has yet been designated may allow upon motion and notice) the party to whom the request is directed serves upon the requesting party a sworn statement either denying specifically the matters of which an admission is requested or setting forth in detail the reasons why he cannot truthfully either admit or deny such matters. Copies of requests for admission and answers thereto shall be served on all parties. Any admission made by a party to such request is only for the purposes of the pending proceeding, or any proceeding or action instituted for the enforcement of any order entered therein, and shall not constitute and admission by him for any other purpose or be used against him in any other proceeding or action.
            
            
              § 81.78
              Evidence.
              Irrelevant, immaterial, unreliable, and unduly repetitious evidence will be excluded.
            
            
              
              § 81.79
              Cross-examination.
              A witness may be cross-examined on any matter material to the proceeding without regard to the scope of his direct examination.
            
            
              § 81.80
              Unsponsored written material.
              Letters expressing views or urging action and other unsponsored written material regarding matters in issue in a hearing will be placed in the correspondence section of the docket of the proceeding. These data are not deemed part of the evidence or record in the hearing.
            
            
              § 81.81
              Objections.
              Objections to evidence shall be timely and briefly state the ground relied upon.
            
            
              § 81.82
              Exceptions to rulings of presiding officer unnecessary.
              Exceptions to rulings of the presiding officer are unnecessary. It is sufficient that a party, at the time the ruling of the presiding officer is sought, makes known the action which he desires the presiding officer to take, or his objection to an action taken, and his grounds therefor.
            
            
              § 81.83
              Official notice.
              Where official notice is taken or is to be taken of a material fact not appearing in the evidence of record, any party, on timely request, shall be afforded an opportunity to show the contrary.
            
            
              § 81.84
              Public document items.
              Whenever there is offered (in whole or in part) a public document, such as an official report, decision, opinion, or published scientific or economic statistical data issued by any of the executive departments (or their subdivisions), legislative agencies or committees, or administrative agencies of the Federal Government (including Government-owned corporations), or a similar document issued by a State or its agencies, and such document (or part thereof) has been shown by the offeror to be reasonably available to the public, such document need not be produced or marked for identification, but may be offered for official notice, as a public document item by specifying the document or relevant part thereof.
            
            
              § 81.85
              Offer of proof.
              An offer of proof made in connection with an objection taken to any ruling of the presiding officer rejecting or excluding proffered oral testimony shall consist of a statement of the substance of the evidence which counsel contends would be adduced by such testimony; and, if the excluded evidence consists of evidence in documentary or written form or of reference to documents or records, a copy of such evidence shall be marked for identification and shall accompany the record as the offer of proof.
            
            
              § 81.86
              Appeals from ruling of presiding officer.
              Rulings of the presiding officer may not be appealed to the reviewing authority prior to his consideration of the entire proceeding except with the consent of the presiding officer and where he certifies on the record or in writing that the allowance of an interlocutory appeal is clearly necessary to prevent exceptional delay, expense, or prejudice to any party, or substantial detriment to the public interest. If an appeal is allowed, any party may file a brief with the reviewing authority within such period as the presiding officer directs. No oral argument will be heard unless the reviewing authority directs otherwise. At any time prior to submission of the proceeding to it for decisions, the reviewing authority may direct the presiding officer to certify any question or the entire record to it for decision. Where the entire record is so certified, the presiding officer shall recommend a decision.
            
          
          
            Subpart I—The Record
            
              § 81.91
              Official transcript.

              The Department will designate the official reporter for all hearings. The official transcripts of testimony taken, together with any exhibits, briefs, or memoranda of law filed therewith shall be filed with the Department. Transcripts of testimony in hearings may be obtained from the official reporter by the parties and the public at rates not to exceed the maximum rates fixed by the contract between the Department and the reporter. Upon notice to all parties, the presiding officer may authorize corrections to the transcript which involve matters of substance.
            
            
              § 81.92
              Record for decision.
              The transcript of testimony, exhibits, and all papers and requests filed in the proceedings, except the correspondence section of the docket, including rulings and any recommended or initial decision shall constitute the exclusive record for decision.
            
          
          
            Subpart J—Posthearing Procedures, Decisions
            
              § 81.101
              Posthearing briefs: Proposed findings and conclusions.
              (a) The presiding officer shall fix the time for filing posthearing briefs, which may contain proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, and, if permitted, reply briefs.
              (b) Briefs should include a summary of the evidence relied upon together with references to exhibit numbers and pages of the transcript, with citations of the authorities relied upon.
            
            
              § 81.102
              Decisions following hearing.
              When the time for submission of posthearing briefs has expired, the presiding officer shall certify the entire record, including his recommended findings and proposed decision, to the responsible Department official; or if so authorized he shall make an initial decision. A copy of the recommended findings and proposed decision, or of the initial decision, shall be served upon all parties, and amici, if any.
            
            
              § 81.103
              Exceptions to initial or recommended decisions.
              Within 20 days after the mailing of an initial or recommended decision, any party may file exceptions to the decision, stating reasons therefor, with the reviewing authority. Any other party may file a response thereto within 30 days after the mailing of the decision. Upon the filing of such exceptions, the reviewing authority shall review the decision and issue its own decision thereon.
            
            
              § 81.104
              Final decisions.
              (a) Where the hearing is conducted by a hearing examiner who makes an initial decision, if no exceptions thereto are filed within the 20-day period specified in § 81.103, such decision shall become the final decision of the Department, and shall constitute “final agency action” within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 704 (formerly section 10(c) of the Administrative Procedure Act), subject to the provisions of § 81.106.
              (b) Where the hearing is conducted by a hearing examiner who makes a recommended decision, or upon the filing of exceptions to a hearing examiner's initial decision, the reviewing authority shall review the recommended or initial decision and shall issue its own decision thereon, which shall become the final decision of the Department, and shall constitute “final agency action” within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 704 (formerly section 10(c) of the Administrative Procedure Act), subject to the provisions of § 81.106.
              (c) All final decisions shall be promptly served on all parties, and amici, if any.
            
            
              § 81.105
              Oral argument to the reviewing authority.
              (a) If any party desires to argue a case orally on exceptions or replies to exceptions to an initial or recommended decision, he shall make such request in writing. The reviewing authority may grant or deny such requests in its discretion. If granted, it will serve notice of oral argument on all parties. The notice will set forth the order of presentation, the amount of time allotted, and the time and place for argument. The names of persons who will argue should be filed with the Department hearing clerk not later than 7 days before the date set for oral argument.

              (b) The purpose of oral argument is to emphasize and clarify the written argument in the briefs. Reading at length from the brief or other texts is not favored. Participants should confine their arguments to points of controlling importance and to points upon which exceptions have been filed. Consolidations of appearances at oral argument by parties taking the same side will permit the parties' interests to be presented more effectively in the time allotted.
              (c) Pamphlets, charts, and other written material may be presented at oral argument only if such material is limited to facts already in the record and is served on all parties and filed with the Department hearing clerk at least 7 days before the argument.
            
            
              § 81.106
              Review by the Secretary.
              Within 20 days after an initial decision becomes a final decision pursuant to § 81.104(a) or within 20 days of the mailing of a final decision referred to in § 81.104(b), as the case may be, a party may request the Secretary to review the final decision. The Secretary may grant or deny such request, in whole or in part, or serve notice of his intent to review the decision in whole or in part upon his own motion. If the Secretary grants the requested review, or if he serves notice of intent to review upon his own motion, each party to the decision shall have 20 days following notice of the Secretary's proposed action within which to file exceptions to the decision and supporting briefs and memoranda, or briefs and memoranda in support of the decision. Failure of a party to request review under this paragraph shall not be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies for the purpose of obtaining judicial review.
            
            
              § 81.107
              Service on amici curiae.
              All briefs, exceptions, memoranda, requests, and decisions referred to in this Subpart J shall be served upon amici curiae at the same times and in the same manner required for service on parties. Any written statements of position and trial briefs required of parties under § 81.71 shall be served on amici.
            
          
          
            Subpart K—Judicial Standards of Practice
            
              § 81.111
              Conduct.
              Parties and their representatives are expected to conduct themselves with honor and dignity and observe judicial standards of practice and ethics in all proceedings. They should not indulge in offensive personalities, unseemly wrangling, or intemperate accusations or characterizations. A representative of any party whether or not a lawyer shall observe the traditional responsibilities of lawyers as officers of the court and use his best efforts to restrain his client from improprieties in connection with a proceeding.
            
            
              § 81.112
              Improper conduct.
              With respect to any proceeding it is improper for any interested person to attempt to sway the judgment of the reviewing authority by undertaking to bring pressure or influence to bear upon any officer having a responsibility for a decision in the proceeding, or his decisional staff. It is improper that such interested persons or any members of the Department's staff or the presiding officer give statements to communications media, by paid advertisement or otherwise, designed to influence the judgment of any officer having a responsibility for a decision in the proceeding, or his decisional staff. It is improper for any person to solicit communications to any such officer, or his decisional staff, other than proper communications by parties or amici curiae.
            
            
              § 81.113
              Ex parte communications.
              Only persons employed by or assigned to work with the reviewing authority who perform no investigative or prosecuting function in connection with a proceeding shall communicate ex parte with the reviewing authority, or the presiding officer, or any employee or person involved in the decisional process in such proceedings with respect to the merits of that or a factually related proceeding. The reviewing authority, the presiding officer, or any employee or person involved in the decisional process of a proceeding shall communicate ex parte with respect to the merits of that or a factually related proceeding only with persons employed by or assigned to work with them and who perform no investigative or prosecuting function in connection with the proceeding.
            
            
              
              § 81.114
              Expeditious treatment.
              Requests for expeditious treatment of matters pending before the responsible Department official or the presiding officer are deemed communications on the merits, and are improper except when forwarded from parties to a proceeding and served upon all other parties thereto. Such communications should be in the form of a motion.
            
            
              § 81.115
              Matters not prohibited.
              A request for information which merely inquires about the status of a proceeding without discussing issues or expressing points of view is not deemed an ex parte communication. Such requests should be directed to the Civil Rights hearing clerk. Communications with respect to minor procedural matters or inquiries or emergency requests for extensions of time are not deemed ex parte communications prohibited by § 81.113. Where feasible, however, such communications should be by letter with copies to all parties. Ex parte communications between a respondent and the responsible Department official or the Secretary with respect to securing such respondent's voluntary compliance with any requirement of part 80 of this title are not prohibited.
            
            
              § 81.116
              Filing of ex parte communications.
              A prohibited communication in writing received by the Secretary, the reviewing authority, or by the presiding officer, shall be made public by placing it in the correspondence file of the docket in the case and will not be considered as part of the record for decision. If the prohibited communication is received orally a memorandum setting forth its substance shall be made and filed in the correspondence section of the docket in the case. A person referred to in such memorandum may file a comment for inclusion in the docket if he considers the memorandum to be incorrect.
            
          
          
            Subpart L—Posttermination Proceedings
            
              § 81.121
              Posttermination proceedings.
              (a) An applicant or recipient adversely affected by the order terminating, discontinuing, or refusing Federal financial assistance in consequence of proceedings pursuant to this title may request the responsible Department official for an order authorizing payment, or permitting resumption, of Federal financial assistance. Such request shall be in writing and shall affirmatively show that since entry of the order, it has brought its program or activity into compliance with the requirements of the Act, and with the Regulation thereunder, and shall set forth specifically, and in detail, the steps which it has taken to achieve such compliance. If the responsible Department official denies such request the applicant or recipient shall be given an expeditious hearing if it so requests in writing and specifies why it believes the responsible Department official to have been in error. The request for such a hearing shall be addressed to the responsible Department official and shall be made within 30 days after the applicant or recipient is informed that the responsible Department official has refused to authorize payment or permit resumption of Federal financial assistance.
              (b) In the event that a hearing shall be requested pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, the hearing procedures established by this part shall be applicable to the proceedings, except as otherwise provided in this section.
            
          
          
            Subpart M—Definitions
            
              § 81.131
              Definitions.

              The definitions contained in § 80.13 of this subtitle apply to this part, unless the context otherwise requires, and the term reviewing authority as used herein includes the Secretary of Health and Human Services, with respect to action by that official under § 81.106.

              Transition provisions: (a) The amendments herein shall become effective upon publication in the Federal Register.
              

              (b) These rules shall apply to any proceeding or part thereof to which part 80 of this title as amended effective October 19, 1967 (published in the Federal Register for October 19, 1967), and as the same may be hereafter amended, applies. In the case of any proceeding or part thereof governed by the provisions of part 80 as that part existed prior to such amendment, and rules in this part 81 shall apply as if these amendments were not in effect.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 83
          PART 83—REGULATION FOR THE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF SECTIONS 799A AND 845 OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT
          
            
              Subpart A—Purposes; Definitions; Coverage
              Sec.
              83.1
              Purposes.
              83.2
              Definitions.
              83.3
              Remedial and affirmative actions.
              83.4
              Coverage.
              83.5
              Effect of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
              83.6-83.9
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart B—Discrimination in Admissions Prohibited
              83.10
              General obligations.
              83.11
              Discriminatory acts prohibited.
              83.12
              Recruitment.
              83.13
              State law and licensure requirements.
              83.14
              Development and dissemination of nondiscrimination policy.
              83.15
              Designation by entity of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              83.16-83.19
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart C—Procedures [Interim]
              83.20
              Interim procedures.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 215(b), Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 216(b)).
          
          
            Source:
            40 FR 28573, July 7, 1975, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—Purposes; Definitions; Coverage
            
              § 83.1
              Purposes.
              (a) The purposes of this part are (1) to effectuate the provisions of sections 799A and 845 of the Public Health Service Act, which forbid the extension of Federal support under title VII or VIII of that Act to any entity of the types described in those sections unless that entity submits to the Secretary of Health and Human Services an assurance satisfactory to the Secretary that it will not discriminate on the basis of sex in the admission of individuals to its training programs, and (2) to implement the policy of the Secretary that no Federal support will be extended under those titles to any other entity unless that entity submits to the Secretary an assurance satisfactory to the Secretary that it will not discriminate on the basis of sex in the admission of individuals to its training programs.
              (b) The objective of this part is to abolish use of sex as a criterion in the admission of individuals to all training programs operated by an entity which receives support under title VII or VIII of the Act, and thereby to foster maximum use of all available human resources in meeting the Nation's needs for qualified health personnel.
            
            
              § 83.2
              Definitions.
              As used in this part the term—
              (a) Act means the Public Health Service Act.
              (b) Administrative law judge means a person appointed by the Reviewing Authority to preside over a hearing held under this part.
              (c) Assurance commitment clause means a clause in an invitation for a contract offer extended by the Federal Government under title VII or VIII of the Act which, when executed by an entity as part of such offer, becomes, upon acceptance of such offer by the Federal Government, a contractual obligation of such entity to comply with its assurance submitted to the Director under this part.
              (d) Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (e) Director means the Director of the Office for Civil Rights of the Department.
              (f) Entity means (1) a school of medicine, school of dentistry, school of osteopathy, school of pharmacy, school of optometry, school of podiatry, school of veterinary medicine, or school of public health, as defined by section 724 of the Act;
              (2) A school of nursing, as defined by section 843 of the Act;

              (3) A school or college of a training center for an allied health profession, as defined by section 795 of the Act, or of another institution of undergraduate education which school or college can provide a training program;
              
              (4) An affiliated hospital, as defined by section 724 or 795 of the Act; and
              (5) Any other institution, organization, consortium, or agency which is eligible to receive Federal support.
              (g) Federal support means assistance extended after November 18, 1971, under title VII or VIII of the Act to an entity by means of a grant to, a contract with, or a loan guarantee or interest subsidy payment made on behalf of, such entity.
              (h) Federally supported entity means an entity which receives Federal support.
              (i) Reviewing authority means that component of the Department to which the Secretary delegates authority to review the decision of an administrative law judge in a proceeding arising under this part.
              (j) Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
              (k) Training program means a program of training described by section 724(4) of the Act, a program of education described by, or specified by regulations pursuant to, section 795(1) of the Act, a program of education described by section 843(c), 843(d), or 843(e) of the Act, and a program leading to any license or certification requisite to the practice of a health profession for which a degree specified in any such section is granted.
            
            
              § 83.3
              Remedial and affirmative actions.
              (a) Remedial action. If the Director finds that an entity has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex in any of its training programs, such entity shall take such remedial action as the Director deems necessary to overcome the effects of such discrimination.
              (b) Affirmative action. In the absence of a finding of discrimination on the basis of sex in a training program, an entity may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limited participation therein by persons of a particular sex.
            
            
              § 83.4
              Coverage.
              (a) If an entity receives Federal support for any of its training programs, all of its training programs thereby become subject to this part.
              (b) The obligation imposed by this part on a federally supported entity not to discriminate on the basis of sex in the admission of individuals to a training program includes not only the obligation not to discriminate on such basis in the selection of individuals for such program, but also the obligation not to discriminate on such basis against individuals after their selection for such program.
              (c) The obligation imposed by this part on a federally supported entity not to discriminate on the basis of sex against an individual who is an applicant for, or is enrolled in, a training program is applicable to the same extent to the actions of such entity with respect to an applicant for, or a student enrolled in, an undergraduate program of education of such entity if individuals enrolled in such program must complete all or a part of such programs to be eligible for admission to an undergraduate training program of such entity.
              (d) An entity shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in violation of this part for as long as such entity receives or benefits from Federal support. For purposes of the preceding sentence, an entity shall be deemed to continue to receive or benefit from Federal support for as long as it retains ownership, possession, or use of either real or personal property and which was acquired in whole or in part with Federal support. If an entity receives value for property which was acquired in whole or in part with Federal support and such value is applied toward the acquisition of other property, such entity shall be deemed to continue to receive or benefit from such support for as long as such entity retains ownership, use, or possession of such other property.

              (e) An entity shall not transfer property which was acquired, constructed, altered, repaired, expanded, or renovated in whole or in part with Federal support unless the agency, organization, or individual to whom such property is to be transferred has submitted to the Director, and he or she has found satisfactory, an assurance of compliance with this part. The preceding sentence shall not apply with respect to any real or personal property for which payments have been recaptured by the United States under title VII or VIII of the Act, with respect to any other property for which the transferring entity has refunded to the Federal Government the Federal share of the fair market value of such property, or with respect to any personal property which has only scrap value to both the entity and the agency, organization or individual to which the property is to be transferred.
            
            
              § 83.5
              Effect of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
              The obligations imposed by this part are independent of obligations imposed by or pursuant to title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
            
            
              §§ 83.6-83.9
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Discrimination in Admissions Prohibited
            
              § 83.10
              General obligations.
              (a) Eligibility for support. No entity will be provided Federal support unless such entity has furnished the Director assurances satisfactory to him or her that it will not discriminate on the basis of sex, in violation of this part, in the admission of individuals to each of its training programs.
              (b) Eliminating the effects of discrimination. An assurance of compliance with this part will not be satisfactory to the Director if the entity submitting such assurance fails to take whatever remedial action in accordance with § 83.3(a) that is necessary for such entity to eliminate the effects of any discrimination on the basis of sex in the admission of individuals to its training programs that such entity practiced prior to the submission to the Director of such assurance, or practices at the time of or subsequent to such submission. The Director may require such entity, as a condition to determining that its assurance is, or remains, satisfactory, to take specific actions, or to submit to him or her specific information, bearing upon compliance with this part.
            
            
              § 83.11
              Discriminatory acts prohibited.
              (a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other training program or activity operated by an entity.
              (b) Discrimination in selection. In determining whether an individual satisfies any enrollment, eligibility, or other condition for selection for a training program, a federally supported entity shall not:
              (1) On the basis of sex, given preference to one individual over another by ranking applicants on such basis, or otherwise give such preference; or
              (2) Apply numerical limitations upon the number or proportion of persons of either sex who may be admitted; or
              (3) Otherwise treat one individual differently from another on the basis of sex.
              (c) Testing. A federally supported entity shall not administer or operate any test or use any criterion for admission which has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless the use of such test or criterion is shown validly to predict success in the training program or activity in question and alternative tests or criteria which do not have such a disproportionately adverse effect are shown to be unavailable.
              (d) Prohibitions relating to marital or parental status. In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, in providing financial aid or any other benefit, an entity to which this subpart applies:
              (1) Shall not apply any rule concerning the actual or potential parental, family, or marital status of a student or applicant which treats persons differently on the basis of sex;
              (2) Shall not discriminate against or exclude any person on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy or recovery therefrom, or establish or follow any rule or practice which so discriminates or excludes;

              (3) Shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy and any temporary disabilities related to or resulting from pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy or recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability or physical condition; and
              
              (4) Shall not make pre-admission inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for admission, including whether such applicant is “Miss,” or “Mrs.” A recipient may make pre-admission inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for admission, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by this part.
              (e) Preference to students from other institutions in admission. An entity shall not give preference to applicants for admission, on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or other school or entity which admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preference has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this part.
              (f) Discrimination in the provision of benefits and services—(1) General. Except as otherwise provided in this part in providing financial aid or any other benefit, or in providing any service, to an applicant for a training program or to a student enrolled in such program, no federally supported entity shall on the basis of sex:
              (i) Treat one individual differently from another in determining whether such individual satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such benefit of service;
              (ii) Provide a different benefit or service or provide a benefit or a service in a different manner;
              (iii) Deny an individual any such benefit or service;
              (iv) Subject an individual to separate treatment or rules of behavior;
              (v) Discriminate against any individual by assisting an agency, organization, or individual in providing, in a manner which discriminates on the basis of sex, a benefit or service to applicants for or students enrolled in a training program; or
              (vi) Otherwise limit any individual in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity.
              (2) Financial aid established by certain legal instruments. (i) A recipient may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance established pursuant to domestic or foreign wills, trusts, bequests, or similar legal instruments or by acts of a foreign government which requires that awards be made to members of a particular sex specified therein: Provided, That the overall effect of the award of such sex-restricted scholarships, fellowships, and other forms of financial assistance does not discriminate on the basis of sex.
              (ii) To ensure nondiscriminatory awards of assistance as required in paragraph (f)(2)(i) of this section, recipients shall develop and use procedures under which:
              (A) Students are selected for award of financial assistance on the basis of non-discriminatory criteria and not on the basis of availability of funds restricted to members of a particular sex;
              (B) An appropriate sex-restricted scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance is allocated to each student selected under paragraph (f)(2)(ii) (A) of this section; and
              (C) No student is denied the award for which he or she was selected under paragraph (f)(2)(ii)(A) of this section because of the absence of a scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance designated for a member of that student's sex.
              (g) Housing. (1) An entity shall not, on the basis of sex, apply different rules or regulations, impose different fees or requirements, or offer different services or benefits related to housing, except as provided in this subsection (including housing provided only to married students).
              (2) An entity may provide separate housing on the basis of sex.
              (3) Housing provided by an entity to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, shall be as a whole: (i) Proportionate in quantity to the number of students of that sex applying for such housing; and (ii) comparable in quality and cost to the student.
              (4) An entity shall not on the basis of sex, administer different policies or practices concerning occupancy by its students of housing other than that provided by such recipient.

              (5) An entity which, through solicitation, listing, approval of housing, or otherwise, assists any agency, organization, or person in making housing available to any of its students, shall take reasonable action to ensure that such housing is provided to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, is as a whole: (i) Proportionate in quantity and (ii) comparable in quality and cost to the student. An entity may render such assistance to any agency, organization, or person which provides all or part of such housing to students only of one sex.
              (h) Inter-institutional programs. If a federally supported entity aids participation, by any applicant for or student enrolled in any of its training programs, in any program or activity of another organization or agency, such entity shall:
              (1) Develop and implement a procedure to assure itself that such organization or agency takes no action with respect to such applicants or students which this part would prohibit such entity from taking; and
              (2) Not aid such participation if such organization or agency takes such action.
              (i) Discrimination in employment prohibited. A federally supported entity shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in employment practices relating to its professional and other staff who work directly with applicants for or students enrolled in any of its training programs. The provisions of this subpart apply to:
              (1) Recruitment, advertising, and the process of application for employment;
              (2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, consideration for and award of tenure, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, right of return from layoff, and rehiring;
              (3) Rates of pay or any other form of compensation, and changes in compensation;
              (4) Job assignments, classifications and structure, including position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
              (5) The terms of any collective bargaining agreement;
              (6) Granting and return from leaves of absence, pregnancy leave, leave for persons of either sex to care for children or dependents, or any other leave;
              (7) Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, whether or not administered by the recipient;
              (8) Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related activities, selection for tuition assistance, selection for sabbaticals and leaves of absence to pursue training;
              (9) Employer-sponsored activities, including social or recreational programs; and
              (10) Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
            
            
              § 83.12
              Recruitment.
              (a) Comparable recruitment. A federally supported entity shall, with respect to each of its training programs, make comparable efforts to recruit members of each sex in the geographic area from which such entity attracts its students. A federally supported entity shall not recruit for any of its training programs exclusively or primarily at organizations or agencies which admit as members or students, or which provide a service for, only members of one sex unless such entity can demonstrate that such action is part of a recruitment program which does not have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in selection for a training program.
              (b) Recruitment practices. A federally supported entity shall:
              (1) Prominently include a statement of its policy of nondiscrimination on the basis of sex in each announcement, bulletin, catalogue, or application form which describes the training program of such entity or is used in connection with the recruitment of employees who will work directly with applicants for or students enrolled in a training program;
              (2) Distribute without discrimination on the basis of sex any announcements, bulletins, catalogues, or other materials used in connection with the recruitment of students for a training program or employees who will work directly with applicants for such program or such students; and

              (3) Apprise each of its recruitment representatives of its policy of nondiscrimination on the basis of sex, and require such representatives to adhere to such policy.
            
            
              § 83.13
              State law and licensure requirements.
              The obligation of an entity to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any State or local law which would render an applicant for or student enrolled in a training program ineligible on the basis of sex for any license or certificate requisite to the practice of the health profession for which such applicant seeks, or student pursues, training.
            
            
              § 83.14
              Development and dissemination of nondiscrimination policy.
              (a) A federally supported entity shall develop a written policy statement of nondiscrimination on the basis of sex, in accordance with this part, and shall implement specific and continuing steps to publicize such statement to applicants for admission or employment, students, employees, and sources of referral of applicants for admission or employment.
              (b) Each federally supported entity shall prominently include a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section in each announcement, bulletin, catalogue, and application form which it makes available to any person of a type described in paragraph (a) of this section, or which is otherwise used in connection with the recruitment of students or employees who work directly with students and applicants for admission.
              (c) A federally supported entity shall not use or distribute a publication of the type described in this section which suggests, by text or illustration, that such recipient treats applicants, students, or employees differently on the basis of sex except as such treatment is permitted by this part.
            
            
              § 83.15
              Designation by entity of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              (a) Designation of responsible employee. A federally supported entity shall designate at least one employee to coordinate its efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under this part, including any investigation of any complaint communicated to such entity alleging its noncompliance with this part or alleging any action which would be prohibited by this part. The entity shall notify all of its students and employees who work directly with students and applicants for admission of the name, office address and telephone number of the employee or employees appointed pursuant to this paragraph.
              (b) Complaint procedure of entity. A federally supported entity shall adopt and publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and employee complaints alleging any action which would be prohibited by this part. Such procedures shall be in writing and available to all present and prospective students and employees.
            
            
              §§ 83.16-83.19
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Procedures [Interim]
            
              § 83.20
              Interim procedures.
              For the purposes of implementing this part during the period between its effective date and the final issuance by the Department of a consolidated procedural regulation applicable to sections 704 and 845 of the Act and other civil rights authorities administered by the Department, the procedural provisions applicable to title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. These procedures may be found at 45 CFR 80.6 through 80.11 and 45 CFR part 81.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 84
          PART 84—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF HANDICAP IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
          
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              Sec.
              84.1
              Purpose.
              84.2
              Application.
              84.3
              Definitions.
              84.4
              Discrimination prohibited.
              84.5
              Assurances required.
              84.6
              Remedial action, voluntary action, and self-evaluation.
              84.7
              Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              84.8
              Notice.
              
              84.9
              Administrative requirements for small recipients.
              84.10
              Effect of State or local law or other requirements and effect of employment opportunities.
            
            
              Subpart B—Employment Practices
              84.11
              Discrimination prohibited.
              84.12
              Reasonable accommodation.
              84.13
              Employment criteria.
              84.14
              Preemployment inquiries.
              84.15-84.20
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart C—Accessibility
              84.21
              Discrimination prohibited.
              84.22
              Existing facilities.
              84.23
              New construction.
              84.24-84.30
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart D—Preschool, Elementary, and Secondary Education
              84.31
              Application of this subpart.
              84.32
              Location and notification.
              84.33
              Free appropriate public education.
              84.34
              Educational setting.
              84.35
              Evaluation and placement.
              84.36
              Procedural safeguards.
              84.37
              Nonacademic services.
              84.38
              Preschool and adult education.
              84.39
              Private education.
              84.40
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart E—Postsecondary Education
              84.41
              Application of this subpart.
              84.42
              Admissions and recruitment.
              84.43
              Treatment of students; general.
              84.44
              Academic adjustments.
              84.45
              Housing.
              84.46
              Financial and employment assistance to students.
              84.47
              Nonacademic services.
              84.48-84.50
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart F—Health, Welfare, and Social Services
              84.51
              Application of this subpart.
              84.52
              Health, welfare, and other social services.
              84.53
              Drug and alcohol addicts.
              84.54
              Education of institutionalized persons.
              84.55
              Procedures relating to health care for handicapped infants.
              84.56-84.60
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart G—Procedures
              84.61
              Procedures.
              Appendix A to Part 84—Analysis of Final Regulation
              Appendix B to Part 84—Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs [Note]
              Appendix C to Part 84—Guidelines Relating to Health Care for Handicapped Infants
            
          
          
            Authority:
            20 U.S.C. 1405; 29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 290dd-2; 21 U.S.C. 1174.
          
          
            Source:
            42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            
              § 84.1
              Purpose.
              The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which is designed to eliminate discrimination on the basis of handicap in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
            
            
              § 84.2
              Application.
              This part applies to each recipient of Federal financial assistance from the Department of Health and Human Services and to the program or activity that receives such assistance.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.3
              Definitions.
              As used in this part, the term:
              (a) The Act means the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Pub. L. 93-112, as amended by the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93-516, 29 U.S.C. 794.
              (b) Section 504 means section 504 of the Act.
              (c) Education of the Handicapped Act means that statute as amended by the Education for all Handicapped Children Act of 1975, Pub. L. 94-142, 20 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.
              
              (d) Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (e) Director means the Director of the Office for Civil Rights of the Department.
              (f) Recipient means any state or its political subdivision, any instrumentality of a state or its political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any person to which Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient, including any successor, assignee, or transferee of a recipient, but excluding the ultimate beneficiary of the assistance.
              
              (g) Applicant for assistance means one who submits an application, request, or plan required to be approved by a Department official or by a recipient as a condition to becoming a recipient.
              (h) Federal financial assistance means any grant, loan, contract (other than a procurement contract or a contract of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by which the Department provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
              (1) Funds;
              (2) Services of Federal personnel; or
              (3) Real and personal property or any interest in or use of such property, including:
              (i) Transfers or leases of such property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
              (ii) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of such property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal Government.
              (i) Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or other real or personal property or interest in such property.
              (j) Handicapped person—(1) Handicapped persons means any person who (i) has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, (ii) has a record of such an impairment, or (iii) is regarded as having such an impairment.
              (2) As used in paragraph (j)(1) of this section, the phrase:
              (i) Physical or mental impairment means (A) any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive, digestive, genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or (B) any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
              (ii) Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working.
              (iii) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
              (iv) Is regarded as having an impairment means (A) has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities but that is treated by a recipient as constituting such a limitation; (B) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or (C) has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (j)(2)(i) of this section but is treated by a recipient as having such an impairment.
              (k) Program or activity means all of the operations of—
              (1)(i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
              (ii) The entity of such State or local government that distributes Federal financial assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
              (2)(i) A college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or
              (ii) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 7801), system of vocational education, or other school system;
              (3)(i) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
              (A) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
              (B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or

              (ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
              (4) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (k)(1), (2), or (3) of this section; any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
              (l) Qualified handicapped person means:
              (1) With respect to employment, a handicapped person who, with reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the job in question;
              (2) With respect to public preschool elementary, secondary, or adult educational services, a handicapped person (i) of an age during which nonhandicapped persons are provided such services, (ii) of any age during which it is mandatory under state law to provide such services to handicapped persons, or (iii) to whom a state is required to provide a free appropriate public education under section 612 of the Education of the Handicapped Act; and
              (3) With respect to postsecondary and vocational education services, a handicapped person who meets the academic and technical standards requisite to admission or participation in the recipient's education program or activity;
              (4) With respect to other services, a handicapped person who meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of such services.
              (m) Handicap means any condition or characteristic that renders a person a handicapped person as defined in paragraph (j) of this section.
              (29 U.S.C. 794(b))
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.4
              Discrimination prohibited.
              (a) General. No qualified handicapped person shall, on the basis of handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity which receives Federal financial assistance.
              (b) Discriminatory actions prohibited. (1) A recipient, in providing any aid, benefit, or service, may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, on the basis of handicap:
              (i) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service;
              (ii) Afford a qualified handicapped person an opportunity to participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service that is not equal to that afforded others;
              (iii) Provide a qualified handicapped person with an aid, benefit, or service that is not as effective as that provided to others;
              (iv) Provide different or separate aid, benefits, or services to handicapped persons or to any class of handicapped persons unless such action is necessary to provide qualified handicapped persons with aid, benefits, or services that are as effective as those provided to others;
              (v) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against a qualified handicapped person by providing significant assistance to an agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of handicap in providing any aid, benefit, or service to beneficiaries of the recipients program or activity;
              (vi) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to participate as a member of planning or advisory boards; or
              (vii) Otherwise limit a qualified handicapped person in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by others receiving an aid, benefit, or service.
              (2) For purposes of this part, aids, benefits, and services, to be equally effective, are not required to produce the identical result or level of achievement for handicapped and nonhandicapped persons, but must afford handicapped persons equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement, in the most integrated setting appropriate to the person's needs.

              (3) Despite the existence of separate or different aids, benefits, or services provided in accordance with this part, a recipient may not deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to participate in such aids, benefits, or services that are not separate or different.
              (4) A recipient may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration (i) that have the effect of subjecting qualified handicapped persons to discrimination on the basis of handicap, (ii) that have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the recipient's program or activity with respect to handicapped persons, or (iii) that perpetuate the discrimination of another recipient if both recipients are subject to common administrative control or are agencies of the same State.
              (5) In determining the site or location of a facility, an applicant for assistance or a recipient may not make selections (i) that have the effect of excluding handicapped persons from, denying them the benefits of, or otherwise subjecting them to discrimination under any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance or (ii) that have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with respect to handicapped persons.
              (6) As used in this section, the aid, benefit, or service provided under a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance includes any aid, benefit, or service provided in or through a facility that has been constructed, expanded, altered, leased or rented, or otherwise acquired, in whole or in part, with Federal financial assistance.
              (c) Aids, benefits, or services limited by Federal law. The exclusion of nonhandicapped persons from aids, benefits, or services limited by Federal statute or executive order to handicapped persons or the exclusion of a specific class of handicapped persons from aids, benefits, or services limited by Federal statute or executive order to a different class of handicapped persons is not prohibited by this part.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.5
              Assurances required.
              (a) Assurances. An applicant for Federal financial assistance to which this part applies shall submit an assurance, on a form specified by the Director, that the program or activity will be operated in compliance with this part. An applicant may incorporate these assurances by reference in subsequent applications to the Department.
              (b) Duration of obligation. (1) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended in the form of real property or to provide real property or structures on the property, the assurance will obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the real property or structures are used for the purpose for which Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits.
              (2) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide personal property, the assurance will obligate the recipient for the period during which it retains ownership or possession of the property.
              (3) In all other cases the assurance will obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended.
              (c) Covenants. (1) Where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of real property or interest in the property from the Department, the instrument effecting or recording this transfer shall contain a covenant running with the land to assure nondiscrimination for the period during which the real property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits.
              (2) Where no transfer of property is involved but property is purchased or improved with Federal financial assistance, the recipient shall agree to include the covenant described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section in the instrument effecting or recording any subsequent transfer of the property.

              (3) Where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of real property or interest in the property from the Department, the covenant shall also include a condition coupled with a right to be reserved by the Department to revert title to the property in the event of a breach of the covenant. If a transferee of real property proposes to mortgage or otherwise encumber the real property as security for financing construction of new, or improvement of existing, facilities on the property for the purposes for which the property was transferred, the Director may, upon request of the transferee and if necessary to accomplish such financing and upon such conditions as he or she deems appropriate, agree to forbear the exercise of such right to revert title for so long as the lien of such mortgage or other encumbrance remains effective.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.6
              Remedial action, voluntary action, and self-evaluation.
              (a) Remedial action. (1) If the Director finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of handicap in violation of section 504 or this part, the recipient shall take such remedial action as the Director deems necessary to overcome the effects of the discrimination.
              (2) Where a recipient is found to have discriminated against persons on the basis of handicap in violation of section 504 or this part and where another recipient exercises control over the recipient that has discriminated, the Director, where appropriate, may require either or both recipients to take remedial action.
              (3) The Director may, where necessary to overcome the effects of discrimination in violation of section 504 or this part, require a recipient to take remedial action (i) with respect to handicapped persons who are no longer participants in the recipient's program or activity but who were participants in the program or activity when such discrimination occurred or (ii) with respect to handicapped persons who would have been participants in the program or activity had the discrimination not occurred.
              (b) Voluntary action. A recipient may take steps, in addition to any action that is required by this part, to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in the recipient's program or activity by qualified handicapped persons.
              (c) Self-evaluation. (1) A recipient shall, within one year of the effective date of this part:
              (i) Evaluate, with the assistance of interested persons, including handicapped persons or organizations representing handicapped persons, its current policies and practices and the effects thereof that do not or may not meet the requirements of this part;
              (ii) Modify, after consultation with interested persons, including handicapped persons or organizations representing handicapped persons, any policies and practices that do not meet the requirements of this part; and
              (iii) Take, after consultation with interested persons, including handicapped persons or organizations representing handicapped persons, appropriate remedial steps to eliminate the effects of any discrimination that resulted from adherence to these policies and practices.
              (2) A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall, for at least three years following completion of the evaluation required under paragraph (c)(1) of this section, maintain on file, make available for public inspection, and provide to the Director upon request: (i) A list of the interested persons consulted (ii) a description of areas examined and any problems identified, and (iii) a description of any modifications made and of any remedial steps taken.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.7
              Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              (a) Designation of responsible employee. A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall designate at least one person to coordinate its efforts to comply with this part.
              (b) Adoption of grievance procedures. A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall adopt grievance procedures that incorporate appropriate due process standards and that provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by this part. Such procedures need not be established with respect to complaints from applicants for employment or from applicants for admission to postsecondary educational institutions.
            
            
              § 84.8
              Notice.
              (a) A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall take appropriate initial and continuing steps to notify participants, beneficiaries, applications, and employees, including those with impaired vision or hearing, and unions or professional organizations holding collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient that it does not discriminate on the basis of handicap in violation of section 504 and this part. The notification shall state, where appropriate, that the recipient does not discriminate in admission or access to, or treatment or employment in, its programs or activities. The notification shall also include an identification of the responsible employee designated pursuant to § 84.7(a). A recipient shall make the initial notification required by this paragraph within 90 days of the effective date of this part. Methods of initial and continuing notification may include the posting of notices, publication in newspapers and magazines, placement of notices in recipients' publication, and distribution of memoranda or other written communications.
              (b) If a recipient publishes or uses recruitment materials or publications containing general information that it makes available to participants, beneficiaries, applicants, or employees, it shall include in those materials or publications a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section. A recipient may meet the requirement of this paragraph either by including appropriate inserts in existing materials and publications or by revising and reprinting the materials and publications.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.9
              Administrative requirements for small recipients.
              The Director may require any recipient with fewer than fifteen employees, or any class of such recipients, to comply with §§ 84.7 and 84.8, in whole or in part, when the Director finds a violation of this part or finds that such compliance will not significantly impair the ability of the recipient or class of recipients to provide benefits or services.
            
            
              § 84.10
              Effect of State or local law or other requirements and effect of employment opportunities.
              (a) The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by the existence of any state or local law or other requirement that, on the basis of handicap, imposes prohibitions or limits upon the eligibility of qualified handicapped persons to receive services or to practice any occupation or profession.
              (b) The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated because employment opportunities in any occupation or profession are or may be more limited for handicapped persons than for nonhandicapped persons.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Employment Practices
            
              § 84.11
              Discrimination prohibited.
              (a) General. (1) No qualified handicapped person shall, on the basis of handicap, be subjected to discrimination in employment under any program or activity to which this part applies.
              (2) A recipient that receives assistance under the Education of the Handicapped Act shall take positive steps to employ and advance in employment qualified handicapped persons in programs or activities assisted under that Act.
              (3) A recipient shall make all decisions concerning employment under any program or activity to which this part applies in a manner which ensures that discrimination on the basis of handicap does not occur and may not limit, segregate, or classify applicants or employees in any way that adversely affects their opportunities or status because of handicap.

              (4) A recipient may not participate in a contractual or other relationship that has the effect of subjecting qualified handicapped applicants or employees to discrimination prohibited by this subpart. The relationships referred to in this paragraph include relationships with employment and referral agencies, with labor unions, with organizations providing or administering fringe benefits to employees of the recipient, and with organizations providing training and apprenticeships.
              (b) Specific activities. The provisions of this subpart apply to:
              (1) Recruitment, advertising, and the processing of applications for employment;
              (2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, award of tenure, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, right of return from layoff and rehiring;
              (3) Rates of pay or any other form of compensation and changes in compensation;
              (4) Job assignments, job classifications, organizational structures, position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
              (5) Leaves of absense, sick leave, or any other leave;
              (6) Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, whether or not administered by the recipient;
              (7) Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related activities, and selection for leaves of absence to pursue training;
              (8) Employer sponsored activities, including those that are social or recreational; and
              (9) Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
              (c) A recipient's obligation to comply with this subpart is not affected by any inconsistent term of any collective bargaining agreement to which it is a party.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.12
              Reasonable accommodation.
              (a) A recipient shall make reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified handicapped applicant or employee unless the recipient can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its program or activity.
              (b) Reasonable accommodation may include: (1) Making facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons, and (2) job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, the provision of readers or interpreters, and other similar actions.
              (c) In determining pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section whether an accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of a recipient's program or activity, factors to be considered include:
              (1) The overall size of the recipient's program or activity with respect to number of employees, number and type of facilities, and size of budget;
              (2) The type of the recipient's operation, including the composition and structure of the recipient's workforce; and
              (3) The nature and cost of the accommodation needed.
              (d) A recipient may not deny any employment opportunity to a qualified handicapped employee or applicant if the basis for the denial is the need to make reasonable accommodation to the physical or mental limitations of the employee or applicant.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.13
              Employment criteria.
              (a) A recipient may not make use of any employment test or other selection criterion that screens out or tends to screen out handicapped persons or any class of handicapped persons unless: (1) The test score or other selection criterion, as used by the recipient, is shown to be job-related for the position in question, and (2) alternative job-related tests or criteria that do not screen out or tend to screen out as many handicapped persons are not shown by the Director to be available.

              (b) A recipient shall select and administer tests concerning employment so as best to ensure that, when administered to an applicant or employee who has a handicap that impairs sensory, manual, or speaking skills, the test results accurately reflect the applicant's or employee's job skills, aptitude, or whatever other factor the test purports to measure, rather than reflecting the applicant's or employee's impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills (except where those skills are the factors that the test purports to measure).
            
            
              § 84.14
              Preemployment inquiries.
              (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a recipient may not conduct a preemployment medical examination or may not make preemployment inquiry of an applicant as to whether the applicant is a handicapped person or as to the nature or severity of a handicap. A recipient may, however, make preemployment inquiry into an applicant's ability to perform job-related functions.

              (b) When a recipient is taking remedial action to correct the effects of past discrimination pursuant to § 84.6 (a), when a recipient is taking voluntary action to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in its federally assisted program or activity pursuant to § 84.6(b), or when a recipient is taking affirmative action pursuant to section 503 of the Act, the recipient may invite applicants for employment to indicate whether and to what extent they are handicapped, Provided, That:
              (1) The recipient states clearly on any written questionnaire used for this purpose or makes clear orally if no written questionnaire is used that the information requested is intended for use solely in connection with its remedial action obligations or its voluntary or affirmative action efforts; and
              (2) The recipient states clearly that the information is being requested on a voluntary basis, that it will be kept confidential as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, that refusal to provide it will not subject the applicant or employee to any adverse treatment, and that it will be used only in accordance with this part.

              (c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a recipient from conditioning an offer of employment on the results of a medical examination conducted prior to the employee's entrance on duty, Provided, That: (1) All entering employees are subjected to such an examination regardless of handicap, and (2) the results of such an examination are used only in accordance with the requirements of this part.
              (d) Information obtained in accordance with this section as to the medical condition or history of the applicant shall be collected and maintained on separate forms that shall be accorded confidentiality as medical records, except that:
              (1) Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding restrictions on the work or duties of handicapped persons and regarding necessary accommodations;
              (2) First aid and safety personnel may be informed, where appropriate, if the condition might require emergency treatment; and
              (3) Government officials investigating compliance with the Act shall be provided relevant information upon request.
            
            
              §§ 84.15-84.20
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Accessibility
            
              § 84.21
              Discrimination prohibited.
              No qualified handicapped person shall, because a recipient's facilities are inaccessible to or unusable by handicapped persons, be denied the benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity to which this part applies.
            
            
              § 84.22
              Existing facilities.
              (a) Accessibility. A recipient shall operate its program or activity so that when each part is viewed in its entirety, it is readily accessible to handicapped persons. This paragraph does not require a recipient to make each of its existing facilities or every part of a facility accessible to and usable by handicapped persons.
              (b) Methods. A recipient may comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section through such means as redesign of equipment, reassignment of classes or other services to accessible buildings, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, delivery of health, welfare, or other social services at alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and construction of new facilities in conformance with the requirements of § 84.23, or any other methods that result in making its program or activity accessible to handicapped persons. A recipient is not required to make structural changes in existing facilities where other methods are effective in achieving compliance with paragraph (a) of this section. In choosing among available methods for meeting the requirement of paragraph (a) of this section, a recipient shall give priority to those methods that serve handicapped persons in the most integrated setting appropriate.
              (c) Small health, welfare, or other social service providers. If a recipient with fewer than fifteen employees that provides health, welfare, or other social services finds, after consultation with a handicapped person seeking its services, that there is no method of complying with paragraph (a) of this section other than making a significant alteration in its existing facilities, the recipient may, as an alternative, refer the handicapped person to other providers of those services that are accessible.
              (d) Time period. A recipient shall comply with the requirement of paragraph (a) of this section within sixty days of the effective date of this part except that where structural changes in facilities are necessary, such changes shall be made within three years of the effective date of this part, but in any event as expeditiously as possible.
              (e) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to facilities are necessary to meet the requirement of paragraph (a) of this section, a recipient shall develop, within six months of the effective date of this part, a transition plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The plan shall be developed with the assistance of interested persons, including handicapped persons or organizations representing handicapped persons. A copy of the transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum:
              (1) Identify physical obstacles in the recipient's facilities that limit the accessibility of its program or activity to handicapped persons;
              (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the facilities accessible;
              (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve full accessibility under paragraph (a) and, if the time period of the transition plan is longer than one year, identify the steps that will be taken during each year of the transition period; and
              (4) Indicate the person responsible for implementation of the plan.
              (f) Notice. The recipient shall adopt and implement procedures to ensure that interested persons, including persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain information as to the existence and location of services, activities, and facilities that are accessible to and usable by handicapped persons.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.23
              New construction.
              (a) Design and construction. Each facility or part of a facility constructed by, on behalf of, or for the use of a recipient shall be designed and constructed in such manner that the facility or part of the facility is readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons, if the construction was commenced after the effective date of this part.
              (b) Alteration. Each facility or part of a facility which is altered by, on behalf of, or for the use of a recipient after the effective date of this part in a manner that affects or could affect the usability of the facility or part of the facility shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be altered in such manner that the altered portion of the facility is readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons.
              (c) Conformance with Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. (1) Effective as of January 18, 1991, design, construction, or alteration of buildings in conformance with sections 3-8 of the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFSA) (appendix A to 41 CFR subpart 101-19.6) shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section with respect to those buildings. Departures from particular technical and scoping requirements of UFAS by the use of other methods are permitted where substantial equivalent or greater access to and usability of the building is provided.

              (2) For purposes of this section, section 4.1.6(1)(g) of UFAS shall be interpreted to exempt from the requirements of UFAS only mechanical rooms and other spaces that, because of their intended use, will not require accessibility to the public or beneficiaries or result in the employment or residence therein of persons with physical handicaps.
              (3) This section does not require recipients to make building alterations that have little likelihood of being accomplished without removing or altering a load-bearing structural member.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 55 FR 52138, 52142, Dec. 19, 1990]
            
            
              §§ 84.24-84.30
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Preschool, Elementary, and Secondary Education
            
              § 84.31
              Application of this subpart.
              Subpart D applies to preschool, elementary, secondary, and adult education programs or activities that receive Federal financial assistance and to recipients that operate, or that receive Federal financial assistance for the operation of, such programs or activities.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.32
              Location and notification.
              A recipient that operates a public elementary or secondary education program or activity shall annually:
              (a) Undertake to identify and locate every qualified handicapped person residing in the recipient's jurisdiction who is not receiving a public education; and
              (b) Take appropriate steps to notify handicapped persons and their parents or guardians of the recipient's duty under this subpart.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.33
              Free appropriate public education.
              (a) General. A recipient that operates a public elementary or secondary education program or activity shall provide a free appropriate public education to each qualified handicapped person who is in the recipient's jurisdiction, regardless of the nature or severity of the person's handicap.
              (b) Appropriate education. (1) For the purpose of this subpart, the provision of an appropriate education is the provision of regular or special education and related aids and services that (i) are designed to meet individual educational needs of handicapped persons as adequately as the needs of nonhandicapped persons are met and (ii) are based upon adherence to procedures that satisfy the requirements of §§ 84.34, 84.35, and 84.36.
              (2) Implementation of an Individualized Education Program developed in accordance with the Education of the Handicapped Act is one means of meeting the standard established in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.
              (3) A recipient may place a handicapped person or refer such a person for aids, benefits, or services other than those that it operates or provides as its means of carrying out the requirements of this subpart. If so, the recipient remains responsible for ensuring that the requirements of this subpart are met with respect to any handicapped person so placed or referred.
              (c) Free education—(1) General. For the purpose of this section, the provision of a free education is the provision of educational and related services without cost to the handicapped person or to his or her parents or guardian, except for those fees that are imposed on non-handicapped persons or their parents or guardian. It may consist either of the provision of free services or, if a recipient places a handicapped person or refers such person for aids, benefits, or services not operated or provided by the recipient as its means of carrying out the requirements of this subpart, of payment for the costs of the aids, benefits, or services. Funds available from any public or private agency may be used to meet the requirements of this subpart. Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve an insurer or similar third party from an otherwise valid obligation to provide or pay for services provided to a handicapped person.
              (2) Transportation. If a recipient places a handicapped person or refers such person for aids, benefits, or services not operated or provided by the recipient as its means of carrying out the requirements of this subpart, the recipient shall ensure that adequate transportation to and from the aids, benefits, or services is provided at no greater cost than would be incurred by the person or his or her parents or guardian if the person were placed in the aids, benefits, or services operated by the recipient.
              (3) Residential placement. If a public or private residential placement is necessary to provide a free appropriate public education to a handicapped person because of his or her handicap, the placement, including non-medical care and room and board, shall be provided at no cost to the person or his or her parents or guardian.
              (4) Placement of handicapped persons by parents. If a recipient has made available, in conformance with the requirements of this section and § 84.34, a free appropriate public education to a handicapped person and the person's parents or guardian choose to place the person in a private school, the recipient is not required to pay for the person's education in the private school. Disagreements between a parent or guardian and a recipient regarding whether the recipient has made a free appropriate public education available or otherwise regarding the question of financial responsibility are subject to the due process procedures of § 84.36.
              (d) Compliance. A recipient may not exclude any qualified handicapped person from a public elementary or secondary education after the effective date of this part. A recipient that is not, on the effective date of this regulation, in full compliance with the other requirements of the preceding paragraphs of this section shall meet such requirements at the earliest practicable time and in no event later than September 1, 1978.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.34
              Educational setting.
              (a) Academic setting. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall educate, or shall provide for the education of, each qualified handicapped person in its jurisdiction with persons who are not handicapped to the maximum extent appropriate to the needs of the handicapped person. A recipient shall place a handicapped person in the regular educational environment operated by the recipient unless it is demonstrated by the recipient that the education of the person in the regular environment with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily. Whenever a recipient places a person in a setting other than the regular educational environment pursuant to this paragraph, it shall take into account the proximity of the alternate setting to the person's home.
              (b) Nonacademic settings. In providing or arranging for the provision of nonacademic and extracurricular services and activities, including meals, recess periods, and the services and activities set forth in § 84.37(a)(2), a recipient shall ensure that handicapped persons participate with nonhandicapped persons in such activities and services to the maximum extent appropriate to the needs of the handicapped person in question.
              (c) Comparable facilities. If a recipient, in compliance with paragraph (a) of this section, operates a facility that is identifiable as being for handicapped persons, the recipient shall ensure that the facility and the services and activities provided therein are comparable to the other facilities, services, and activities of the recipient.
            
            
              § 84.35
              Evaluation and placement.
              (a) Preplacement evaluation. A recipient that operates a public elementary or secondary education program or activity shall conduct an evaluation in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section of any person who, because of handicap, needs or is believed to need special education or related services before taking any action with respect to the initial placement of the person in regular or special education and any subsequent significant change in placement.
              (b) Evaluation procedures. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall establish standards and procedures for the evaluation and placement of persons who, because of handicap, need or are believed to need special education or related services which ensure that:

              (1) Tests and other evaluation materials have been validated for the specific purpose for which they are used and are administered by trained personnel in conformance with the instructions provided by their producer;
              (2) Tests and other evaluation materials include those tailored to assess specific areas of educational need and not merely those which are designed to provide a single general intelligence quotient; and
              (3) Tests are selected and administered so as best to ensure that, when a test is administered to a student with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills, the test results accurately reflect the student's aptitude or achievement level or whatever other factor the test purports to measure, rather than reflecting the student's impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills (except where those skills are the factors that the test purports to measure).
              (c) Placement procedures. In interpreting evaluation data and in making placement decisions, a recipient shall (1) draw upon information from a variety of sources, including aptitude and achievement tests, teacher recommendations, physical condition, social or cultural background, and adaptive behavior, (2) establish procedures to ensure that information obtained from all such sources is documented and carefully considered, (3) ensure that the placement decision is made by a group of persons, including persons knowledgeable about the child, the meaning of the evaluation data, and the placement options, and (4) ensure that the placement decision is made in conformity with § 84.34.
              (d) Reevaluation. A recipient to which this section applies shall establish procedures, in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, for periodic reevaluation of students who have been provided special education and related services. A reevaluation procedure consistent with the Education for the Handicapped Act is one means of meeting this requirement.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.36
              Procedural safeguards.
              A recipient that operates a public elementary or secondary education program or activity shall establish and implement, with respect to actions regarding the identification, evaluation, or educational placement of persons who, because of handicap, need or are believed to need special instruction or related services, a system of procedural safeguards that includes notice, an opportunity for the parents or guardian of the person to examine relevant records, an impartial hearing with opportunity for participation by the person's parents or guardian and representation by counsel, and a review procedure. Compliance with the procedural safeguards of section 615 of the Education of the Handicapped Act is one means of meeting this requirement.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24319, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.37
              Nonacademic services.
              (a) General. (1) A recipient to which this subpart applies shall provide non-academic and extracurricular services and activities in such manner as is necessary to afford handicapped students an equal opportunity for participation in such services and activities.
              (2) Nonacademic and extracurricular services and activities may include counseling services, physical recreational athletics, transportation, health services, recreational activities, special interest groups or clubs sponsored by the recipients, referrals to agencies which provide assistance to handicapped persons, and employment of students, including both employment by the recipient and assistance in making available outside employment.
              (b) Counseling services. A recipient to which this subpart applies that provides personal, academic, or vocational counseling, guidance, or placement services to its students shall provide these services without discrimination on the basis of handicap. The recipient shall ensure that qualified handicapped students are not counseled toward more restrictive career objectives than are nonhandicapped students with similar interests and abilities.
              (c) Physical education and athletics. (1) In providing physical education courses and athletics and similar aids, benefits, or services to any of its students, a recipient to which this subpart applies may not discriminate on the basis of handicap. A recipient that offers physical education courses or that operates or sponsors interscholastic, club, or intramural athletics shall provide to qualified handicapped students an equal opportunity for participation.
              (2) A recipient may offer to handicapped students physical education and athletic activities that are separate or different from those offered to nonhandicapped students only if separation or differentiation is consistent with the requirements of § 84.34 and only if no qualified handicapped student is denied the opportunity to compete for teams or to participate in courses that are not separate or different.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.38
              Preschool and adult education.
              A recipient to which this subpart applies that provides preschool education or day care or adult education may not, on the basis of handicap, exclude qualified handicapped persons and shall take into account the needs of such persons in determining the aids, benefits, or services to be provided.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.39
              Private education.
              (a) A recipient that provides private elementary or secondary education may not, on the basis of handicap, exclude a qualified handicapped person if the person can, with minor adjustments, be provided an appropriate education, as defined in § 84.33(b)(1), within that recipient's program or activity.
              (b) A recipient to which this section applies may not charge more for the provision of an appropriate education to handicapped persons than to nonhandicapped persons except to the extent that any additional charge is justified by a substantial increase in cost to the recipient.
              (c) A recipient to which this section applies that provides special education shall do so in accordance with the provisions of §§ 84.35 and 84.36. Each recipient to which this section applies is subject to the provisions of §§ 84.34, 84.37, and 84.38.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.40
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Postsecondary Education
            
              § 84.41
              Application of this subpart.
              Subpart E applies to postsecondary education programs or activities, including postsecondary vocational education programs or activities, that receive Federal financial assistance and to recipients that operate, or that receive Federal financial assistance for the operation of, such programs or activities.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.42
              Admissions and recruitment.
              (a) General. Qualified handicapped persons may not, on the basis of handicap, be denied admission or be subjected to discrimination in admission or recruitment by a recipient to which this subpart applies.
              (b) Admissions. In administering its admission policies, a recipient to which this subpart applies:
              (1) May not apply limitations upon the number or proportion of handicapped persons who may be admitted;
              (2) May not make use of any test or criterion for admission that has a disproportionate, adverse effect on handicapped persons or any class of handicapped persons unless (i) the test or criterion, as used by the recipient, has been validated as a predictor of success in the education program or activity in question and (ii) alternate tests or criteria that have a less disproportionate, adverse effect are not shown by the Director to be available.

              (3) Shall assure itself that (i) admissions tests are selected and administered so as best to ensure that, when a test is administered to an applicant who has a handicap that impairs sensory, manual, or speaking skills, the test results accurately reflect the applicant's aptitude or achievement level or whatever other factor the test purports to measure, rather than reflecting the applicant's impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills (except where those skills are the factors that the test purports to measure); (ii) admissions tests that are designed for persons with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills are offered as often and in as timely a manner as are other admissions tests; and (iii) admissions tests are administered in facilities that, on the whole, are accessible to handicapped persons; and
              (4) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, may not make preadmission inquiry as to whether an applicant for admission is a handicapped person but, after admission, may make inquiries on a confidential basis as to handicaps that may require accommodation.
              (c) Preadmission inquiry exception. When a recipient is taking remedial action to correct the effects of past discrimination pursuant to § 84.6(a) or when a recipient is taking voluntary action to overcome the effects of conditons that resulted in limited participation in its federally assisted program or activity pursuant to § 84.6(b), the recipient may invite applicants for admission to indicate whether and to what extent they are handicapped, Provided, That:
              (1) The recipient states clearly on any written questionnaire used for this purpose or makes clear orally if no written questionnaire is used that the information requested is intended for use solely in connection with its remedial action obligations or its voluntary action efforts; and
              (2) The recipient states clearly that the information is being requested on a voluntary basis, that it will be kept confidential, that refusal to provide it will not subject the applicant to any adverse treatment, and that it will be used only in accordance with this part.
              (d) Validity studies. For the purpose of paragraph (b)(2) of this section, a recipient may base prediction equations on first year grades, but shall conduct periodic validity studies against the criterion of overall success in the education program or activity in question in order to monitor the general validity of the test scores.
            
            
              § 84.43
              Treatment of students; general.
              (a) No qualified handicapped student shall, on the basis of handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any academic, research, occupational training, housing, health insurance, counseling, financial aid, physical education, athletics, recreation, transportation, other extracurricular, or other postsecondary education aids, benefits, or services to which this subpart applies.
              (b) A recipient to which this subpart applies that considers participation by students in education programs or activities not operated wholly by the recipient as part of, or equivalent to, and education program or activity operated by the recipient shall assure itself that the other education program or activity, as a whole, provides an equal opportunity for the participation of qualified handicapped persons.
              (c) A recipient to which this subpart applies may not, on the basis of handicap, exclude any qualified handicapped student from any course, course of study, or other part of its education program or activity.
              (d) A recipient to which this subpart applies shall operate its program or activity in the most integrated setting appropriate.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.44
              Academic adjustments.
              (a) Academic requirements. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall make such modifications to its academic requirements as are necessary to ensure that such requirements do not discriminate or have the effect of discriminating, on the basis of handicap, against a qualified handicapped applicant or student. Academic requirements that the recipient can demonstrate are essential to the instruction being pursued by such student or to any directly related licensing requirement will not be regarded as discriminatory within the meaning of this section. Modifications may include changes in the length of time permitted for the completion of degree requirements, substitution of specific courses required for the completion of degree requirements, and adaptation of the manner in which specific courses are conducted.
              (b) Other rules. A recipient to which this subpart applies may not impose upon handicapped students other rules, such as the prohibition of tape recorders in classrooms or of dog guides in campus buildings, that have the effect of limiting the participation of handicapped students in the recipient's education program or activity.
              (c) Course examinations. In its course examinations or other procedures for evaluating students' academic achievement, a recipient to which this subpart applies shall provide such methods for evaluating the achievement of students who have a handicap that impairs sensory, manual, or speaking skills as will best ensure that the results of the evaluation represents the student's achievement in the course, rather than reflecting the student's impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills (except where such skills are the factors that the test purports to measure).
              (d) Auxiliary aids. (1) A recipient to which this subpart applies shall take such steps as are necessary to ensure that no handicapped student is denied the benefits of, excluded from participation in, or otherwise subjected to discrimination because of the absence of educational auxiliary aids for students with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills.
              (2) Auxiliary aids may include taped texts, interpreters or other effective methods of making orally delivered materials available to students with hearing impairments, readers in libraries for students with visual impairments, classroom equipment adapted for use by students with manual impairments, and other similar services and actions. Recipients need not provide attendants, individually prescribed devices, readers for personal use or study, or other devices or services of a personal nature.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.45
              Housing.
              (a) Housing provided by the recipient. A recipient that provides housing to its nonhandicapped students shall provide comparable, convenient, and accessible housing to handicapped students at the same cost as to others. At the end of the transition period provided for in subpart C, such housing shall be available in sufficient quantity and variety so that the scope of handicapped students' choice of living accommodations is, as a whole, comparable to that of nonhandicapped students.
              (b) Other housing. A recipient that assists any agency, organization, or person in making housing available to any of its students shall take such action as may be necessary to assure itself that such housing is, as a whole, made available in a manner that does not result in discrimination on the basis of handicap.
            
            
              § 84.46
              Financial and employment assistance to students.
              (a) Provision of financial assistance. (1) In providing financial assistance to qualified handicapped persons, a recipient to which this subpart applies may not (i), on the basis of handicap, provide less assistance than is provided to nonhandicapped persons, limit eligibility for assistance, or otherwise discriminate or (ii) assist any entity or person that provides assistance to any of the recipient's students in a manner that discriminates against qualified handicapped persons on the basis of handicap.
              (2) A recipient may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance established under wills, trusts, bequests, or similar legal instruments that require awards to be made on the basis of factors that discriminate or have the effect of discriminating on the basis of handicap only if the overall effect of the award of scholarships, fellowships, and other forms of financial assistance is not discriminatory on the basis of handicap.
              (b) Assistance in making available outside employment. A recipient that assists any agency, organization, or person in providing employment opportunities to any of its students shall assure itself that such employment opportunities, as a whole, are made available in a manner that would not violate subpart B if they were provided by the recipient.
              (c) Employment of students by recipients. A recipient that employs any of its students may not do so in a manner that violates subpart B.
            
            
              
              § 84.47
              Nonacademic services.
              (a) Physical education and athletics. (1) In providing physical education courses and athletics and similar aids, benefits, or services to any of its students, a recipient to which this subpart applies may not discriminate on the basis of handicap. A recipient that offers physical education courses or that operates or sponsors intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics shall provide to qualified handicapped students an equal opportunity for participation in these activities.
              (2) A recipient may offer to handicapped students physical education and athletic activities that are separate or different only if separation or differentiation is consistent with the requirements of § 84.43(d) and only if no qualified handicapped student is denied the opportunity to compete for teams or to participate in courses that are not separate or different.
              (b) Counseling and placement services. A recipient to which this subpart applies that provides personal, academic, or vocational counseling, guidance, or placement services to its students shall provide these services without discrimination on the basis of handicap. The recipient shall ensure that qualified handicapped students are not counseled toward more restrictive career objectives than are nonhandicapped students with similar interests and abilities. This requirement does not preclude a recipient from providing factual information about licensing and certification requirements that may present obstacles to handicapped persons in their pursuit of particular careers.
              (c) Social organizations. A recipient that provides significant assistance to fraternities, sororities, or similar organizations shall assure itself that the membership practices of such organizations do not permit discrimination otherwise prohibited by this subpart.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              §§ 84.48-84.50
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Health, Welfare, and Social Services
            
              § 84.51
              Application of this subpart.
              Subpart F applies to health, welfare, and other social service programs or activities that receive Federal financial assistance and to recipients that operate, or that receive Federal financial assistance for the operation of, such programs or activities.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.52
              Health, welfare, and other social services.
              (a) General. In providing health, welfare, or other social services or benefits, a recipient may not, on the basis of handicap:
              (1) Deny a qualified handicapped person these benefits or services;
              (2) Afford a qualified handicapped person an opportunity to receive benefits or services that is not equal to that offered nonhandicapped persons;
              (3) Provide a qualified handicapped person with benefits or services that are not as effective (as defined in § 84.4(b)) as the benefits or services provided to others;
              (4) Provide benefits or services in a manner that limits or has the effect of limiting the participation of qualified handicapped persons; or
              (5) Provide different or separate benefits or services to handicapped persons except where necessary to provide qualified handicapped persons with benefits and services that are as effective as those provided to others.
              (b) Notice. A recipient that provides notice concerning benefits or services or written material concerning waivers of rights or consent to treatment shall take such steps as are necessary to ensure that qualified handicapped persons, including those with impaired sensory or speaking skills, are not denied effective notice because of their handicap.
              (c) Emergency treatment for the hearing impaired. A recipient hospital that provides health services or benefits shall establish a procedure for effective communication with persons with impaired hearing for the purpose of providing emergency health care.
              (d) Auxiliary aids. (1) A recipient to which this subpart applies that employs fifteen or more persons shall provide appropriate auxiliary aids to persons with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills, where necessary to afford such persons an equal opportunity to benefit from the service in question.
              (2) The Director may require recipients with fewer than fifteen employees to provide auxiliary aids where the provision of aids would not significantly impair the ability of the recipient to provide its benefits or services.
              (3) For the purpose of this paragraph, auxiliary aids may include brailled and taped material, interpreters, and other aids for persons with impaired hearing or vision.
            
            
              § 84.53
              Drug and alcohol addicts.
              A recipient to which this subpart applies that operates a general hospital or outpatient facility may not discriminate in admission or treatment against a drug or alcohol abuser or alcoholic who is suffering from a medical condition, because of the person's drug or alcohol abuse or alcoholism.
            
            
              § 84.54
              Education of institutionalized persons.
              A recipient to which this subpart applies and that provides aids, benefits, or services for persons who are institutionalized because of handicap shall ensure that each qualified handicapped person, as defined in § 84.3(l)(2), in its program or activity is provided an appropriate education, as defined in § 84.33(b). Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as altering in any way the obligations of recipients under subpart D.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 84.55
              Procedures relating to health care for handicapped infants.
              (a) Infant Care Review Committees. The Department encourages each recipient health care provider that provides health care services to infants in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance to establish an Infant Care Review Committee (ICRC) to assist the provider in delivering health care and related services to infants and in complying with this part. The purpose of the committee is to assist the health care provider in the development of standards, policies and procedures for providing treatment to handicapped infants and in making decisions concerning medically beneficial treatment in specific cases. While the Department recognizes the value of ICRC's in assuring appropriate medical care to infants, such committees are not required by this section. An ICRC should be composed of individuals representing a broad range of perspectives, and should include a practicing physician, a representative of a disability organization, a practicing nurse, and other individuals. A suggested model ICRC is set forth in paragraph (f) of this section.
              (b) Posting of informational notice. (1) Each recipient health care provider that provides health care services to infants in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance shall post and keep posted in appropriate places an informational notice.
              (2) The notice must be posted at location(s) where nurses and other medical professionals who are engaged in providing health care and related services to infants will see it. To the extent it does not impair accomplishment of the requirement that copies of the notice be posted where such personnel will see it, the notice need not be posted in area(s) where parents of infant patients will see it.
              (3) Each health care provider for which the content of the following notice (identified as Notice A) is truthful may use Notice A. For the content of the notice to be truthful: (i) The provider must have a policy consistent with that stated in the notice; (ii) the provider must have a procedure for review of treatment deliberations and decisions to which the notice applies, such as (but not limited to) an Infant Care Review Committee; and (iii) the statements concerning the identity of callers and retaliation are truthful.
              
                Notice A:
                PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT OF DISABLED INFANTS

                It is the policy of this hospital, consistent with Federal law, that, nourishment and medically beneficial treatment (as determined with respect for reasonable medical judgments) should not be withheld from handicapped infants solely on the basis of their present or anticipated mental or physical impairments.
                This Federal law, section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, prohibits discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance. For further information, or to report suspected noncompliance, call:
                [Identify designated hospital contact point and telephone number] or
                [Identify appropriate child protective services agency and telephone number] or

                U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS): 800-368-1019 (Toll-free; available 24 hours a day; TDD capability).
                
                The identity of callers will be held confidential. Retaliation by this hospital against any person for providing information about possible noncompliance is prohibited by this hospital and Federal regulations.
              
              
              (4) Health care providers other than those described in paragraph (b)(3) of this section must post the following notice (identified as Notice B):
              
                Notice B:
                PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT OF DISABLED INFANTS
                Federal law prohibits discrimination on the basis of handicap. Under this law, nourishment and medically beneficial treatment (as determined with respect for reasonable medical judgments) should not be withheld from handicapped infants solely on the basis of their present or anticipated mental or physical impairments.
                This Federal law, section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, applies to programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance. For further information, or to report suspected noncompliance, call:
                [Identify appropriate child protective services agency and telephone number] or

                U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS): 800-368-1019 (Toll-free; available 24 hours a day: TDD capability)
                
                The identity of callers will be held confidential. Federal regulations prohibit retaliation by this hospital against any person who provides information about possible violations.
              
              
              (5) The notice may be no smaller than 5 by 7 inches, and the type size no smaller than that generally used for similar internal communications to staff. The recipient must insert the specified information on the notice it selects. Recipient hospitals in Washington, DC, must list 863-0100 as the telephone number for HHS. No other alterations may be made to the notice. Copies of the notices may be obtained from the Department of Health and Human Services upon request, or the recipient may produce its own notices in conformance with the specified wording.
              (c) Responsibilities of recipient state child protective services agencies. (1) Within 60 days of the effective date of this section, each recipient state child protective services agency shall establish and maintain in written form methods of administration and procedures to assure that the agency utilizes its full authority pursuant to state law to prevent instances of unlawful medical neglect of handicapped infants. These methods of administration and procedures shall include:
              (i) A requirement that health care providers report on a timely basis to the state agency circumstances which they determine to constitute known or suspected instances of unlawful medical neglect of handicapped infants;
              (ii) A method by which the state agency can receive reports of suspected unlawful medical neglect of handicapped infants from health care providers, other individuals, and the Department on a timely basis;
              (iii) Immediate review of reports of suspected unlawful medical neglect of handicapped infants and, where appropriate, on-site investigation of such reports;
              (iv) Provision of child protective services to such medically neglected handicapped infants, including, where appropriate, seeking a timely court order to compel the provision of necessary nourishment and medical treatment; and

              (v) Timely notification to the responsible Department official of each report of suspected unlawful medical neglect involving the withholding, solely on the basis of present or anticipated physical or mental impairments, of treatment or nourishment from a handicapped infant who, in spite of such impairments, will medically benefit from the treatment or nourishment, the steps taken by the state agency to investigate such report, and the state agency's final disposition of such report.
              
              (2) Whenever a hospital at which an infant who is the subject of a report of suspected unlawful medical neglect is being treated has an Infant Care Review Committee (ICRC) the Department encourages the state child protective services agency to consult with the ICRC in carrying out the state agency's authorities under its state law and methods of administration. In developing its methods of administration and procedures, the Department encourages child protective services agencies to adopt guidelines for investigations similar to those of the Department regarding the involvement of ICRC's.
              (d) Expedited access to records. Access to pertinent records and facilities of a recipient pursuant to 45 CFR 80.6(c) (made applicable to this part by 45 CFR 84.61) shall not be limited to normal business hours when, in the judgment of the responsible Department official, immediate access is necessary to protect the life or health of a handicapped individual.
              (e) Expedited action to effect compliance. The requirement of 45 CFR 80.8(d)(3) pertaining to notice to recipients prior to the initiation of action to effect compliance (made applicable to this part by 45 CFR 84.61) shall not apply when, in the judgment of the responsible Department official, immediate action to effect compliance is necessary to protect the life or health of a handicapped individual. In such cases the recipient will, as soon as practicable, be given oral or written notice of its failure to comply, of the action to be taken to effect compliance, and its continuing opportunity to comply voluntarily.
              (f) Model Infant Care Review Committee. Recipient health care providers wishing to establish Infant Care Review Committees should consider adoption of the following model. This model is advisory. Recipient health care providers are not required to establish a review committee or, if one is established, to adhere to this model. In seeking to determine compliance with this part, as it relates to health care for handicapped infants, by health care providers that have an ICRC established and operated substantially in accordance with this model, the Department will, to the extent possible, consult with the ICRC.
              (1) Establishment and purpose. (i) The hospital establishes an Infant Care Review Committee (ICRC) or joins with one or more other hospitals to create a joint ICRC. The establishing document will state that the ICRC is for the purpose of facilitating the development and implementation of standards, policies and procedures designed to assure that, while respecting reasonable medical judgments, treatment and nourishment not be withheld, solely on the basis of present or anticipated physical or mental impairments, from handicapped infants who, in spite of such impairments, will benefit medically from the treatment or nourishment.
              (ii) The activities of the ICRC will be guided by the following principles:
              (A) The interpretative guidelines of the Department relating to the applicability of this part to health care for handicapped infants.

              (B) As stated in the “Principles of Treatment of Disabled Infants” of the coalition of major medical and disability organizations, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, National Association of Children's Hospitals and Related Institutions, Association for Retarded Citizens, Down's Syndrome Congress, Spina Bifida Association, and others:
              
              
                When medical care is clearly beneficial, it should always be provided. When appropriate medical care is not available, arrangements should be made to transfer the infant to an appropriate medical facility. Consideration such as anticipated or actual limited potential of an individual and present or future lack of available community resources are irrelevant and must not determine the decisions concerning medical care. The individual's medical condition should be the sole focus of the decision. These are very strict standards.
                It is ethically and legally justified to withhold medical or surgical procedures which are clearly futile and will only prolong the act of dying. However, supportive care should be provided, including sustenance as medically indicated and relief of pain and suffering. The needs of the dying person should be respected. The family also should be supported in its grieving.

                In cases where it is uncertain whether medical treatment will be beneficial, a person's disability must not be the basis for a decision to withhold treatment. At all times during the process when decisions are being made about the benefit or futility of medical treatment, the person should be cared for in the medically most appropriate ways. When doubt exists at any time about whether to treat, a presumption always should be in favor of treatment.
              
              

              (C) As stated by the President's Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research:
              
              
                This [standard for providing medically beneficial treatment] is a very strict standard in that it excludes consideration of the negative effects of an impaired child's life on other persons, including parents, siblings, and society. Although abiding by this standard may be difficult in specific cases, it is all too easy to undervalue the lives of handicapped infants; the Commission finds it imperative to counteract this by treating them no less vigorously than their healthy peers or than older children with similar handicaps would be treated.
              
              
              (iii) The ICRC will carry out its purposes by:
              (A) Recommending institutional policies concerning the withholding or withdrawal of medical or surgical treatments to infants, including guidelines for ICRC action for specific categories of life-threatening conditions affecting infants;
              (B) Providing advice in specific cases when decisions are being considered to withhold or withdraw from infant life-sustaining medical or surgical treatment; and
              (C) Reviewing retrospectively on a regular basis infant medical records in situations in which life-sustaining medical or surgical treatment has been withheld or withdrawn.
              (2) Organization and staffing. The ICRC will consist of at least 7 members and include the following:
              (i) A practicing physician (e.g., a pediatrician, a neonatologist, or a pediatric surgeon),
              (ii) A practicing nurse,
              (iii) A hospital administrator,
              (iv) A representative of the legal profession,
              (v) A representative of a disability group, or a developmental disability expert,
              (vi) A lay community member, and
              (vii) A member of a facility's organized medical staff, who shall serve as chairperson.
              In connection with review of specific cases, one member of the ICRC shall be designated to act as “special advocate” for the infant, as provided in paragraph (f)(3)(ii)(E) of the section. The hospital will provide staff support for the ICRC, including legal counsel. The ICRC will meet on a regular basis, or as required below in connection with review of specific cases. It shall adopt or recommend to the appropriate hospital official or body such administrative policies as terms of office and quorum requirements. The ICRC will recommend procedures to ensure that both hospital personnel and patient families are fully informed of the existence and functions of the ICRC and its availability on a 24-hour basis.
              (3) Operation of ICRC—(i) Prospective policy development. (A) The ICRC will develop and recommend for adoption by the hospital institutional policies concerning the withholding or withdrawal of medical treatment for infants with life-threatening conditions. These will include guidelines for management of specific types of cases or diagnoses, for example, Down's syndrome and spina bifida, and procedures to be followed in such recurring circumstances as, for example, brain death and parental refusal to consent to life-saving treatment. The hospital, upon recommendation of the ICRC, may require attending physicians to notify the ICRC of the presence in the facility of an infant with a diagnosis specified by the ICRC, e.g., Down's syndrome and spina bifida.
              (B) In recommending these policies and guidelines, the ICRC will consult with medical and other authorities on issues involving disabled individuals, e.g., neonatologists, pediatric surgeons, county and city agencies which provide services for the disabled, and disability advocacy organizations. It will also consult with appropriate committees of the medical staff, to ensure that the ICRC policies and guidelines build on existing staff by-laws, rules and regulations concerning consultations and staff membership requirements. The ICRC will also inform and educate hospital staff on the policies and guidelines it develops.
              (ii) Review of specific cases. In addition to regularly scheduled meetings, interim ICRC meetings will take place under specified circumstances to permit review of individual cases. The hospital will, to the extent possible, require in each case that life-sustaining treatment be continued, until the ICRC can review the case and provide advice.
              (A) Interim ICRC meetings will be convened within 24 hours (or less if indicated) when there is disagreement between the family of an infant and the infant's physician as to the withholding or withdrawal of treatment, when a preliminary decision to withhold or withdraw life-sustaining treatment has been made in certain categories of cases identified by the ICRC, when there is disagreement between members of the hospital's medical and/or nursing staffs, or when otherwise appropriate.
              (B) Such interim ICRC meetings will take place upon the request of any member of the ICRC or hospital staff or parent or guardian of the infant. The ICRC will have procedures to preserve the confidentiality of the identity of persons making such requests, and such persons shall be protected from reprisal. When appropriate, the ICRC or a designated member will inform the requesting individual of the ICRC's recommendation.
              (C) The ICRC may provide for telephone and other forms of review when the timing and nature of the case, as identified in policies developed by the ICRC, make the convening of an interim meeting impracticable.
              (D) Interim meetings will be open to the affected parties. The ICRC will ensure that the interests of the parents, the physician, and the child are fully considered; that family members have been fully informed of the patient's condition and prognosis; that they have been provided with a listing which describes the services furnished by parent support groups and public and private agencies in the geographic vicinity to infants with conditions such as that before the ICRC; and that the ICRC will facilitate their access to such services and groups.
              (E) To ensure a comprehensive evaluation of all options and factors pertinent to the committee's deliberations, the chairperson will designate one member of the ICRC to act, in connection with that specific case, as special advocate for the infant. The special advocate will seek to ensure that all considerations in favor of the provision of life-sustaining treatment are fully evaluated and considered by the ICRC.
              (F) In cases in which there is disagreement on treatment between a physician and an infant's family, and the family wishes to continue life-sustaining treatment, the family's wishes will be carried out, for as long as the family wishes, unless such treatment is medically contraindicated. When there is physician/family disagreement and the family refuses consent to life-sustaining treatment, and the ICRC, after due deliberation, agrees with the family, the ICRC will recommend that the treatment be withheld. When there is physician/family disagreement and the family refuses consent, but the ICRC disagrees with the family, the ICRC will recommend to the hospital board or appropriate official that the case be referred immediately to an appropriate court or child protective agency, and every effort shall be made to continue treatment, preserve the status quo, and prevent worsening of the infant's condition until such time as the court or agency renders a decision or takes other appropriate action. The ICRC will also follow this procedure in cases in which the family and physician agree that life-sustaining treatment should be withheld or withdrawn, but the ICRC disagrees.
              (iii) Retrospective record review. The ICRC, at its regularly-scheduled meeting, will review all records involving withholding or termination of medical or surgical treatment to infants consistent with hospital policies developed by the ICRC, unless the case was previously before the ICRC pursuant to paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this section. If the ICRC finds that a deviation was made from the institutional policies in a given case, it shall conduct a review and report the findings to appropriate hospital personnel for appropriate action.
              (4) Records. The ICRC will maintain records of all of its deliberations and summary descriptions of specific cases considered and the disposition of those cases. Such records will be kept in accordance with institutional policies on confidentiality of medical information. They will be made available to appropriate government agencies, or upon court order, or as otherwise required by law.
              
                Note:

                The mandatory provisions set forth in paragraphs (b)-(e) inclusive of this section are subject to an injunction prohibiting their enforcement. In Bowen v. American Hospital Association, ___ U.S. ___, 106 S. Ct. 2101 (1986), the Supreme Court upheld the action of a United States District Court, 585 F. Supp. 541 (S.D.N.Y. 1984), declaring invalid and enjoining enforcement of provisions under this section, promulgated January 12, 1984.
              
              (Information collection requirements contained in paragraph (c) have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 0990-0114)
              [49 FR 1651, Jan. 12, 1984, as amended at 52 FR 3012, Jan. 30, 1987; 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              §§ 84.56-84.60
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart G—Procedures
            
              § 84.61
              Procedures.
              The procedural provisions applicable to title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 apply to this part. These procedures are found in §§ 80.6 through 80.10 and part 81 of this title.
              [42 FR 22677, May 4, 1977; 42 FR 22888, May 5, 1977]
            
          
          
             
            
              Pt. 84, App. A
              Appendix A to Part 84—Analysis of Final Regulation
              subpart a—general provisions
              
                Definitions—1. “Recipient”. Section 84.23 contains definitions used throughout the regulation. Most of the comments concerning § 84.3(f), which contains the definition of “recipient,” commended the inclusion of recipient whose sole source of Federal financial assistance is Medicaid. The Secretary believes that such Medicaid providers should be regarded as recipients under the statute and the regulation and should be held individually responsible for administering services in a nondiscriminatory fashion. Accordingly, § 84.3(f) has not been changed. Small Medicaid providers, however, are exempt from some of the regulation's administrative provisions (those that apply to recipients with fifteen or more employees). And such recipients will be permitted to refer patients to accessible facilities in certain limited circumstances under revised § 84.22(b). The Secretary recognizes the difficulties involved in Federal enforcement of this regulation with respect to thousands of individual Medicaid providers. As in the case of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Office for Civil Rights will concentrate its compliance efforts on the state Medicaid agencies and will look primarily to them to ensure compliance by individual providers.
              One other comment requested that the regulation specify that nonpublic elementary and secondary schools that are not otherwise recipients do not become recipients by virtue of the fact their students participate in certain federally funded programs. The Secretary believes it unnecessary to amend the regulation in this regard, because almost identical language in the Department's regulations implementing title VI and Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 has consistently been interpreted so as not to render such schools recipients. These schools, however, are indirectly subject to the substantive requirements of this regulation through the application of § 84.4(b)(iv), which prohibits recipients from assisting agencies that discriminate on the basis of handicap in providing services to beneficiairies of the recipients' programs.
              2. “Federal financial assistance”. In § 84.3(h), defining Federal financial assistance, a clarifying change has been made: procurement contracts are specifically excluded. They are covered, however, by the Department of Labor's regulation under section 503. The Department has never considered such contracts to be contracts of assistance; the explicit exemption has been added only to avoid possible confusion.
              The proposed regulation's exemption of contracts of insurance or guaranty has been retained. A number of comments argued for its deletion on the ground that section 504, unlike title VI and title IX, contains no statutory exemption for such contracts. There is no indication, however, in the legislative history of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or of the amendments to that Act in 1974, that Congress intended section 504 to have a broader application, in terms of Federal financial assistance, than other civil rights statutes. Indeed, Congress directed that section 504 be implemented in the same manner as titles VI and IX. In view of the long established exemption of contracts of insurance or guaranty under title VI, we think it unlikely that Congress intended section 504 to apply to such contracts.

              In its May 1976 Notice of Intent, the Department suggested that the arrangement under which individual practitioners, hospitals, and other facilities receive reimbursement for providing services to beneficiaries under Part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (Medicare) constitutes a contract of insurance or guaranty and thus falls within the exemption from the regulation. This explanation oversimplified the Department's view of whether Medicare Part B constitutes Federal financial assistance. The Department's position has consistently been that, whether or not Medicare Part B arrangements involve a contract of insurance or guaranty, no Federal financial assistance flows from the Department to the doctor or other practitioner under the program, since Medicare Part B—like other social security programs—is basically a program of payments to direct beneficiaries.
              3. “Handicapped person”. Section 84.3(j), which defines the class of persons protected under the regulation, has not been substantially changed. The definition of handicapped person in paragraph (j)(1) conforms to the statutory definition of handicapped person that is applicable to section 504, as set forth in section 111(a) of the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93-516.
              The first of the three parts of the statutory and regulatory definition includes any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. Paragraph (j)(2)(i) further defines physical or mental impairments. The definition does not set forth a list of specific diseases and conditions that constitute physical or mental impairments because of the difficulty of ensuring the comprehensiveness of any such list. The term includes, however, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, and, as discussed below, drug addiction and alcoholism.
              It should be emphasized that a physical or mental impairment does not constitute a handicap for purposes of section 504 unless its severity is such that it results in a substantial limitation of one or more major life activities. Several comments observed the lack of any definition in the proposed regulation of the phrase “substantially limits.” The Department does not believe that a definition of this term is possible at this time.
              A related issue raised by several comments is whether the definition of handicapped person is unreasonably broad. Comments suggested narrowing the definition in various ways. the most common recommendation was that only “traditional” handicaps be covered. The Department continues to believe, however, that it has no flexibility within the statutory definition to limit the term to persons who have those severe, permanent, or progressive conditions that are most commonly regarded as handicaps. The Department intends, however, to give particular attention in its enforcement of section 504 to eliminating discrimination against persons with the severe handicaps that were the focus of concern in the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
              The definition of handicapped person also includes specific limitations on what persons are classified as handicapped under the regulation. The first of the three parts of the definition specifies that only physical and mental handicaps are included. Thus, environmental, cultural, and economic disadvantage are not in themselves covered; nor are prison records, age, or homosexuality. Of course, if a person who has any of these characteristics also has a physical or mental handicap, the person is included within the definition of handicapped person.
              In paragraph (j)(2)(i), physical or mental impairment is defined to include, among other impairments, specific learning disabilities. The Department will interpret the term as it is used in section 602 of the Education of the Handicapped Act, as amended. Paragraph (15) of section 602 uses the term “specific learning disabilities” to describe such conditions as perceptual handicaps, brain injury, minimal brain dysfunction, dyslexia, and developmental aphasia.
              Paragraph (j)(2)(i) has been shortened, but not substantively changed, by the deletion of clause (C), which made explicit the inclusion of any condition which is mental or physical but whose precise nature is not at present known. Clauses (A) and (B) clearly comprehend such conditions.
              The second part of the statutory and regulatory definition of handicapped person includes any person who has a record of a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity. Under the definition of “record” in paragraph (j)(2)(iii), persons who have a history of a handicapping condition but no longer have the condition, as well as persons who have been incorrectly classified as having such a condition, are protected from discrimination under section 504. Frequently occurring examples of the first group are persons with histories of mental or emotional illness, heart disease, or cancer; of the second group, persons who have been misclassified as mentally retarded.

              The third part of the statutory and regulatory definition of handicapped person includes any person who is regarded as having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. It includes many persons who are ordinarily considered to be handicapped but who do not technically fall within the first two parts of the statutory definition, such as persons with a limp. This part of the definition also includes some persons who might not ordinarily be considered handicapped, such as persons with disfiguring scars, as well as persons who have no physical or mental impairment but are treated by a recipient as if they were handicapped.
              
              4. Drug addicts and alcoholics. As was the case during the first comment period, the issue of whether to include drug addicts and alcoholics within the definition of handicapped person was of major concern to many commenters. The arguments presented on each side of the issue were similar during the two comment periods, as was the preference of commenters for exclusion of this group of persons. While some comments reflected misconceptions about the implications of including alcoholics and drug addicts within the scope of the regulation, the Secretary understands the concerns that underlie the comments on this question and recognizes that application of section 504 to active alcoholics and drug addicts presents sensitive and difficult questions that must be taken into account in interpretation and enforcement.
              The Secretary has carefully examined the issue and has obtained a legal opinion from the Attorney General. That opinion concludes that drug addiction and alcoholism are “physical or mental impairments” within the meaning of section 7(6) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, and that drug addicts and alcoholics are therefore handicapped for purposes of section 504 if their impairment substantially limits one of their major life activities. The Secretary therefore believes that he is without authority to exclude these conditions from the definition. There is a medical and legal consensus that alcoholism and drug addiction are diseases, although there is disagreement as to whether they are primarily mental or physical. In addition, while Congress did not focus specifically on the problems of drug addiction and alcoholism in enacting section 504, the committees that considered the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 were made aware of the Department's long-standing practice of treating addicts and alcoholics as handicapped individuals eligible for rehabilitation services under the Vocational Rehabilitation Act.
              The Secretary wishes to reassure recipients that inclusion of addicts and alcoholics within the scope of the regulation will not lead to the consequences feared by many commenters. It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the statute and the regulation apply only to discrimination against qualified handicapped persons solely by reason of their handicap. The fact that drug addiction and alcoholism may be handicaps does not mean that these conditions must be ignored in determining whether an individual is qualified for services or employment opportunities. On the contrary, a recipient may hold a drug addict or alcoholic to the same standard of performance and behavior to which it holds others, even if any unsatisfactory performance or behavior is related to the person's drug addiction or alcoholism. In other words, while an alcoholic or drug addict may not be denied services or disqualified from employment solely because of his or her condition, the behavioral manifestations of the condition may be taken into account in determining whether he or she is qualified.
              With respect to the employment of a drug addict or alcoholic, if it can be shown that the addiction or alcoholism prevents successful performance of the job, the person need not be provided the employment opportunity in question. For example, in making employment decisions, a recipient may judge addicts and alcoholics on the same basis it judges all other applicants and employees. Thus, a recipient may consider—for all applicants including drug addicts and alcoholics—past personnel records, absenteeism, disruptive, abusive, or dangerous behavior, violations of rules and unsatisfactory work performance. Moreover, employers may enforce rules prohibiting the possession or use of alcohol or drugs in the work-place, provided that such rules are enforced against all employees.
              With respect to services, there is evidence that drug addicts and alcoholics are often denied treatment at hospitals for conditions unrelated to their addiction or alcoholism. In addition, some addicts and alcoholics have been denied emergency treatment. These practices have been specifically prohibited by section 407 of the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972 (21 U.S.C. 1174) and section 321 of the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4581), as amended. These statutory provisions are also administered by the Department's Office for Civil Rights and are implemented in § 84.53 of this regulation.
              With respect to other services, the implications of coverage, of alcoholics and drug addicts are two-fold: first, no person may be excluded from services solely by reason of the presence or history of these conditions; second, to the extent that the manifestations of the condition prevent the person from meeting the basic eligibility requirements of the program or cause substantial interference with the operation of the program, the condition may be taken into consideration. Thus, a college may not exclude an addict or alcoholic as a student, on the basis of addiction or alcoholism, if the person can successfully participate in the education program and complies with the rules of the college and if his or her behavior does not impede the performance of other students.

              Of great concern to many commenters was the question of what effect the inclusion of drug addicts and alcoholics as handicapped persons would have on school disciplinary rules prohibiting the use or possession of drugs or alcohol by students. Neither such rules nor their application to drug addicts or alcoholics is prohibited by this regulation, provided that the rules are enforced evenly with respect to all students.
              5. “Qualified handicapped person.” Paragraph (k) of § 84.3 defines the term “qualified handicapped person.” Throughout the regulation, this term is used instead of the statutory term “otherwise qualified handicapped person.” The Department believes that the omission of the word “otherwise” is necessary in order to comport with the intent of the statute because, read literally, “otherwise” qualified handicapped persons include persons who are qualified except for their handicap, rather than in spite of their handicap. Under such a literal reading, a blind person possessing all the qualifications for driving a bus except sight could be said to be “otherwise qualified” for the job of driving. Clearly, such a result was not intended by Congress. In all other respects, the terms “qualified” and “otherwise qualified” are intended to be interchangeable.
              Section 84.3(k)(1) defines a qualified handicapped person with respect to employment as a handicapped person who can, with reasonable accommodation, perform the essential functions of the job in question. The term “essential functions” does not appear in the corresponding provision of the Department of Labor's section 503 regulation, and a few commenters objected to its inclusion on the ground that a handicapped person should be able to perform all job tasks. However, the Department believes that inclusion of the phrase is useful in emphasizing that handicapped persons should not be disqualified simply because they may have difficulty in performing tasks that bear only a marginal relationship to a particular job. Further, we are convinced that inclusion of the phrase is not inconsistent with the Department of Labor's application of its definition.
              Certain commenters urged that the definition of qualified handicapped person be amended so as explicitly to place upon the employer the burden of showing that a particular mental or physical characteristic is essential. Because the same result is achieved by the requirement contained in paragraph (a) of § 84.13, which requires an employer to establish that any selection criterion that tends to screen out handicapped persons is job-related, that recommendation has not been followed.
              Section 84.3(k)(2) (formerly § 84.3(k)(3)) defines qualified handicapped person, with respect to preschool, elementary, and secondary programs, in terms of age. Several commenters recommended that eligibility for the services be based upon the standard of substantial benefit, rather than age, because of the need of many handicapped children for early or extended services if they are to have an equal opportunity to benefit from education programs. No change has been made in this provision, again because of the extreme difficulties in administration that would result from the choice of the former standard. Under the remedial action provisions of § 84.6(a)(3), however, persons beyond the age limits prescribed in § 84.3(k)(2) may in appropriate cases be required to be provided services that they were formerly denied because of a recipient's violation of section 504.
              Section 84.3(k)(2) states that a handicapped person is qualified for preschool, elementary, or secondary services if the person is of an age at which nonhandicapped persons are eligible for such services or at which state law mandates the provision of educational services to handicapped persons. In addition, the extended age ranges for which recipients must provide full educational opportunity to all handicapped persons in order to be eligible for assistance under the Education of the Handicapped Act—generally, 3-18 as of September 1978, and 3-21 as of September 1980 are incorporated by reference in this paragraph.
              Section 84.3(k)(3) formerly § 84.3(k)(2)) defines qualified handicapped person with respect to postsecondary educational programs. As revised, the paragraph means that both academic and technical standards must be met by applicants to these programs. The term “technical standards” refers to all nonacademic admissions criteria that are essential to participation in the program in question.
              6. General prohibitions against discrimination. Section 84.4 contains general prohibitions against discrimination applicable to all recipients of assistance from this Department.
              Paragraph (b)(1(i) prohibits the exclusion of qualified handicapped persons from aids, benefits, or services, and paragraph (ii) requires that equal opportunity to participate or benefit be provided. Paragraph (iii) requires that services provided to handicapped persons be as effective as those provided to the nonhandicapped. In paragraph (iv), different or separate services are prohibited except when necessary to provide equally effective benefits.

              In this context, the term “equally effective,” defined in paragraph (b)(2), is intended to encompass the concept of equivalent, as opposed to identical, services and to acknowledge the fact that in order to meet the individual needs of handicapped persons to the same extent that the corresponding needs of nonhandicapped persons are met, adjustments to regular programs or the provision of different programs may sometimes be necessary. For example, a welfare office that uses the telephone for communicating with its clients must provide alternative modes of communicating with its deaf clients. This standard parallels the one established under title VI of Civil Rights Act of 1964 with respect to the provision of educational services to students whose primary language is not English. See Lau v. Nichols,
                414 U.S. 563 (1974). To be equally effective, however, an aid, benefit, or service need not produce equal results; it merely must afford an equal opportunity to achieve equal results.
              It must be emphasized that, although separate services must be required in some instances, the provision of unnecessarily separate or different services is discriminatory. The addition to paragraph (b)(2) of the phrase “in the most integrated setting appropriated to the person's needs” is intended to reinforce this general concept. A new paragraph (b)(3) has also been added to § 84.4, requiring recipients to give qualified handicapped persons the option of participating in regular programs despite the existence of permissibly separate or different programs. The requirement has been reiterated in §§ 84.38 and 84.47 in connection with physical education and athletics programs.
              Section 84.4(b)(1)(v) prohibits a recipient from supporting another entity or person that subjects participants or employees in the recipient's program to discrimination on the basis of handicap. This section would, for example, prohibit financial support by a recipient to a community recreational group or to a professional or social organization that discriminates against handicapped persons. Among the criteria to be considered in each case are the substantiality of the relationship between the recipient and the other entity, including financial support by the recipient, and whether the other entity's activities relate so closely to the recipient's program or activity that they fairly should be considered activities of the recipient itself. Paragraph (b)(1)(vi) was added in response to comment in order to make explicit the prohibition against denying qualified handicapped persons the opportunity to serve on planning and advisory boards responsible for guiding federally assisted programs or activities.
              Several comments appeared to interpret § 84.4(b)(5), which proscribes discriminatory site selection, to prohibit a recipient that is located on hilly terrain from erecting any new buildings at its present site. That, of course, is not the case. This paragraph is not intended to apply to construction of additional buildings at an existing site. Of course, any such facilities must be made accessible in accordance with the requirements of § 84.23.
              7. Assurances of compliance. Section 84.5(a) requires a recipient to submit to the Director an assurance that each of its programs and activities receiving or benefiting from Federal financial assistance from this Department will be conducted in compliance with this regulation. To facilitate the submission of assurances by thousands of Medicaid providers, the Department will follow the title VI procedures of accepting, in lieu of assurances, certification on Medicaid vouchers. Many commenters also sought relief from the paperwork requirements imposed by the Department's enforcement of its various civil rights responsibilities by requesting the Department to issue one form incorporating title VI, title IX, and section 504 assurances. The Secretary is sympathetic to this request. While it is not feasible to adopt a single civil rights assurance form at this time, the Office for Civil Rights will work toward that goal.
              8. Private rights of action. Several comments urged that the regulation incorporate provision granting beneficiaries a private right of action against recipients under section 504. To confer such a right is beyond the authority of the executive branch of Government. There is, however, case law holding that such a right exists. Lloyd v. Regional Transportation Authority, 548 F. 2d 1277 (7th Cir. 1977); see Hairston v. Drosick, Civil No. 75-0691 (S.D. W. Va., Jan. 14, 1976); Gurmankin v. Castanzo, 411 F. Supp. 982 (E.D. Pa. 1976); cf. Lau v. Nichols, supra.
              
              9. Remedial action. Where there has been a finding of discrimination, § 84.6 requires a recipient to take remedial action to overcome the effects of the discrimination. Actions that might be required under paragraph (a)(1) include provision of services to persons previously discriminated against, reinstatement of employees and development of a remedial action plan. Should a recipient fail to take required remedial action, the ultimate sanctions of court action or termination of Federal financial assistance may be imposed.
              Paragraph (a)(2) extends the responsibility for taking remedial action to a recipient that exercises control over a noncomplying recipient. Paragraph (a)(3) also makes clear that handicapped persons who are not in the program at the time that remedial action is required to be taken may also be the subject of such remedial action. This paragraph has been revised in response to comments in order to include persons who would have been in the program if discriminatory practices had not existed. Paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) have also been amended in response to comments to make plain that, in appropriate cases, remedial action might be required to redress clear violations of the statute itself that occurred before the effective date of this regulation.
              10. Voluntary action. In § 84.6(b), the term “voluntary action” has been substituted for the term “affirmative action” because the use of the latter term led to some confusion. We believe the term “voluntary action” more accurately reflects the purpose of the paragraph. This provision allows action, beyond that required by the regulation, to overcome conditions that led to limited participation by handicapped persons, whether or not the limited participation was caused by any discriminatory actions on the part of the recipient. Several commenters urged that paragraphs (a) and (b) be revised to require remedial action to overcome effects of prior discriminatory practices regardless of whether there has been an express finding of discrimination. The self-evaluation requirement in paragraph (c) accomplishes much the same purpose.
              11. Self-evaluation. Paragraph (c) requires recipients to conduct a self-evaluation in order to determine whether their policies or practices may discriminate against handicapped persons and to take steps to modify any discriminatory policies and practices and their effects. The Department received many comments approving of the addition to paragraph (c) of a requirement that recipients seek the assistance of handicapped persons in the self-evaluation process. This paragraph has been further amended to require consultation with handicapped persons or organizations representing them before recipients undertake the policy modifications and remedial steps prescribed in paragraphs (c)(1)(ii) and (iii).
              Paragraph (c)(2), which sets forth the recordkeeping requirements concerning self-evaluation, now applies only to recipients with fifteen or more employees. This change was made as part of an effort to reduce unnecessary or counterproductive administrative obligations on small recipients. For those recipients required to keep records, the requirements have been made more specific; records must include a list of persons consulted and a description of areas examined, problems identified, and corrective steps taken. Moreover, the records must be made available for public inspection.
              12. Grievance procedure. Section 84.7 (formerly § 84.8) requires recipients with fifteen or more employees to designate an individual responsible for coordinating its compliance efforts and to adopt a grievance procedure. Two changes were made in the section in response to comment. A general requirement that appropriate due process procedures be followed has been added. It was decided that the details of such procedures could not at this time be specified because of the varied nature of the persons and entities who must establish the procedures and of the programs to which they apply. A sentence was also added to make clear that grievance procedures are not required to be made available to unsuccessful applicants for employment or to applicants for admission to colleges and universities.
              The regulation does not require that grievance procedures be exhausted before recourse is sought from the Department. However, the Secretary believes that it is desirable and efficient in many cases for complainants to seek resolution of their complaints and disputes at the local level and therefore encourages them to use available grievance procedures.
              A number of comments asked whether compliance with this section or the notice requirements of § 84.8 could be coordinated with comparable action required by the title IX regulation. The Department encourages such efforts.
              13. Notice. Section 84.8 (formerly § 84.9) sets forth requirements for dissemination of statements of nondicrimination policy by recipients.
              It is important that both handicapped persons and the public at large be aware of the obligations of recipients under section 504. Both the Department and recipients have responsibilities in this regard. Indeed the Department intends to undertake a major public information effort to inform persons of their rights under section 504 and this regulation. In § 84.8 the Department has sought to impose a clear obligation on major recipients to notify beneficiaries and employees of the requirements of section 504, without dictating the precise way in which this notice must be given. At the same time, we have avoided imposing requirements on small recipients (those with fewer than fifteen employees) that would create unnecessary and counterproductive paper work burdens on them and unduly stretch the enforcement resources of the Department.
              Section 84.8(a), as simplified, requires recipients with fifteen or more employees to take appropriate steps to notify beneficiaries and employees of the recipient's obligations under section 504. The last sentence of § 84.8(a) has been revised to list possible, rather than required, means of notification. Section 84.8(b) requires recipients to include a notification of their policy of nondiscrimination in recruitment and other general information materials.
              In response to a number of comments, § 84.8 has been revised to delete the requirements of publication in local newspapers, which has proved to be both troublesome and ineffective. Several commenters suggested that notification on separate forms be allowed until present stocks of publications and forms are depleted. The final regulation explicitly allows this method of compliance. The separate form should, however, be included with each significant publication or form that is distributed.
              Former § 84.9(b)(2), which prohibited the use of materials that might give the impression that a recipient excludes qualified handicapped persons from its program, has been deleted. The Department is convinced by the comments that this provision is unnecessary and difficult to apply. The Department encourages recipients, however, to include in their recruitment and other general information materials photographs of handicapped persons and ramps and other features of accessible buildings.

              Under new § 84.9 the Director may, under certain circumstances, require recipients with fewer than fifteen employees to comply with one or more of these requirements. Thus, if experience shows a need for imposing notice or other requirements on particular recipients or classes of small recipients, the Department is prepared to expand the coverage of these sections.
              14. Inconsistent State laws. Section 84.10(a) states that compliance with the regulation is not excused by state or local laws limiting the eligibility of qualified handicapped persons to receive services or to practice an occupation. The provision thus applies only with respect to state or local laws that unjustifiably differentiate on the basis of handicap.
              Paragraph (b) further points out that the presence of limited employment opportunities in a particular profession, does not excuse a recipient from complying with the regulation. Thus, a law school could not deny admission to a blind applicant because blind laywers may find it more difficult to find jobs that do nonhandicapped lawyers.
              subpart b—employment practices
              Subpart B prescribes requirements for nondiscrimination in the employment practices of recipients of Federal financial assistance administered by the Department. This subpart is consistent with the employment provisions of the Department's regulation implementing title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (45 CFR part 86) and the regulation of the Department of Labor under section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act, which requries certain Federal contractors to take affirmative action in the employment and advancement of qualified handicapped persons. All recipients subject to title IX are also subject to this regulation. In addition, many recipients subject to this regulation receive Federal procurement contracts in excess of $2,500 and are therefore also subject to section 503.
              15. Discriminatory practices. Section 84.11 sets forth general provisions with respect to discrimination in employment. A new paragraph (a)(2) has been added to clarify the employment obligations of recipients that receive Federal funds under Part B of the Education of the Handicapped Act, as amended (EHA). Section 606 of the EHA obligates elementary or secondary school systems that receive EHA funds to take positive steps to employ and advance in employment qualified handicapped persons. This obligation is similar to the nondiscrimination requirement of section 504 but requires recipients to take additional steps to hire and promote handicapped persons. In enacting section 606 Congress chose the words “positive steps” instead of “affirmative action” advisedly and did not intend section 606 to incorporate the types of activities required under Executive Order 11246 (affirmative action on the basis of race, color, sex, or national origin) or under sections 501 and 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
              Paragraph (b) of § 84.11 sets forth the specific aspects of employment covered by the regulation. Paragraph (c) provides that inconsistent provisions of collective bargaining agreements do not excuse noncompliance.
              16. Reasonable accommodation. The reasonable accommodation requirement of § 84.12 generated a substantial number of comments. The Department remains convinced that its approach is both fair and effective. Moreover, the Department of Labor reports that it has experienced little difficulty in administering the requirements of reasonable accommodation. The provision therefore remains basically unchanged from the proposed regulation.
              Section 84.12 requires a recipient to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental limitations of a handicapped applicant or employee unless the recipient can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its program. Where a handicapped person is not qualified to perform a particular job, where reasonable accommodation does not overcome the effects of a person's handicap, or where reasonable accommodation causes undue hardship to the employer, failure to hire or promote the handicapped person will not be considered discrimination.
              Section 84.12(b) lists some of the actions that constitute reasonable accommodation. The list is neither all-inclusive nor meant to suggest that employers must follow all of the actions listed.
              Reasonable accommodation includes modification of work schedules, including part-time employment, and job restructuring. Job restructuring may entail shifting nonessential duties to other employees. In other cases, reasonable accommodation may include physical modifications or relocation of particular offices or jobs so that they are in facilities or parts of facilities that are accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. If such accommodations would cause undue hardship to the employer, they need not be made.

              Paragraph (c) of this section sets forth the factors that the Office for Civil Rights will consider in determining whether an accommodation necessary to enable an applicant or employee to perform the duties of a job would impose an undue hardship. The weight given to each of these factors in making the determination as to whether an accommodation constitutes undue hardship will vary depending on the facts of a particular situation. Thus, a small day-care center might not be required to expend more than a nominal sum, such as that necessary to equip a telephone for use by a secretary with impaired hearing, but a large school district might be required to make available a teacher's aide to a blind applicant for a teaching job. Further, it might be considered reasonable to require a state welfare agency to accommodate a deaf employee by providing an interpreter, while it would constitute an undue hardship to impose that requirement on a provider of foster home care services. The reasonable accommodation standard in § 84.12 is similar to the obligation imposed upon Federal contractors in the regulation implementing section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, administered by the Department of Labor. Although the wording of the reasonable accommodation provisions of the two regulations is not identical, the obligation that the two regulations impose is the same, and the Federal Government's policy in implementing the two sections will be uniform. The Department adopted the factors listed in paragraph (c) instead of the “business necessity” standard of the Labor regulation because that term seemed inappropriate to the nature of the programs operated by the majority of institutions subject to this regulation, e.g., public school systems, hospitals, colleges and universities, nursing homes, day-care centers, and welfare offices. The factors listed in paragraph (c) are intended to make the rationale underlying the business necessity standard applicable to an understandable by recipients of HHS funds.
              17. Tests and selection criteria. Revised § 84.13(a) prohibits employers from using test or other selection criteria that screen out or tend to screen out handicapped persons unless the test or criterion is shown to be job-related and alternative tests or criteria that do not screen out or tend to screen out as many handicapped persons are not shown by the Director to be available. This paragraph is an application of the principle established under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in Griggs v. Duke Power Company, 401 U.S. 424 (1971).
              Under the proposed section, a statistical showing of adverse impact on handicapped persons was required to trigger an employer's obligation to show that employment criteria and qualifications relating to handicap were necessary. This requirement was changed because the small number of handicapped persons taking tests would make statistical showings of “disproportionate, adverse effect” difficult and burdensome. Under the altered, more workable provision, once it is shown that an employment test substantially limits the opportunities of handicapped persons, the employer must show the test to be job-related. A recipient is no longer limited to using predictive validity studies as the method for demonstrating that a test or other selection criterion is in fact job-related. Nor, in all cases, are predictive validity studies sufficient to demonstrate that a test or criterion is job-related. In addition, § 84.13(a) has been revised to place the burden on the Director, rather than the recipient, to identify alternate tests.
              Section 84.13(b) requires that a recipient take into account that some tests and criteria depend upon sensory, manual, or speaking skills that may not themselves be necessary to the job in question but that may make the handicapped person unable to pass the test. The recipient must select and administer tests so as best to ensure that the test will measure the handicapped person's ability to perform on the job rather than the person's ability to see, hear, speak, or perform manual tasks, except, of course, where such skills are the factors that the test purports to measure. For example, a person with a speech impediment may be perfectly qualified for jobs that do not or need not, with reasonable accommodation, require ability to speak clearly. Yet, if given an oral test, the person will be unable to perform in a satisfactory manner. The test results will not, therefore, predict job performance but instead will reflect impaired speech.
              18. Preemployment inquiries. Section 84.14, concerning preemployment inquiries, generated a large number of comments. Commenters representing handicapped persons strongly favored a ban on preemployment inquiries on the ground that such inquiries are often used to discriminate against handicapped persons and are not necessary to serve any legitimate interests of employers. Some recipients, on the other hand, argued that preemployment inquiries are necessary to determine qualifications of the applicant, safety hazards caused by a particular handicapping condition, and accommodations that might required.
              The Secretary has concluded that a general prohibition of preemployment inquiries is appropriate. However, a sentence has been added to paragraph (a) to make clear that an employer may inquire into an applicant's ability to perform job-related tasks but may not ask if the person has a handicap. For example, an employer may not ask on an employment form if an applicant is visually impaired but may ask if the person has a current driver's license (if that is a necessary qualification for the position in question). Similarly, employers may make inquiries about an applicant's ability to perform a job safely. Thus, an employer may not ask if an applicant is an epileptic but may ask whether the person can perform a particular job without endangering other employees.

              Section 84.14(B) allows preemployment inquiries only if they are made in conjunction with required remedial action to correct past discrimination, with voluntary action to overcome past conditions that have limited the participation of handicapped persons, or with obligations under section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. In these instances, paragraph (b) specifies certain safeguards that must be followed by the employer.
              Finally, the revised provision allows an employer to condition offers of employment to handicapped persons on the results of medical examinations, so long as the examinations are administered to all employees in a nondiscriminatory manner and the results are treated on a confidential basis.
              19. Specific acts of Discrimination. Sections 84.15 (recruitment), 84.16 (compensation), 84.17 (job classification and structure) and 84.18 (fringe benefits) have been deleted from the regulation as unnecessarily duplicative of § 84.11 (discrimination prohibited). The deletion of these sections in no way changes the substantive obligations of employers subject to this regulation from those set forth in the July 16 proposed regulation. These deletions bring the regulation closer in form to the Department of Labor's section 503 regulation.
              Proposed § 84.18, concerning fringe benefits, had allowed for differences in benefits or contributions between handicapped and nonhandicapped persons in situations only where such differences could be justified on an actuarial basis. Section 84.11 simply bars discrimination in providing fringe benefits and does not address the issue of actuarial differences. The Department believes that currently available data and experience do not demonstrate a basis for promulgating a regulation specifically allowing for differences in benefits or contributions.
              subpart c—program accessibility
              In general, subpart C prohibits the exclusion of qualified handicapped persons from federally assisted programs or activities because a recipient's facilities are inaccessible or unusable.
              20. Existing facilities. Section 84.22 maintains the same standard for nondiscrimination in regard to existing facilities as was included in the proposed regulation. The section states that a recipient's program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, must be readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. Paragraphs (a) and (b) make clear that a recipient is not required to make each of its existing facilities accessible to handicapped persons if its program as a whole is accessible. Accessibility to the recipient's program or activity may be achieved by a number of means, including redesign of equipment, reassignment of classes or other services to accessible buildings, and making aides available to beneficiaries. In choosing among methods of compliance, recipients are required to give priority consideration to methods that will be consistent with provision of services in the most appropriate integrated setting. Structural changes in existing facilities are required only where there is no other feasible way to make the recipient's program accessible.
              Under § 84.22, a university does not have to make all of its existing classroom buildings accessible to handicapped students if some of its buildings are already accessible and if it is possible to reschedule or relocate enough classes so as to offer all required courses and a reasonable selection of elective courses in accessible facilities. If sufficient relocation of classes is not possible using existing facilities, enough alterations to ensure program accessibility are required. A university may not exclude a handicapped student from a specifically requested course offering because it is not offered in an accessible location, but it need not make every section of that course accessible.
              Commenters representing several institutions of higher education have suggested that it would be appropriate for one postsecondary institution in a geographical area to be made accessible to handicapped persons and for other colleges and universities in that area to participate in that school's program, thereby developing an educational consortium for the postsecondary education of handicapped students. The Department believes that such a consortium, when developed and applied only to handicapped persons, would not constitute compliance with § 84.22, but would discriminate against qualified handicapped persons by restricting their choice in selecting institutions of higher education and would, therefore, be inconsistent with the basic objectives of the statute.
              Nothing in this regulation, however, should be read as prohibiting institutions from forming consortia for the benefit of all students. Thus, if three colleges decide that it would be cost-efficient for one college to offer biology, the second physics, and the third chemistry to all students at the three colleges, the arrangement would not violate section 504. On the other hand, it would violate the regulation if the same institutions set up a consortium under which one college undertook to make its biology lab accessible, another its physics lab, and a third its chemistry lab, and under which mobility-impaired handicapped students (but not other students) were required to attend the particular college that is accessible for the desired courses.
              Similarly, while a public school district need not make each of its buildings completely accessible, it may not make only one facility or part of a facility accessible if the result is to segregate handicapped students in a single setting.

              All recipients that proivde health, welfare, or other social services may also comply with § 84.22 by delivering services at alternate accessible sites or making home visits. Thus, for example, a pharmacist might arrange to make home deliveries of drugs. Under revised § 84.22(c), small providers of health, welfare, and social services (those with fewer than fifteen employees) may refer a beneficiary to an accessible provider of the desired service, but only if no means of meeting the program accessibility requirement other than a significant alteration in existing facilties is available. The referring recipient has the responsibility of determining that the other provider is in fact accessible and willing to provide the service. The Secretary believes this “last resort” referral provision is appropriate to avoid imposition of additional costs in the health care area, to encourage providers to remain in the Medicaid program, and to avoid imposing significant costs on small, low-budget providers such as day-care centers or foster homes.
              A recent change in the tax law may assist some recipients in meeting their obligations under this section. Under section 2122 of the Tax Reform Act of 1976, recipients that pay federal income tax are eligible to claim a tax deduction of up to $25,000 for architectural and transportation modifications made to improve accessibility for handicapped persons. Many physicians and dentists, among others, may be eligible for this tax deduction. See 42 FR 17870 (April 4, 1977), adopting 26 CFR 7.190.
              Several commenters expressed concern about the feasibility of compliance with the program accessibility standard. The Secretary believes that the standard is flexible enough to permit recipients to devise ways to make their programs accessible short of extremely expensive or impractical physical changes in facilities. Accordingly, the section does not allow for waivers. The Department is ready at all times to provide technical assistance to recipients in meeting their program accessibility responsibilities. For this purpose, the Department is establishing a special technical assistance unit. Recipients are encouraged to call upon the unit staff for advice and guidance both on structural modifications and on other ways of meeting the program accessibility requirement.
              Paragraph (d) has been amended to require recipients to make all nonstructural adjustments necessary for meeting the program accessibility standard within sixty days. Only where structural changes in facilities are necessary will a recipient be permitted up to three years to accomplish program accessibility. It should be emphasized that the three-year time period is not a waiting period and that all changes must be accomplished as expeditiously as possible. Further, it is the Department's belief, after consultation with experts in the field, that outside ramps to buildings can be constructed quickly and at relatively low cost. Therefore, it will be expected that such structural additions will be made promptly to comply with § 84.22(d).
              The regulation continues to provide, as did the proposed version, that a recipient planning to achieve program accessibility by making structural changes must develop a transition plan for such changes within six months of the effective date of the regulation. A number of commenters suggested extending that period to one year. The secretary believes that such an extension is unnecessary and unwise. Planning for any necessary structural changes should be undertaken promptly to ensure that they can be completed within the three-year period. The elements of the transition plan as required by the regulation remain virtually unchanged from the proposal but § 84.22(d) now includes a requirement that the recipient make the plan available for public inspection.
              Several commenters expressed concern that the program accessibility standard would result in the segregation of handicapped persons in educational institutions. The regulation will not be applied to permit such a result. See § 84.4(c)(2)(iv), prohibiting unnecessarily separate treatment; § 84.35, requiring that students in elementary and secondary schools be educated in the most integrated setting appropriate to their needs; and new § 84.43(d), applying the same standard to postsecondary education.
              We have received some comments from organizations of handicapped persons on the subject of requiring, over an extended period of time, a barrier-free environment—that is, requiring the removal of all architectural barriers in existing facilities. The Department has considered these comments but has decided to take no further action at this time concerning these suggestions, believing that such action should only be considered in light of experience in implementing the program accessibility standard.
              21. New construction. Section 84.23 requires that all new facilities, as well as alterations that could affect access to and use of existing facilities, be designed and constructed in a manner so as to make the facility accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. Section 84.23(a) has been amended so that it applies to each newly constructed facility if the construction was commenced after the effective date of the regulation. The words “if construction has commenced” will be considered to mean “if groundbreaking has takenplace.” Thus, a recipient will not be required to alter the design of a facility that has progressed beyond groundbreaking prior to the effective date of the regulation.

              Paragraph (b) requires certain alterations to conform to the requirement of physical accessibility in paragraph (a). If an alteration is undertaken to a portion of a building the accessibility of which could be improved by the manner in which the alteration is carried out, the alteration must be made in that manner. Thus, if a doorway or wall is being altered, the door or other wall opening must be made wide enough to accommodate wheelchairs. On the other hand, if the alteration consists of altering ceilings, the provisions of this section are not applicable because this alteration cannot be done in a way that affects the accessibility of that portion of the building. The phrase “to the maximum extent feasible” has been added to allow for the occasional case in which the nature of an existing facility is such as to make it impractical or prohibitively expensive to renovate the building in a manner that results in its being entirely barrier-free. In all such cases, however, the alteration should provide the maximum amount of physical accessibility feasible.
              As proposed, § 84.23(c) required compliance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard on building accessibility as the minimum necessary for compliance with the accessibility requirement of § 84.23 (a) and (b). The regerence to the ANSI standard created some ambiguity, since the standard itself provides for waivers where other methods are equally effective in providing accessibility to the facility. Moreover, the Secretary does not wish to discourage innovation in barrier-free construction by requiring absolute adherence to a rigid design standard. Accordingly, § 84.23 (c) has been revised to permit departures from particular requirements of the ANSI standard where the recipient can demonstrate that equivalent access to the facility is provided.
              Section 84.23(d) of the proposed regulation, providing for a limited deferral of action concerning facilities that are subject to section 502 as well as section 504 of the Act, has been deleted. The Secretary believes that the provision is unnecessary and inappropriate to this regulation. The Department will, however, seek to coordinate enforcement activities under this regulation with those of the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
              subpart d—preschool, elementary, and secondary education
              Subpart D sets forth requirements for nondiscrimination in preschool, elementary, secondary, and adult education programs and activities, including secondary vocational education programs. In this context, the term “adult education” refers only to those educational programs and activities for adults that are operated by elementary and secondary schools.
              The provisions of Subpart D apply to state and local educational agencies. Although the subpart applies, in general, to both public and private education programs and activities that are federally assisted, §§ 84.32 and 84.33 apply only to public programs and § 84.39 applies only to private programs; §§ 84.35 and 84.36 apply both to public programs and to those private programs that include special services for handicapped students.

              Subpart B generally conforms to the standards established for the education of handicapped persons in Mills v. Board of Education of the District of Columbia, 348 F. Supp. 866 (D.D.C. 1972), Pennsylvania Association for Retarded Children v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 344 F. Supp. 1257 (E.D. 1971), 343 F. Supp. 279 (E.D. Pa. 1972), and Lebanks v. Spears, 60, F.R.D. 135 (E.D. La. 1973), as well as in the Education of the Handicapped Act, as amended by Pub. L. 94-142 (the EHA).
              The basic requirements common to those cases, to the EHA, and to this regulation are (1) that handicapped persons, regardless of the nature or severity of their handicap, be provided a free appropriate public education, (2) that handicapped students be educated with nonhandicapped students to the maximum extent appropriate to their needs, (3) that educational agencies undertake to identify and locate all unserved handicapped children, (4) that evaluation procedures be improved in order to avoid the inappropriate education that results from the misclassification of students, and (5) that procedural safeguard be established to enable parents and guardians to influence decisions regarding the evaluation and placement of their children. These requirements are designed to ensure that no handicapped child is excluded from school on the basis of handicap and, if a recipient demonstrates that placement in a regular educational setting cannot be achieved satisfactorily, that the student is provided with adequate alternative services suited to the student's needs without additional cost to the student's parents or guardian. Thus, a recipient that operates a public school system must either educate handicapped children in its regular program or provide such children with an appropriate alternative education at public expense.
              It is not the intention of the Department, except in extraordinary circumstances, to review the result of individual placement and other educational decisions, so long as the school district complies with the “process” requirements of this subpart (concerning identification and location, evaluation, and due process procedures). However, the Department will place a high priority on investigating cases which may involve exclusion of a child from the education system or a pattern or practice of discriminatory placements or education.
              22. Location and notification. Section 84.32 requires public schools to take steps annually to identify and locate handicapped children who are not receiving an education and to publicize to handicapped children and their parents the rights and duties established by section 504 and this regulation. This section has been shortened without substantive change.
              
              23. Free appropriate public education. Former §§ 84.34 (“Free education”) and 84.36(a) (“Suitable education”) have been consolidated and revised in new § 84.33. Under § 84.34(a), a recipient is responsible for providing a free appropriate public education to each qualified handicapped person who is in the recipient's jurisdiction. The word “in” encompasses the concepts of both domicile and actual residence. If a recipient places a child in a program other than its own, it remains financially responsible for the child, whether or not the other program is operated by another recipient or educational agency. Moreover, a recipient may not place a child in a program that is inappropriate or that otherwise violates the requirements of Subpart D. And in no case may a recipient refuse to provide services to a handicapped child in its jurisdiction because of another person's or entity's failure to assume financial responsibility.
              Section 84.33(b) concerns the provision of appropriate educational services to handicapped children. To be appropriate, such services must be designed to meet handicapped children's individual educational needs to the same extent that those of nonhandicapped children are met. An appropriate education could consist of education in regular classes, education in regular classes with the use of supplementary services, or special education and related services. Special education may include specially designed instruction in classrooms, at home, or in private or public institutions and may be accompanied by such related services as developmental, corrective, and other supportive services (including psychological, counseling, and medical diagnostic services). The placement of the child must however, be consistent with the requirements of § 84.34 and be suited to his or her educational needs.
              The quality of the educational services provided to handicapped students must equal that of the services provided to nonhandicapped students; thus, handicapped student's teachers must be trained in the instruction of persons with the handicap in question and appropriate materials and equipment must be available. The Department is aware that the supply of adequately trained teachers may, at least at the outset of the imposition of this requirement, be insufficient to meet the demand of all recipients. This factor will be considered in determining the appropriateness of the remedy for noncompliance with this section. A new § 84.33(b)(2) has been added, which allows this requirement to be met through the full implementation of an individualized education program developed in accordance with the standards of the EHA.
              Paragraph (c) of § 84.33 sets forth the specific financial obligations of a recipient. If a recipient does not itself provide handicapped persons with the requisite services, it must assume the cost of any alternate placement. If, however, a recipient offers adequate services and if alternate placement is chosen by a student's parent or guardian, the recipient need not assume the cost of the outside services. (If the parent or guardian believes that his or her child cannot be suitably educated in the recipient's program, he or she may make use of the procedures established in § 84.36.) Under this paragraph, a recipient's obligation extends beyond the provision of tuition payments in the case of placement outside the regular program. Adequate transportation must also be provided. Recipients must also pay for psychological services and those medical services necessary for diagnostic and evaluative purposes.
              If the recipient places a student, because of his or her handicap, in a program that necessitates his or her being away from home, the payments must also cover room and board and nonmedical care (including custodial and supervisory care). When residential care is necessitated not by the student's handicap but by factors such as the student's home conditions, the recipient is not required to pay the cost of room and board.
              Two new sentences have been added to paragraph (c)(1) to make clear that a recipient's financial obligations need not be met solely through its own funds. Recipients may rely on funds from any public or private source including insurers and similar third parties.
              The EHA requires a free appropriate education to be provided to handicapped children “no later than September 1, 1978,” but section 504 contains no authority for delaying enforcement. To resolve this problem, a new paragraph (d) has been added to § 84.33. Section 84.33(d) requires recipients to achieve full compliance with the free appropriate public education requirements of § 84.33 as expeditiously as possible, but in no event later than September 1, 1978. The provision also makes clear that, as of the effective date of this regulation, no recipient may exclude a qualified handicapped child from its educational program. This provision against exclusion is consistent with the order of providing services set forth in section 612(3) of the EHA, which places the highest priority on providing services to handicapped children who are not receiving an education.
              24. Educational setting. Section 84.34 prescribes standards for educating handicapped persons with nonhandicapped persons to the maximum extent appropriate to the needs of the handicapped person in question. A handicapped student may be removed from the regular educational setting only where the recipient can show that the needs of the student would, on balance, be served by placement in another setting.
              
              Although under § 84.34, the needs of the handicapped person are determinative as to proper placement, it should be stressed that, where a handicapped student is so disruptive in a regular classroom that the education of other students is significantly impaired, the needs of the handicapped child cannot be met in that environment. Therefore, regular placement would not be appropriate to his or her needs and would not be required by § 84.34.
              Among the factors to be considered in placing a child is the need to place the child as close to home as possible. A new sentence has been added to paragraph (a) requiring recipients to take this factor into account. As pointed out in several comments, the parents' right under § 84.36 to challenge the placement of their child extends not only to placement in special classes or separate schools but also to placement in a distant school and, in particular, to residential placement. An equally appropriate educational program may exist closer to home; this issue may be raised by the parent or guardian under §§ 84.34 and 84.36.
              New paragraph (b) specified that handicapped children must also be provided nonacademic services in as integrated a setting as possible. This requirement is especially important for children whose educational needs necessitate their being solely with other handicapped children during most of each day. To the maximum extent appropriate, children in residential settings are also to be provided opportunities for participation with other children.
              Section 84.34(c) (formerly § 84.38) requires that any facilities that are identifiable as being for handicapped students be comparable in quality to other facilities of the recipient. A number of comments objected to this section on the basis that it encourages the creation and maintenance of such facilities. This is not the intent of the provision. A separate facility violates section 504 unless it is indeed necessary to the provision of an appropriate education to certain handicapped students. In those instances in which such facilities are necessary (as might be the case, for example, for severely retarded persons), this provision requires that the educational services provided be comparable to those provided in the facilities of the recipient that are not identifiable as being for handicapped persons.
              25. Evaluation and placement. Because the failure to provide handicapped persons with an appropriate education is so frequently the result of misclassification or misplacement, § 84.33(b)(1) makes compliance with its provisions contingent upon adherence to certain procedures designed to ensure appropriate classification and placement. These procedures, delineated in §§ 84.35 and 84.36, are concerned with testing and other evaluation methods and with procedural due process rights.
              Section 84.35(a) requires that an individual evaluation be conducted before any action is taken with respect either to the initial placement of a handicapped child in a regular or special education program or to any subsequent significant change in that placement. Thus, a full reevaluation is not required every time an adjustment in placement is made. “Any action” includes denials of placement.
              Paragraphs (b) and (c) of § 84.35 establishes procedures designed to ensure that children are not misclassified, unnecessarily labeled as being handicapped, or incorrectly placed because of inappropriate selection, administration, or interpretation of evaluation materials. This problem has been extensively documented in “Issues in the Classification of Children,” a report by the Project on Classification of Exceptional Children, in which the HHS Interagency Task Force participated. The provisions of these paragraphs are aimed primarily at abuses in the placement process that result from misuse of, or undue or misplaced reliance on, standardized scholastic aptitude tests.
              Paragraph (b) has been shortened but not substantively changed. The requirement in former subparagraph (1) that recipients provide and administer evaluation materials in the native language of the student has been deleted as unnecessary, since the same requirement already exists under title VI and is more appropriately covered under that statute. Subparagraphs (1) and (2) are, in general, intended to prevent misinterpretation and similar misuse of test scores and, in particular, to avoid undue reliance on general intelligence tests. Subparagraph (3) requires a recipient to administer tests to a student with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills in whatever manner is necessary to avoid distortion of the test results by the impairment. Former subparagraph (4) has been deleted as unnecessarily repetitive of the other provisions of this paragraph.
              Paragraph (c) requires a recipient to draw upon a variety of sources in the evaluation process so that the possibility of error in classification is minimized. In particular, it requires that all significant factors relating to the learning process, including adaptive behavior, be considered. (Adaptive behavior is the effectiveness with which the individual meets the standards of personal independence and social responsibility expected of his or her age and cultural group.) Information from all sources must be documented and considered by a group of persons, and the procedure must ensure that the child is placed in the most integrated setting appropriate.

              The proposed regulation would have required a complete individual reevaluation of the student each year. The Department has concluded that it is inappropriate in the section 504 regulation to require full reevaluations on such a rigid schedule. Accordingly, § 84.35(c) requires periodic reevaluations and specifies that reevaluations in accordance with the EHA will constitute compliance. The proposed regulation implementing the EHA allows reevaluation at three-year intervals except under certain specified circumstances.
              Under § 84.36, a recipient must establish a system of due process procedures to be afforded to parents or guardians before the recipient takes any action regarding the identification, evaluation, or educational placement of a person who, because of handicap, needs or is believed to need special education or related services. This section has been revised. Because the due process procedures of the EHA, incorporated by reference in the proposed section 504 regulation, are inappropriate for some recipients not subject to that Act, the section now specifies minimum necessary procedures: notice, a right to inspect records, an impartial hearing with a right to representation by counsel, and a review procedure. The EHA procedures remain one means of meeting the regulation's due process requirements, however, and are recommended to recipients as a model.
              26. Nonacademic services. Section 84.37 requires a recipient to provide nonacademic and extracurricular services and activities in such manner as is necessary to afford handicapped students an equal opportunity for participation. Because these services and activities are part of a recipient's education program, they must, in accordance with the provisions of § 84.34, be provided in the most integrated setting appropriate.
              Revised paragraph (c)(2) does permit separation or differentiation with respect to the provision of physical education and athletics activities, but only if qualified handicapped students are also allowed the opportunity to compete for regular teams or participate in regular activities. Most handicapped students are able to participate in one or more regular physical education and athletics activities. For example, a student in a wheelchair can participate in regular archery course, as can a deaf student in a wrestling course.
              Finally, the one-year transition period provided in former § 84.37(a)(3) was deleted in response to the almost unanimous objection of commenters to that provision.
              27. Preschool and adult education. Section 84.38 prohibits discrimination on the basis of handicap in preschool and adult education programs. Former paragraph (b), which emphasized that compensatory programs for disadvantaged children are subject to section 504, has been deleted as unnecessary, since it is comprehended by paragraph (a).
              28. Private education. Section 84.39 sets forth the requirements applicable to recipients that operate private education programs and activities. The obligations of these recipients have been changed in two significant respects: First, private schools are subject to the evaluation and due process provisions of the subpart only if they operate special education programs; second, under § 84.39(b), they may charge more for providing services to handicapped students than to nonhandicapped students to the extent that additional charges can be justified by increased costs.
              Paragraph (a) of § 84.39 is intended to make clear that recipients that operate private education programs and activities are not required to provide an appropriate education to handicapped students with special educational needs if the recipient does not offer programs designed to meet those needs. Thus, a private school that has no program for mentally retarded persons is neither required to admit such a person into its program nor to arrange or pay for the provision of the person's education in another program. A private recipient without a special program for blind students, however, would not be permitted to exclude, on the basis of blindness, a blind applicant who is able to participate in the regular program with minor adjustments in the manner in which the program is normally offered.
              subpart e—postsecondary education
              Subpart E prescribes requirements for nondiscrimination in recruitment, admission, and treatment of students in postsecondary education programs and activities, including vocational education.
              29. Admission and recruitment. In addition to a general prohibition of discrimination on the basis of handicap in § 84.42(a), the regulation delineates, in § 84.42(b), specific prohibitions concerning the establishment of limitations on admission of handicapped students, the use of tests or selection criteria, and preadmission inquiry. Several changes have been made in this provision.
              Section 84.42(b) provides that postsecondary educational institutions may not use any test or criterion for admission that has a disproportionate, adverse effect on handicapped persons unless it has been validated as a predictor of academic success and alternate tests or criteria with a less disproportionate, adverse effect are shown by the Department to be available. There are two significant changes in this approach from the July 16 proposed regulation.

              First, many commenters expressed concern that § 84.42(b)(2)(ii) could be interpreted to require a “global search” for alternate tests that do not have a disproportionate, adverse impact on handicapped persons. this was not the intent of the provision and, therefore, it has been amended to place the burden on the Director of the Office for Civil Rights, rather than on the recipient, to identify alternate tests.
              Second, a new paragraph (d), concerning validity studies, has been added. Under the proposed regulation, overall success in an education program, not just first-year grades, was the criterion against which admissions tests were to be validated. This approach has been changed to reflect the comment of professional testing services that use of first year grades would be less disruptive of present practice and that periodic validity studies against overall success in the education program would be sufficient check on the reliability of first-year grades.
              Section 84.42(b)(3) also requires a recipient to assure itself that admissions tests are selected and administered to applicants with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills in such manner as is necessary to avoid unfair distortion of test results. Methods have been developed for testing the aptitude and achievement of persons who are not able to take written tests or even to make the marks required for mechanically scored objective tests; in addition, methods for testing persons with visual or hearing impairments are available. A recipient, under this paragraph, must assure itself that such methods are used with respect to the selection and administration of any admissions tests that it uses.

              Section 84.42(b)(3)(iii) has been amended to require that admissions tests be administered in facilities that, on the whole, are accessible. In this context, on the whole means that not all of the facilities need be accessible so long as a sufficient number of facilities are available to handicapped persons.
              Revised § 84.42(b)(4) generally prohibits preadmission inquiries as to whether an applicant has a handicap. The considerations that led to this revision are similar to those underlying the comparable revision of § 84.14 on preemployment inquiries. The regulation does, however, allow inquiries to be made, after admission but before enrollment, as to handicaps that may require accommodation.
              New paragraph (c) parallels the section on preemployment inquiries and allows postsecondary institutions to inquire about applicants' handicaps before admission, subject to certain safeguards, if the purpose of the inquiry is to take remedial action to correct past discrimination or to take voluntary action to overcome the limited participation of handicapped persons in postsecondary educational institutions.
              Proposed § 84.42(c), which would have allowed different admissions criteria in certain cases for handicapped persons, was widely misinterpreted in comments from both handicapped persons and recipients. We have concluded that the section is unnecessary, and it has been deleted.
              30. Treatment of students. Section 84.43 contains general provisions prohibiting the discriminatory treatment of qualified handicapped applicants. Paragraph (b) requires recipients to ensure that equal opportunities are provided to its handicapped students in education programs and activities that are not operated by the recipient. The recipient must be satisfied that the outside education program or activity as a whole is nondiscriminatory. For example, a college must ensure that discrimination on the basis of handicap does not occur in connection with teaching assignments of student teachers in elementary or secondary schools not operated by the college. Under the “as a whole” wording, the college could continue to use elementary or secondary school systems that discriminate if, and only if, the college's student teaching program, when viewed in its entirety, offered handicapped student teachers the same range and quality of choice in student teaching assignments afforded nonhandicapped students.
              Paragraph (c) of this section prohibits a recipient from excluding qualified handicapped students from any course, course of study, or other part of its education program or activity. This paragraph is designed to eliminate the practice of excluding handicapped persons from specific courses and from areas of concentration because of factors such as ambulatory difficulties of the student or assumptions by the recipient that no job would be available in the area in question for a person with that handicap.
              New paragraph (d) requires postsecondary institutions to operate their programs and activities so that handicapped students are provided services in the most integrated setting appropriate. Thus, if a college had several elementary physics classes and had moved one such class to the first floor of the science building to accommodate students in wheelchairs, it would be a violation of this paragraph for the college to concentrate handicapped students with no mobility impairments in the same class.
              31. Academic adjustments. Paragraph (a) of § 84.44 requires that a recipient make certain adjustments to academic requirements and practices that discriminate or have the effect of discriminating on the basis of handicap. This requirement, like its predecessor in the proposed regulation, does not obligate an institution to waive course or other academic requirements. But such institutions must accommodate those requirements to the needs of individual handicapped students. For example, an institution might permit an otherwise qualified handicapped student who is deaf to substitute an art appreciation or music history course for a required course in music appreciation or could modify the manner in which the music appreciation course is conducted for the deaf student. It shoud be stressed that academic requirements that can be demonstrated by the recipient to be essential to its program of instruction or to particular degrees need not be changed.
              Paragraph (b) provides that postsecondary institutions may not impose rules that have the effect of limiting the participation of handicapped students in the education program. Such rules include prohibition of tape recorders or braillers in classrooms and dog guides in campus buildings. Several recipients expressed concern about allowing students to tape record lectures because the professor may later want to copyright the lectures. This problem may be solved by requiring students to sign agreements that they will not release the tape recording or transcription or otherwise hinder the professor's ability to obtain a copyright.
              Paragraph (c) of this section, concerning the administration of course examinations to students with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills, parallels the regulation's provisions on admissions testing (§ 84.42(b)) and will be similarly interpreted.
              Under § 84.44(d), a recipient must ensure that no handicapped student is subject to discrimination in the recipient's program because of the absence of necessary auxiliary educational aids. Colleges and universities expressed concern about the costs of compliance with this provision.
              The Department emphasizes that recipients can usually meet this obligation by assisting students in using existing resources for auxiliary aids such as state vocational rehabilitation agencies and private charitable organizations. Indeed, the Department anticipates that the bulk of auxiliary aids will be paid for by state and private agencies, not by colleges or universities. In those circumstances where the recipient institution must provide the educational auxiliary aid, the institution has flexibility in choosing the methods by which the aids will be supplied. For example, some universities have used students to work with the institution's handicapped students. Other institutions have used existing private agencies that tape texts for handicapped students free of charge in order to reduce the number of readers needed for visually impaired students.
              As long as no handicapped person is excluded from a program because of the lack of an appropriate aid, the recipient need not have all such aids on hand at all times. Thus, readers need not be available in the recipient's library at all times so long as the schedule of times when a reader is available is established, is adhered to, and is sufficient. Of course, recipients are not required to maintain a complete braille library.
              32. Housing. Section 84.45(a) requires postsecondary institutions to provide housing to handicapped students at the same cost as they provide it to other students and in a convenient, accessible, and comparable manner. Commenters, particularly blind persons pointed out that some handicapped persons can live in any college housing and need not wait to the end of the transition period in Subpart C to be offered the same variety and scope of housing accommodations given to nonhandicapped persons. The Department concurs with this position and will interpret this section accordingly.
              A number of colleges and universities reacted negatively to paragraph (b) of this section. It provides that, if a recipient assists in making off-campus housing available to its students, it should develop and implement procedures to assure itself that off-campus housing, as a whole, is available to handicapped students. Since postsecondary institutions are presently required to assure themselves that off-campus housing is provided in a manner that does not discriminate on the basis of sex (§ 86.32 of the title IX regulation), they may use the procedures developed under title IX in order to comply with § 84.45(b). It should be emphasized that not every off-campus living accommodation need be made accessible to handicapped persons.
              33. Health and insurance. Section 84.46 of the proposed regulation, providing that recipients may not discriminate on the basis of handicap in the provision of health related services, has been deleted as duplicative of the general provisions of § 84.43. This deletion represents no change in the obligation of recipients to provide nondiscriminatory health and insurance plans. The Department will continue to require that nondiscriminatory health services be provided to handicapped students. Recipients are not required, however, to provide specialized services and aids to handicapped persons in health programs. If, for example, a college infirmary treats only simple disorders such as cuts, bruises, and colds, its obligation to handicapped persons is to treat such disorders for them.
              34. Financial assistance. Section 84.46(a) (formerly § 84.47), prohibiting discrimination in providing financial assistance, remains substantively the same. It provides that recipients may not provide less assistance to or limit the eligibility of qualified handicapped persons for such assistance, whether the assistance is provided directly by the recipient or by another entity through the recipient's sponsorship. Awards that are made under wills, trusts, or similar legal instruments in a discriminatory manner are permissible, but only if the overall effect of the recipient's provision of financial assistance is not discriminatory on the basis of handicap.

              It will not be considered discriminatory to deny, on the basis of handicap, an athletic scholarship to a handicapped person if the handicap renders the person unable to qualify for the award. For example, a student who has a neurological disorder might be denied a varsity football scholarship on the basis of his inability to play football, but a deaf person could not, on the basis of handicap, be denied a scholarship for the school's diving team. The deaf person could, however, be denied a scholarship on the basis of comparative diving ability.
              Commenters on § 84.46(b), which applies to assistance in obtaining outside employment for students, expressed similar concerns to those raised under § 84.43(b), concerning cooperative programs. This paragraph has been changed in the same manner as § 84.43(b) to include the “as a whole” concept and will be interpreted in the same manner as § 84.43(b).
              35. Nonacademic services. Section 84.47 (formerly § 84.48) establishes nondiscrimination standards for physical education and athletics counseling and placement services, and social organizations. This section sets the same standards as does § 84.38 of Subpart D, discussed above, and will be interpreted in a similar fashion.
              subpart f—health, welfare, and social services
              Subpart F applies to recipients that operate health, welfare, and social service programs. The Department received fewer comments on this subpart than on others.
              Although many commented that Subpart F lacked specificity, these commenters provided neither concrete suggestions nor additions. Nevertheless, some changes have been made, pursuant to comment, to clarify the obligations of recipients in specific areas. In addition, in an effort to reduce duplication in the regulation, the section governing recipients providing health services (proposed § 84.52) has been consolidated with the section regulating providers of welfare and social services (proposed § 84.53). Since the separate provisions that appeared in the proposed regulation were almost identical, no substantive change should be inferred from their consolidation.
              Several commenters asked whether Subpart F applies to vocational rehabilitation agencies whose purpose is to assist in the rehabilitation of handicapped persons. To the extent that such agencies receive financial assistance from the Department, they are covered by Subpart F and all other relevant subparts of the regulation. Nothing in this regulation, however, precludes such agencies from servicing only handicapped persons. Indeed, § 84.4(c) permits recipients to offer services or benefits that are limited by federal law to handicapped persons or classes of handicapped persons.
              Many comments suggested requiring state health, welfare, and social service agencies to take an active role in the enforcement of section 504 with regard to local health and social service providers. The Department believes that the possibility for federal-state cooperation in the administration and enforcement of section 504 warrants further consideration. Moreover, the Department will rely largely on state Medicaid agencies, as it has under title VI, for monitoring compliance by individual Medicaid providers.
              A number of comments also discussed whether section 504 should be read to require payment of compensation to institutionalized handicapped patients who perform services for the institution in which they reside. The Department of Labor has recently issued a proposed regulation under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) that covers the question of compensation for institutionalized persons, 42 FR 15224 (March 18, 1977). This Department will seek information and comment from the Department of Labor concerning that agency's experience administering the FLSA regulation.
              36. Health, welfare, and other social service providers. As already noted, § 84.53 has been combined with proposed § 84.53 into a single section covering health, welfare, and other social services. Section 84.52(a) has been expanded in several respects. The addition of new paragraph (a)(2) is intended to make clear the basic requirement of equal opportunity to receive benefits or services in the health, welfare, and social service areas. The paragraph parallels §§ 84.4(b)(ii) and 84.43(b). New paragraph (a)(3) requires the provision of effective benefits or services, as defined in § 84.4(b)(2) (i.e., benefits or services which “afford handicapped persons equal opportunity to obtain the same result (or) to gain the same benefit * * *”).
              Section 84.52(a) also includes provisions concerning the limitation of benefits or services to handicapped persons and the subjection of handicapped persons to different eligibility standards. (These provisions were previously included in the welfare recipient section (§ 84.53(a)).) One common misconception about the regulation is that it would require specialized hospitals and other health care providers to treat all handicapped persons. The regulation makes no such requirement. Thus, a burn treatment center need not provide other types of medical treatment to handicapped persons unless it provides such medical services to nonhandicapped persons. It could not, however, refuse to treat the burns of a deaf person because of his or her deafness.
              Commenters had raised the question of whether the prohibition against different standards of eligibility might preclude recipients from providing special services to handicapped persons or classes of handicapped persons. The regulation will not be so interpreted, and the specific section in question has been eliminated. Section 84.4(c) makes clear that special programs for handicapped persons are permitted.

              A new paragraph (a)(5) concerning the provision of different or separate services or benefits has been added. This provision prohibits such treatment unless necessary to provide qualified handicapped persons with benefits and services that are as effective as those provided to others.
              Section 84.52(a)(2) of the proposed regulation has been omitted as duplicative of revised § 84.22 (b) and (c) in Subpart C. As discussed above, these sections permit health care providers to arrange to meet patients in accessible facilities and to make referrals in carefully limited circumstances.
              Section 84.52(a)(3) of the proposed regulation has been redesignated § 84.52(b) and has been amended to cover written material concerning waivers of rights or consent to treatment as well as general notices concerning health benefits or services. The section requires the recipient to ensure that qualified handicapped persons are not denied effective notice because of their handicap. For example, recipients could use several different types of notice in order to reach persons with impaired vision or hearing, such as brailled messages, radio spots, and tacticle devices on cards or envelopes to inform blind persons of the need to call the recipient for further information.
              Sections 84.52(a)(4), 84.52(a)(5), and 84.52(b) have been omitted from the regulation as unnecessary. They are clearly comprehended by the more general sections banning discrimination.
              Section 84.52(c) is a new section requiring recipient hospitals to establish a procedure for effective communication with persons with impaired hearing for the purpose of providing emergency health care. Although it would be appropriate for a hospital to fulfill its responsibilities under this section by having a full-time interpreter for the deaf on staff, there may be other means of accomplishing the desired result of assuring that some means of communication is immediately available for deaf persons needing emergency treatment.
              Section 84.52(d), also a new provision, requires recipients with fifteen or more employees to provide appropriate auxiliary aids for persons with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills. Further, the Director may require a small provider to furnish auxiliary aids where the provision of aids would not adversely affect the ability of the recipient to provide its health benefits or service. Thus although a small nonprofit neighborhood clinic might not be obligated to have available an interpreter for deaf persons, the Director may require provision of such aids as may be reasonably available to ensure that qualified handicapped persons are not denied appropriate benefits or services because of their handicaps.
              37. Treatment of Drug Addicts and Alcoholics. Section 84.53 is a new section that prohibits discrimination in the treatment and admission of drug and alcohol addicts to hospitals and outpatient facilities. This section is included pursuant to section 407, Pub. L. 92-255, the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972 (21 U.S.C. 1174), as amended, and section 321, Public Law 91-616, the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4581), as amended, and section 321, Public Law 93-282. Section 504 itself also prohibits such discriminatory treatment and, in addition, prohibits similar discriminatory treatment by other types of health providers. Section 84.53 prohibits discrimination against drug abusers by operators of outpatient facilities, despite the fact that section 407 pertains only to hospitals, because of the broader application of section 504. This provision does not mean that all hospitals and outpatient facilities must treat drug addiction and alcoholism. It simply means, for example, that a cancer clinic may not refuse to treat cancer patients simply because they are also alcoholics.
              38. Education of institutionalized persons. The regulation retains § 84.54 of the proposed regulation that requires that an appropriate education be provided to qualified handicapped persons who are confined to residential institutions or day care centers.
              subpart g—procedures
              In § 84.61, the Secretary has adopted the title VI complaint and enforcement procedures for use in implementing section 504 until such time as they are superseded by the issuance of a consolidated procedural regulation applicable to all of the civil rights statutes and executive orders administered by the Department.
            
            
              Pt. 84, App. B
              Appendix B to Part 84—Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs [Note]
              
                Note:
                For the text of these guidelines, see 45 CFR part 80, appendix B.
              
              [44 FR 17168, Mar. 21, 1979]
            
            
              Pt. 84, App. C
              Appendix C to Part 84—Guidelines Relating to Health Care for Handicapped Infants
              (a) Interpretative guidelines relating to the applicability of this part to health care for handicapped infants. The following are interpretative guidelines of the Department set forth here to assist recipients and the public in understanding the Department's interpretation of section 504 and the regulations contained in this part as applied to matters concerning health care for handicapped infants. These interpretative guidelines are illustrative; they do not independently establish rules of conduct.
              
              (1) With respect to programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance, health care providers may not, solely on the basis of present or anticipated physical or mental impairments of an infant, withhold treatment or nourishment from the infant who, in spite of such impairments, will medically benefit from the treatment or nourishment.
              (2) Futile treatment or treatment that will do no more than temporarily prolong the act of dying of a terminally ill infant is not considered treatment that will medically benefit the infant.
              (3) In determining whether certain possible treatments will be medically beneficial to an infant, reasonable medical judgments in selecting among alternative courses of treatment will be respected.
              (4) Section 504 and the provisions of this part are not applicable to parents (who are not recipients of Federal financial assistance). However, each recipient health care provider must in all aspects of its health care programs receiving Federal financial assistance provide health care and related services in a manner consistent with the requirements of section 504 and this part. Such aspects includes decisions on whether to report, as required by State law or otherwise, to the appropriate child protective services agency a suspected instance of medical neglect of a child, or to take other action to seek review or parental decisions to withhold consent for medically indicated treatment. Whenever parents make a decision to withhold consent for medically beneficial treatment or nourishment, such recipient providers may not, solely on the basis of the infant's present or anticipated future mental or physical impairments, fail to follow applicable procedures on reporting such incidents to the child protective services agency or to seek judicial review.
              (5) The following are examples of applying these interpretative guidelines. These examples are stated in the context of decisions made by recipient health care providers. Were these decisions made by parents, the guideline stated in section (a)(4) would apply. These examples assume no facts or complications other than those stated. Because every case must be examined on its individual facts, these are merely illustrative examples to assist in understanding the framework for applying the nondiscrimination requirements of section 504 and this part.
              (i) Withholding of medically beneficial surgery to correct an intestinal obstruction in an infant with Down's Syndrome when the withholding is based upon the anticipated future mental retardation of the infant and there are no medical contraindications to the surgery that would otherwise justify withholding the surgery would constitute a discriminatory act, violative of section 504.
              (ii) Withholding of treatment for medically correctable physical anomalies in children born with spina bifida when such denial is based on anticipated mental impairment paralysis or incontinence of the infant, rather than on reasonable medical judgments that treatment would be futile, too unlikely of success given complications in the particular case, or otherwise not of medical benefit to the infant, would constitute a discriminatory act, violative of section 504.
              (iii) Withholding of medical treatment for an infant born with anencephaly, who will inevitably die within a short period of time, would not constitute a discriminatory act because the treatment would be futile and do no more than temporarily prolong the act of dying.
              (iv) Withholding of certain potential treatments from a severely premature and low birth weight infant on the grounds of reasonable medical judgments concerning the improbability of success or risks of potential harm to the infant would not violate section 504.
              (b) Guidelines for HHS investigations relating to health care for handicapped infants. The following are guidelines of the Department in conducting investigations relating to health care for handicapped infants. They are set forth here to assist recipients and the public in understanding applicable investigative procedures. These guidelines do not establish rules of conduct, create or affect legally enforceable rights of any person, or modify existing rights, authorities or responsibilities pursuant to this part. These guidelines reflect the Department's recognition of the special circumstances presented in connection with complaints of suspected life-threatening noncompliance with this part involving health care for handicapped infants. These guidelines do not apply to other investigations pursuant to this part, or other civil rights statutes and rules. Deviations from these guidelines may occur when, in the judgment of the responsible Department official, other action is necessary to protect the life or health of a handicapped infant.

              (1) Unless impracticable, whenever the Department receives a complaint of suspected life-threatening noncompliance with this part in connection with health care for a handicapped infant in a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, HHS will immediately conduct a preliminary inquiry into the matter by initiating telephone contact with the recipient hospital to obtain information relating to the condition and treatment of the infant who is the subject of the complaint. The preliminary inquiry, which may include additional contact with the complainant and a requirement that pertinent records be provided to the Department, will generally be completed within 24 hours (or sooner if indicated) after receipt of the complaint.
              
              (2) Unless impracticable, whenever a recipient hospital has an Infant Care Review Committee, established and operated substantially in accordance with the provisions of 45 CFR 84.55(f), the Department will, as part of its preliminary inquiry, solicit the information available to, and the analysis and recommendations of, the ICRC. Unless, in the judgment of the responsible Department official, other action is necessary to protect the life or health of a handicapped infant, prior to initiating an on-site investigation, the Department will await receipt of this information from the ICRC for 24 hours (or less if indicated) after receipt of the complaint. The Department may require a subsequent written report of the ICRC's findings, accompanied by pertinent records and documentation.
              (3) On the basis of the information obtained during preliminary inquiry, including information provided by the hospital (including the hospital's ICRC, if any), information provided by the complainant, and all other information obtained, the Department will determine whether there is a need for an on-site investigation of the complaint. Whenever the Department determines that doubt remains that the recipient hospital or some other recipient is in compliance with this part or additional documentation is desired to substantiate a conclusion, the Department will initiate an on-site investigation or take some other appropriate action. Unless impracticable, prior to initiating an on-site investigation, the Department's medical consultant (referred to in paragraph 6) will contact the hospital's ICRC or appropriate medical personnel of the recipient hospital.
              (4) In conducting on-site investigations, when a recipient hospital has an ICRC established and operated substantially in accordance with the provisions of 45 CFR 84.55(f), the investigation will begin with, or include at the earliest practicable time, a meeting with the ICRC or its designees. In all on-site investigations, the Department will make every effort to minimize any potential inconvenience or disruption, accommodate the schedules of health care professionals and avoid making medical records unavailable. The Department will also seek to coordinate its investigation with any related investigations by the state child protective services agency so as to minimize potential disruption.
              (5) It is the policy of the Department to make no comment to the public or media regarding the substance of a pending preliminary inquiry or investigation.
              (6) The Department will obtain the assistance of a qualified medical consultant to evaluate the medical information (including medical records) obtained in the course of a preliminary inquiry or investigation. The name, title and telephone number of the Department's medical consultant will be made available to the recipient hospital. The Department's medical consultant will, if appropriate, contact medical personnel of the recipient hospital in connection with the preliminary inquiry, investigation or medical consultant's evaluation. To the extent practicable, the medical consultant will be a specialist with respect to the condition of the infant who is the subject of the preliminary inquiry or investigation. The medical consultant may be an employee of the Department or another person who has agreed to serve, with or without compensation, in that capacity.
              (7) The Department will advise the recipient hospital of its conclusions as soon as possible following the completion of a preliminary inquiry or investigation. Whenever final administrative findings following an investigation of a complaint of suspected life-threatening noncompliance cannot be made promptly, the Department will seek to notify the recipient and the complainant of the Department's decision on whether the matter will be immediately referred to the Department of Justice pursuant to 45 CFR 80.8.
              (8) Except as necessary to determine or effect compliance, the Department will (i) in conducting preliminary inquiries and investigations, permit information provided by the recipient hospital to the Department to be furnished without names or other identifying information relating to the infant and the infant's family; and (ii) to the extent permitted by law, safeguard the confidentiality of information obtained.
              [49 FR 1653, Jan. 12, 1984]
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 85
          PART 85—ENFORCEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF HANDICAP IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
          
            Sec.
            85.1
            Purpose.
            85.2
            Application.
            85.3
            Definitions.
            85.4-85.10
            [Reserved]
            85.11
            Self-evaluation.
            85.12
            Notice.
            85.13-85.20
            [Reserved]
            85.21
            General prohibitions against discrimination.
            85.22-85.30
            [Reserved]
            85.31
            Employment.
            85.32-85.40
            [Reserved]
            85.41
            Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.
            85.42
            Program accessibility: Existing facilities.
            85.43

            Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.
            
            85.44-85.50
            [Reserved]
            85.51
            Communications.
            85.52-85.60
            [Reserved]
            85.61
            Compliance procedures.
            85.62
            Coordination and compliance responsibilities.
          
          
            Authority:
            29 U.S.C. 794.
          
          
            Source:
            53 FR 25603, July 8, 1988, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Editorial Note:
            At the request of the Department of Health and Human Services, the “Section-by-Section Analysis” portion of the preamble of the document published at 53 FR 25595, July 8, 1988, as corrected at 53 FR 26559, July 13, 1988, appears at the end of part 85.
          
          
            § 85.1
            Purpose.
            The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 119 of the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978, which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to prohibit discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or activities conducted by Executive agencies or the United States Postal Service.
          
          
            § 85.2
            Application.
            This part applies to all programs or activities conducted by the agency, except for programs or activities conducted outside the United States that do not involve individuals with handicaps in the United States.
          
          
            § 85.3
            Definitions.
            For purposes of this part, the term—
            
              Agency means the Department of Health and Human Services or any component part of the Department of Health and Human Services that conducts a program or activity covered by this part. Component agency means such component part.
            
              Assistant Attorney General means the Assistant Attorney General, Civil Rights Division, United States Department of Justice.
            
              Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or activities conducted by the agency. For example, auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired vision include readers, Brailled materials, audio recordings, and other similar services and devices. Auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired hearing include telephone handset amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing aids, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's) interpreters, notetakers, written materials, and other similar services and devices.
            
              Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the complainant's name and address and describes the agency's alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the agency of the nature and date of the alleged violation of section 504. It shall be signed by the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or her behalf. Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall describe or identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of discrimination.
            
              Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, rolling stock or other conveyances, or other real or personal property.
            
              Individual with Handicaps means any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment. As used in this definition, the phrase:
            (1) Physical or mental impairment includes:
            (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or

            (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, and drug addiction and alcoholism.
            
            (2) Major life activities includes functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
            (3) Has a record of such impairment means has a history of, or is misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
            (4) Is regarded as having an impairment means:
            (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities but is treated by the agency as constituting such a limitation.
            (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or
            (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (1) of this definition but is treated by the agency as having such an impairment.
            
              OCR means the Office for Civil Rights of the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              OCR Director/Special Assistant means the Director of the Office for Civil Rights, who serves concurrently as the Special Assistant to the Secretary for Civil Rights, or a designee of the Director/Special Assistant.
            
              Qualified individual with handicaps means:
            (1) With respect to preschool, elementary, or secondary education services provided by the agency, an individual with handicaps who is a member of a class of persons otherwise entitled by statute, regulation, or agency policy to receive educational services from the agency;
            (2) With respect to any other agency program or activity under which a person is required to perform services or to achieve a particular level of accomplishment, an individual with handicaps who meets the essential eligibility requirements and who can achieve the purpose of the program or activity without modifications in the program or activity that the agency can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in its nature; and
            (3) With respect to any other program or activity, an individual with handicaps who meets the essential eligibility requirements for participation in, or receipt of benefits from, that program or activity; and
            (4) Qualified handicapped person as that term is defined for purposes of employment in 29 CFR 1613.702(f), which is made applicable to this part by § 85.31.
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services or his/her designee.
            
              Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (29 U.S.C. 794)), as amended by the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-516, 88 Stat. 1617); the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955); the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986 (Pub. L 99-566, 100 Stat. 1810); and the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-259, 102 Stat. 28). As used in this part, section 504 applies only to programs or activities conducted by the agency and not to federally assisted programs.
          
          
            §§ 85.4-85.10
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 85.11
            Self-evaluation.
            (a) The agency shall, within one year of the effective date of this part, evaluate its current policies and practices, and the effects thereof, that do not or may not meet the requirements of this part, and, to the extent modification of any such policies and practices is required, the agency shall proceed to make the necessary modifications. Any new operating or staff divisions established within the agency shall have one year from the date of their establishment to carry out this evaluation.
            (b) The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, including individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps, to participate in the self-evaluation by submitting comments (both oral and written).

            (c) The agency shall, for at least three years following completion of the self-evaluation, maintain on file and make available for public inspection and copying—
            
            (1) A description of areas examined and any problems identified; and
            (2) A description of any modifications made.
          
          
            § 85.12
            Notice.
            The agency shall make available to employees, applicants, participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such information regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability to the programs or activities conducted by the agency, and make such information available to them in such a manner as the agency head finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by section 504 and this part.
          
          
            §§ 85.13-85.20
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 85.21
            General prohibitions against discrimination.
            (a) No qualified individual with handicaps shall, on the basis of handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the agency.
            (b) (1) The agency, in providing any aid, benefit, or service, may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, on the basis of handicap—
            (i) Deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service;
            (ii) Afford a qualified individual with handicaps an opportunity to participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service that is not equal to that afforded others;
            (iii) Provide a qualified individual with handicaps with an aid, benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement as that provided to others;
            (iv) Provide different or separate aids, benefits, or services to individuals with handicaps or to any class or individuals with handicaps than is provided to others unless such action is necessary to provide qualified individuals with handicaps with aids, benefits or services that are as effective as those provided to others;
            (v) Deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to participate as a member of a planning or advisory board; or
            (vi) Otherwise limit a qualified individual with handicaps in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by others receiving the aid, benefit, or service.
            (2) The agency may not deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to participate in programs or activities that are not separate or different, despite the existence of permissibly separate or different programs or activities.
            (3) The agency may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration the purpose or effect of which would—
            (i) Subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination on the basis of handicap; or
            (ii) Defeat or substantially impair accomplishment of the objectives of a program or activity with respect to individuals with handicaps.
            (4) The agency may not, in determining the site or location of a facility, make selections the purpose or effect of which would—
            (i) Exclude individuals with handicaps from, deny them the benefits of, or otherwise subject them to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the agency; or
            (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the objectives of a program or activity with respect to individuals with handicaps.
            (5) The agency, in the selection of procurement contractors, may not use criteria that subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination on the basis of handicap.

            (6) The agency may not administer a licensing or certification program in a manner that subjects qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination on the basis of handicap, nor may the agency establish requirements for the programs or activities of licensees or certified entities that subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination on the basis of handicap. However, the programs or activities of entities that are licensed or certified by the agency are not, themselves, covered by this part.
            (c) The exclusion of individuals without handicaps from the benefits of a program limited by Federal statute or Executive order to individuals with handicaps or the exclusion of a specific class of individuals with handicaps from a program limited by Federal statute or Executive order to a different class of individuals with handicaps is not prohibited by this part.
            (d) The agency shall administer programs and activities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals with handicaps.
          
          
            §§ 85.22-85.30
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 85.31
            Employment.
            No qualified individuals with handicaps shall, on the basis of handicap, be subjected to discrimination in employment under any program or activity conducted by the agency. The definitions, requirements, and procedures of section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (9 U.S.C. 791), as established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 9 CFR part 1613, shall apply to employment in federally conducted programs and activities.
          
          
            §§ 85.32-85.40
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 85.41
            Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.
            Except as otherwise provided in § 85.42, no qualified individual with handicaps shall, because the agency's facilities are inaccessible to or unusable by such persons, be denied the benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the agency.
          
          
            § 85.42
            Program accessibility: Existing facilities.
            (a) General. The agency shall operate each program or activity so that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. This paragraph does not—
            (1) Necessarily require the agency to make each of its existing facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps; or
            (2) Require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency has the burden of proving that compliance with § 85.42(a) would result in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the agency head or his or her designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity in question, and must be accompanied by a written statement of reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that individuals with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
            (b) Methods. (1) The agency may comply with the requirements of this section through such means as redesign of equipment, reassignment of services to accessible buildings, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, delivery of services at alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and construction of new facilities, use of accessible rolling stock, or any other methods that result in making its programs or activities readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. The agency is not required to make structural changes in existing facilities where other methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section. The agency, in making alterations to existing buildings, shall meet accessibility requirements to the extent compelled by the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), and any regulations implementing it.
            
            (2) In choosing among available methods for meeting the requirements of this section, the agency shall give priority to those methods that offer programs and activities to qualified individuals with handicaps in the most integrated setting appropriate.
            (c) Time period for compliance. The agency shall comply with the obligations established under this section within 60 days of the effective date of this part except where structural changes in facilities are undertaken; such changes shall be made within three years of the effective date of this part, but, in any event, as expeditiously as possible.
            (d) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to facilities must be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, and it is not expected that such changes can be completed within six months, the agency shall develop, within six months of the effective date of this part, a transition plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, including individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps, to participate in the development of the transition plan by submitting comments (both oral and written). A copy of the transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum—
            (1) Identify physical obstacles in the agency's facilities that limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals with handicaps;
            (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the facilities accessible;
            (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during each year of the transition period; and
            (4) Indicate the official responsible for the implementation of the plan.
          
          
            § 85.43
            Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.
            Each building or part of a building that is constructed or altered by, or on behalf of, or for the use of the agency shall be designed, constructed, or altered so as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. The definitions, requirements, and standards of the Architectural Barriers Act (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157) as established in 41 CFR 101-19.600 to 101-19.607 apply to buildings covered by this section.
          
          
            §§ 85.44-85.50
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 85.51
            Communications.
            (a) The agency shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective communication with applicants, participants, personnel of other Federal entities, and members of the public.
            (1) The agency shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where necessary to afford an individual with handicaps an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, program or activity conducted by the agency.
            (i) In determining what type of auxiliary aid is necessary, the agency shall give primary consideration to the requests of the individual with handicaps.
            (ii) The agency need not provide individually prescribed devices, readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal nature.
            (2) Where the agency communicates with applicants and beneficiaries by telephone, telecommunications devices for deaf persons (TDD's) or equally effective telecommunication systems shall be used to communicate with persons with impaired hearing.
            (b) The agency shall ensure that interested persons, including persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain information as to the existence and location of accessible services, activities, and facilities.
            (c) The agency shall provide signage at a primary entrance to each of its inaccessible facilities, directing users to a location at which they can obtain information about accessible facilities. The international symbol for accessibility shall be used at each primary entrance of an accessible facility.

            (d) This section does not require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency has the burden of proving that compliance with § 85.51 would result in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the agency head or his or her designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity in question and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action required to comply with this section would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
          
          
            §§ 85.52-85.60
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 85.61
            Compliance procedures.
            (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, this section applies to all allegations of discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or activities conducted by the agency.
            (b) Responsibility for the implementation and operation of this section shall be vested in the CCR Director/Special Assistant.
            (c) The agency shall process complaints alleging violations of section 504 with respect to employment according to the procedures established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR part 1613 pursuant to section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791) and HHS Instruction 1613-3. Part 1613 requires complainants to obtain pre-complaint counseling within 30 days of the alleged discriminatory act, and to file complaints within 15 days of the close of counseling. Responsibility for the acceptance, investigation, and the rendering of decisions with respect to employment complaints is vested in the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration.
            (d) OCR shall accept and investigate all complete complaints for which it has jurisdiction. All complete complaints must be filed within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination. OCR may extend this time for good cause.
            (e) If OCR receives a complaint over which it does not have jurisdiction, it shall promptly notify the complainant and shall make reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate Federal government entity.
            (f) OCR shall notify the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board upon receipt of any complaint alleging that a building or facility that is subject to the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), is not readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps.
            (g) Within 180 days of the receipt of a complete complaint for which it has jurisdiction, OCR shall notify the complainant of the results of the investigations in a letter containing—
            (1) Findings of fact and conclusions of law;
            (2) A description of a remedy for each violation found; and
            (3) A notice of the right to appeal.
            (h) Appeals of the findings of fact and conclusions of law or remedies must be filed by the complainant within 60 days of receipt from the agency of the letter required by § 85.61(g). OCR may extend this time for good cause.
            (i) Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed by the OCR Director/Special Assistant. Decisions on such appeals shall not be heard by the person who made the initial decision.
            (j) OCR shall notify the complainant of the results of the appeal within 60 days of the receipt of the request. If OCR determines that it needs additional information from the complainant, it shall have 60 days from the date it receives the additional information to make its determination on the appeal.

            (k) The time limits cited in (g) and (j) above may be extended with the permission of the Assistant Attorney General.
            
            (l) The agency may delegate its authority for conducting complaint investigations to a component agency or other Federal agencies, except that the authority for making the final determination may not be delegated.
            [53 FR 25603, July 8, 1988; 53 FR 26559, July 13, 1988]
          
          
            § 85.62
            Coordination and compliance responsibilities.
            (a) Each component agency shall be primarily responsible for compliance with this part in connection with the programs and activities it conducts.
            (b) The OCR Director/Special Assistant shall have the overall responsibility to coordinate implementation of this part. The OCR Director/Special Assistant shall have authority to conduct investigations, to conduct compliance reviews, and to initiate such other actions as may be necessary to facilitate and ensure effective implementation of and compliance with, this part.
            (c) If as a result of an investigation or in connection with any other compliance or implementation activity, the OCR Director/Special Assistant determines that a component agency appears to be in noncompliance with its responsibilities under this part, OCR will undertake appropriate action with the component agency to assure compliance. In the event that OCR and the component agency are unable to agree on a resolution of any particular matter, the matter shall be submitted to the Secretary for resolution.
            Pt. 85, Nt.
            
              Editorial Note:
              At the request of the Department of Health and Human Services, the “Section-by-Section Analysis” portion of the preamble of the document published at 53 FR 25595, July 8, 1988, as corrected at 53 FR 26559, July 13, 1988, follows:
            
            
              Section-by-Section Analysis of Regulation and Response to Comments
              Where no discussion of comments follows the analysis of a section, no comments have been received thereon.
              Section 85.1 Purpose.
              Section 85.1 states the purpose of the rule, which is to effectuate section 119 of the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978, which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to prohibit discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or activities conducted by Executive agencies or the United States Postal Service.
              Section 85.2 Application.
              The proposed regulation covers all programs and activities conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS” or the “agency”).
              This includes the following components:
              
              The Office of the Secretary
              Office of the Under Secretary
              Office of the Deputy Under Secretary
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Legislation
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Peronnel Administration
              Office of the General Counsel
              Office of Inspector General
              Office for Civil Rights
              Office of Consumer Affairs
              Office of Human Development Services
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Human Development Services
              Administration on Aging
              Administration for Children, Youth and Families
              Administration for Native Americans
              Administration on Developmental Disabilities
              Public Health Service
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health
              Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
              Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health Administration
              Centers for Disease Control
              Food and Drug Administration
              Health Resources and Services Administration
              Indian Health Service
              National Institutes of Health
              Health Care Financing Administration
              Social Security Administration
              Family Support Administration.
              

              Under this section, a federally conducted program or activity is, in simple terms, anything a Federal agency does. Aside from employment, there are two major categories of federally conducted programs or activities covered by this regulation: those involving general public contact as part of ongoing agency operations, and those directly administered by the agency for program beneficiaries and participants. Activities in the first category include communication with the public (telephone contacts, office walk-ins, or interviews) and the public's use of the agency's facilities. Activities in the second category include programs that provide Federal services or benefits. This regulation does not, however, apply to programs or activities conducted outside the United States that do not involve individuals with handicaps in the United States.
              The major programs subject to this regulation are listed below. Each of the components listed above occupies facilities which the public may have occasion to visit, engages in written and oral communication with the public, and hires Federal employees. In addition, some components operate programs which involve extensive public use, as summarized below:
              
              Office of the Secretary—No major operating programs or activities conducted directly by the Federal government.
              Office of Human Development Services—No major operating programs or activities conducted directly by the Federal government. 1
                
              
              
                
                  1 Financial assistance programs conducted through grants to States and other recipients are covered by the section 504 rule for federally assisted programs at 45 CFR part 84.
              
              Public Health Service—Directly operated programs include the Indian Health Service, and intramural research conducted by the National Institutes of Health. 1
              
              Health Care Financing Administration—Directly operates the Medicare program. 1
              
              Social Security Administration—Directly operates the Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance, and Supplemental Security Income for the Aged, Blind, and Disabled programs.
              Family Support Administration—No major operating programs or activities conducted directly by the Federal government. 1
              
              
              One commenter urged the inclusion of a program operated by one component of the Office of the Secretary, and for a list of all programs and activities to be appended to the regulation. In light of the fact that all programs and activities are covered, that a comprehensive list of all programs would be very lengthy, and that such a list would have to be amended frequently as new programs are enacted and existing programs expire, the above list appears to be sufficient.
              Section 85.3 Definitions.
              
                Agency. For purposes of this part agency means the Department of Health and Human Services or any component part of the Department of Health and Human Services that conducts a program or activity covered by this part. Component agency means any such component part.
              
                Assistant Attorney General. Assistant Attorney General refers to the Assistant Attorney General, Civil Rights Division, United States Department of Justice.
              
                Auxiliary aids. Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, the agency's programs or activities. The definition provides examples of commonly used auxiliary aids. Although auxiliary aids are required explicitly only by § 85.51(a)(1), they may also be necessary to meet other requirements of this regulation.
              Two commenters suggested expanding the definition of auxiliary aids and one of them further suggested re-naming auxiliary aids to read aids for reasonable accommodation and specifically include the services of attendants.
              The items set out in § 85.3 are clearly described as examples, and are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list. By giving examples rather than by including a list, other aids can be used, and, in appropriate cases, required, without amending the regulation. In certain instances, the services of attendants may indeed be appropriate; in those instances, they will fall under the definition in § 85.3. Therefore, there is no need to change the text of the regulations.
              
                Complete complaint. Complete complaint is defined to include all of the information necessary to enable the agency to investigate the complaint. The definition is necessary, because the 180 day period for the agency's investigation (see § 85.61(g)) begins when the agency receives a complete complaint.

              Two commenters stated their belief that the definition of complete complaint is too restrictive, and urged language which would give the complainant specific information as to what additional information is needed, and a further 30 days to submit such information, failing which the complaint would be dismissed without prejudice, and the complainant would be so informed.
              Procedures similar to this suggestion are currently in place, and complainants will be given reasonable opportunities to complete the information submitted. There appears to be no need to spell these procedures out in the regulation.
              
                Facility. The definition of facility is similar to that in the section 504 coordination regulation for federally assisted programs (28 CFR 41.3(f)), except that the term rolling stock or other conveyances has been added and the phrase or interest in such property has been deleted because the term facility, as used in this part, refers to structures and not to intangible property rights. It should, however, be noted that this part applies to all programs and activities conducted by the agency regardless of whether the facility in which they are conducted is owned, leased, or used on some other basis by the agency. The term facility is used in §§ 85.41, 85.42, and 85.61(f).
              One commenter proposed not to delete the phrase or interest in such property. As previously stated, the phrase or interest in such property has been deleted because the term facility, as used in this part, refers to structures and not to intangible property rights.
              
                Individual with Handicaps. The definition of individual with handicaps is identical to the definition of handicapped person appearing in the section 504 coordination regulation for federally assisted programs (28 CFR 41.31), and the HHS regulation for federally assisted programs (45 CFR 84.3(j)). Although section 103(d) of the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986 changed the statutory term handicapped individual to individual with handicaps, the legislative history of the amendment indicates that no substantive change was intended. Thus, although the term has been changed in this regulation to be consistent with the statute as amended, the definition is unchanged. In particular, although the term as revised refers to handicaps in the plural, it does not exclude persons who have only one handicap.
              One commenter suggested that we add sensory to the phrase physical or mental impairment. Since the definition set out in § 85.3 specifically includes the sense organs among the body systems whose impairment constitutes a handicap, we have not found it necessary to amend the regulation.
              
                OCR. OCR means the Office for Civil Rights of the Department of Health and Human Services.
              
                OCR Director/Special Assistant means the Director of the Office for Civil Rights, who serves concurrently as the Special Assistant to the Secretary for Civil Rights, or a designee of the OCR Director/Special Assistant.
              
                Qualified individual with handicaps. The definition of qualified individual with handicaps is a revised version of the definition of qualified handicapped person appearing in the section 504 coordination regulation for federally assisted programs (28 CFR 41.32) and the HHS section 504 regulation for federally assisted programs (45 CFR 84.3(k)).

              Paragraph (1) is an adaptation of existing definitions of qualified handicapped person for purposes of federally assisted preschool, elementary, and secondary education programs (see, e.g., 45 CFR 84.3(k)(2)). It provides that an individual with handicaps is qualified for preschool, elementary, or secondary education programs conducted by the agency, if he or she is a member of a class of persons otherwise entitled by statute, regulation, or agency policy to receive these services from the agency. In other words, an individual with handicaps is qualified if, considering all factors other than the handicapping condition, he or she is entitled to receive educational services from the agency.

              Paragraph (2) deviates from existing regulations for federally assisted programs because of intervening court decisions. It defines qualified individual with handicaps with regard to any program other than those covered by paragraph (1) under which a person is required to perform services or to achieve a level of accomplishment. In such programs, a qualified individual with handicaps is one who can achieve the purpose of the program without modifications in the program that the agency can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in its nature. This definition reflects the decision of the Supreme Court in Davis.
              

              In that case, the Court ruled that a hearing-impaired applicant to a nursing school was not a qualified handicapped person because her hearing impairment would prevent her from participating in the clinical training portion of the program. The Court found that, if the program were modified so as to enable the respondent to participate (by exempting her from the clinical training requirements), she would not receive even a rough equivalent of the training a nursing program normally gives. Id. at 410. It also found that the purpose of [the] program was to train persons who could serve the nursing profession in all customary ways, Id. at 413, and that the respondent would be unable, because of her hearing impairment, to perform some functions expected of a registered nurse. It, therefore, concluded that the school was not required by section 504 to make such modifications that would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the program. Id. at 410.

              We have incorporated the Court's language in the definition of qualified individual with handicaps in order to make clear that such a person must be able to participate in the program offered by the agency. The agency is required to make modifications in order to enable an applicant with handicaps to participate, but is not required to offer a program of a fundamentally different nature. The test is whether, with appropriate modifications, the applicant can achieve the purpose of the program offered, not whether the applicant could benefit or obtain results from some other program that the agency does not offer. Although the revised definition allows exclusion of some individuals with handicaps from some programs, it requires that an individual with handicaps who is capable of achieving the purpose of the program must be accommodated, provided that the modifications do not fundamentally alter the purpose of the program.

              One commenter proposed inserting the second sentence from the above paragraph into the regulatory text. We believe that the use of this language in the preamble is sufficient.
              

              Another commenter commended HHS for the discussion of Davis, and the cases interpreting the Davis decision, in order to explain why the language of this part does not precisely track that of the regulations concerning federally assisted recipients (45 CFR part 84). Two other commenters stated their view that incorporating Davis and Alexander into the regulation was unduly restrictive, and that the differences between this part and part 84 would result in holding HHS to a lesser standard than HHS holds recipients of Federal financial assistance.
              We believe that the Supreme Court's decision in Davis as well as the subsequent lower court decisions following Davis interpret section 504 and that it is necessary to reflect those decisions in the Department's regulation. The suggested changes are therefore not being adopted.
              The agency has the burden of demonstrating that a proposed modification would constitute a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity. Furthermore, in demonstrating that a modification would result in such an alteration, the agency must follow the procedures established in §§ 85.42(a) and 85.51(d), which are discussed below, for demonstrating that an action would result in undue financial and administrative burdens to the agency. That is, the decision must be made by the agency head or his or her designee in writing after consideration of all resources which are legally available to the agency for the purpose, and must be accompanied by an explanation of the reasons for the decision. If the agency head determines that an action would result in a fundamental alteration, the agency must consider options that would enable the individual with handicaps to achieve the purpose of the program but would not result in such an alteration.

              Two commenters suggested that the total resources of the agency be considered in determining undue burden. Because many Department funds are earmarked for specific purposes and are therefore unavailable for use elsewhere, the entire agency budget is not an appropriate consideration.

              For programs or activities which do not fall under either of the first two paragraphs, paragraph (3) adopts the existing definition of qualified handicapped person with respect to services (28 CFR 41.32(b)) in the coordination regulation for programs receiving Federal financial assistance. Under this definition, a qualified individual with handicaps is an individual with handicaps who meets the essential eligibility requirements for participation in the program or activity.
              Paragraph (4) explains that qualified individual with handicaps means qualified handicapped person as that term is defined for purposes of employment in the EEOC regulation at 29 CFR 1613.702(f), which is made applicable to this part by § 85.31. Nothing in this part changes existing regulations pertaining to employment.

              One commenter proposed using the general section 504 definition of qualified handicapped person in employment cases rather than the definition of the EEOC regulation. The definition has been supplied by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission which coordinates all employment discrimination matters throughout the government. It is also the Department's view that it is important to have a uniform definition of what constitutes employment discrimination throughout the Federal government.
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services or the Secretary's designee.
              
                Section 504. This definition makes clear that, as used in this part, section 504 applies only to programs or activities conducted by the agency itself and not to programs or activities to which it provides Federal financial assistance.
              Section 85.11 Self-evaluation.
              The agency shall conduct a self-evaluation of its compliance with section 504 within one year of the effective date of this regulation. The self-evaluation requirement is present in the existing section 504 coordination regulation for programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance (28 CFR 41.5(b)(2)) and the HHS regulations for federally assisted programs (45 CFR 84.6(k)). Experience has demonstrated the self-evaluation process to be a valuable means of establishing a working relationship with individuals with handicaps that promotes both effective and efficient implementation of section 504.
              One commenter stated that a three-year retention period is insufficient, and proposed that self-evaluations be kept indefinitely. The regulation requires the self-evaluation to be kept for a minimum of three years, but does not include a maximum. It is expected that the self-evaluation will be retained for the period provided in current document retention policies.
              Another commenter proposed that copies of the self-evaluation be made available for copying as well as for public inspection. This proposal has been adopted.
              A further commenter proposed the inclusion of provisions for assurances, transition plans and specific modification requirements. We believe that while assurances are appropriate—and can be specifically enforced—in section 504 regulations for federally assisted programs or activities, all of the entities involved in this part are under the control of the Secretary, who can issue the necessary directives; assurances are therefore not required.

              The final rule provides for participation in the self-evaluation process by individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps by submitting comments, which may include the development of transition plans. It is expected that component agencies will consult with individuals with handicaps among their own staff in the course of preparing self-evaluations.
              Because modification requirements are intended to address any potential problems in the agency's programs or activities, they are not specified in the regulation.
              Section 85.12 Notice.
              Section 85.12 requires the agency to disseminate sufficient information to employees, applicants, participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons to apprise them of the rights and protections afforded by section 504 and this part. Methods of providing this information include, for example, the publication of information in handbooks, manuals, and pamphlets that are distributed to the public to describe the agency's programs and activities or in connection with recruitment; the display of informative posters in service centers and other public places; or the broadcasting of information by television or radio.
              One commenter suggested the inclusion of a reference to recruitment materials in the above examples. Such a reference has been included.
              Section 85.21 General prohibitions against discrimination.
              Section 85.21 is an adaptation of the corresponding section of the section 504 coordination regulation for programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance (28 CFR 41.51).
              Paragraph (a) restates the nondiscrimination mandate of section 504. The remaining paragraphs in § 85.21 establish the general principles for analyzing whether any particular action of the agency violates this mandate. These principles serve as the analytical foundation for the remaining sections of the part. If the agency violates a provision in any of the subsequent sections, it will also violate one of the general prohibitions found in § 85.21. When there is no applicable subsequent provision, the general prohibitions stated in this section apply.

              Paragraph (b) prohibits overt denials of equal treatment of individuals with handicaps. The agency may not refuse to provide an individual with handicaps with an equal opportunity to participate in or benefit from its program simply because the person is handicapped. Such blatantly exclusionary practices could result from the use of irrebuttable presumptions that absolutely exclude certain classes of disabled persons (e.g., epileptics, hearing-impaired persons, persons with heart ailments) from participation in programs or activities without regard to an individual's actual ability to participate. Use of an irrebuttable presumption is permissible only when in all cases a physical condition by its very nature would prevent an individual from meeting the essential eligibility requirements for participation in the activity in question. It would be permissible, therefore, to exclude without an individual evaluation all persons who are blind in both eyes from eligibility for a license to operate a commercial vehicle in interstate commerce; but it may not be permissible to automatically disqualify all those who are blind in just one eye.
              In addition, section 504 prohibits more than just the most obvious denials of equal treatment. It is not enough to admit persons in wheelchairs to a program if the facilities in which the program is conducted are inaccessible. Paragraph (b)(1)(iii), therefore, requires that the opportunity to participate or benefit afforded to an individual with handicaps be as effective as that afforded to others. The later sections on program accessibility (§§ 85.41-43) and communication (§ 85.51) are specific applications of this principle.
              Despite the mandate of paragraph (d) that the agency administer its programs and activities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals with handicaps, paragraph (b)(1)(iv), in conjunction with paragraph (d), permits the agency to develop separate or different aids, benefits, or services when necessary to provide individuals with handicaps with an equal opportunity to participate in or benefit from the agency's programs or activities. Paragraph (b)(1)(iv) requires that different or separate aids, benefits, or services be provided only when necessary to ensure that the aids, benefits, or services are as effective as those provided to others. Even when separate or different aids, benefits or services would be more effective, paragraph (b)(2) provides that a qualified individual with handicaps still has the right to choose to participate in the program that is not designed to accommodate individuals with handicaps.
              Paragraph (b)(1)(v) prohibits the agency from denying a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to participate as a member of a planning or advisory board.
              Paragraph (b)(1)(vi) prohibits the agency from limiting a qualified individual with handicaps in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by others receiving any aid, benefit, or service.

              Paragraph (b)(3) prohibits the agency from utilizing criteria or methods of administration that deny individuals with handicaps access to the agency's programs or activities. The phrase criteria or methods of administration refers to official written agency policies, as well as the actual practices of the agency. This paragraph prohibits both blatantly exclusionary policies or practices and nonessential policies and practices that are neutral on their face, but deny individuals with handicaps an effective opportunity to participate.
              Paragraph (b)(4) specifically applies the prohibition enunciated in § 85.21(b)(3) to the process of selecting sites for construction of new facilities or existing facilities to be used by the agency. Paragraph (b)(4) does not apply to construction of additional buildings at an existing site.
              Paragraph (b)(5) prohibits the agency, in the selection of procurement contractors, from using criteria that subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination on the basis of handicap.

              Paragraph (b)(6) prohibits the agency from discriminating against qualified individuals with handicaps on the basis of handicap in the granting of licenses or certifications. A person is a qualified individual with handicaps with respect to licensing or certification if he or she can meet the essential eligibility requirements for receiving the license or certification (see § 85.3).
              In addition, the agency may not establish requirements for the programs or activities of licensees or certified entities that subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination on the basis of handicap. For example, the agency must comply with this requirement when establishing safety standards for the operations of licensees. In that case, the agency must ensure that the standards it promulgates do not discriminate against the employment of qualified individuals with handicaps in an impermissible manner.
              Paragraph (b)(6) does not extend section 504 directly to the programs or activities of licensees or certified entities themselves. The programs or activities of Federal licensees or certified entities are not themselves federally conducted programs or activities; nor are they programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance merely by virtue of the Federal license or certificate. However, as noted above, section 504 may affect the content of the rules established by the agency for the operation of the program or activity of the licensee or certified entity and thereby indirectly affect limited aspects of their operations.
              One commenter suggested pointing out that Federal licensees or certified entities, having received services from Federal employees during the process of licensing or certification, thereby become Federally assisted recipients, and are covered by 45 CFR part 84. Such an argument is beyond the scope of this part, and is therefore not being included.
              Another commenter suggested including language such as that found in 45 CFR 84.4(b)(1) to the effect that agencies may not perpetuate discrimination against qualified individuals with handicaps by providing significant assistance to an agency, organization or person that discriminates on the basis of handicap. Assistance from the agency that would provide significant support to an organization constitutes Federal financial assistance and the organization, as a recipient of such assistance, would be covered by the section 504 regulation for federally assisted programs.
              Paragraph (c) provides that programs conducted pursuant to Federal statute or Executive order that are designed to benefit only individuals with handicaps or a given class of individuals with handicaps may be limited to individuals those with handicaps.

              Paragraph (d) provides that the agency must administer programs and activities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the next of qualified individuals with handicaps, i.e. in a setting that enables individuals with handicaps to interact with nonhandicapped individuals to the fullest extent possible.
              Section 85.31 Employment.

              Section 85.31 prohibits discrimination on the basis of handicap in employment by the agency. Courts have held that section 504, as amended in 1978, covers the employment practices of Executive agencies. Gardner v. Morris, 752 F.2d 1271, 1277 (8th Cir. 1985); Smith v. United States Postal Service, 742 F.2d 257, 259-60 (6th Cir. 1984); Prewitt v. United States Postal Service, 662 F.2d 292, 302-04 (5th Cir. 1981). Contra McGuiness v. United States Postal Service, 744 F.2d 1318, 1320-21 (7th Cir. 1984); Boyd v. United States Postal Service, 752 F.2d 410, 413-14 (9th Cir. 1985).

              Courts uniformly have held that, in order to give effect to section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act, which covers Federal employment, the administrative procedures of section 501 must be followed in processing complaints of employment discrimination under section 504. Morgan v. United States Postal Service, 798 F.2d 1162, 1164-65 (8th Cir. 1986); Smith, 742 F.2d at 262; Prewitt, 662 F.2d at 304. Accordingly, § 85.31 (Employment) of this rule adopts the definitions, requirements, and procedures of section 501 as established in regulations of the EEOC at 29 CFR part 1613. Responsibility for coordinating enforcement of Federal laws prohibiting discrimination in employment is assigned to the EEOC by Executive Order 12067 (3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 206). Under this authority, the EEOC establishes government-wide standards on nondiscrimination in employment on the basis of handicap.

              One commenter proposed that the general definition of qualified individual with handicaps be used in this section, instead of that used under section 501. We believe that the above paragraphs sufficiently explain the need for using the section 501 definition.
              
              In addition to this section, § 85.61(c) specifies that the agency will use the existing EEOC procedures to resolve allegations of employment discrimination.
              Section 85.41 Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.
              Section 85.41 states the general nondiscrimination principle underlying the program accessibility requirements of §§ 85.42 and 85.43.
              Section 85.42 Program accessibility: Existing facilities.
              This part adopts the program accessibility concept found in the existing section 504 coordination regulation for programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance (28 CFR 41.57) with certain modifications. Thus, § 85.42 requires that each agency program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. The part also makes clear that the agency is not required to make each of its existing facilities accessible (§ 85.42(a)(1)). However, § 85.42, unlike 28 CFR 41.57, places explicit limits on the agency's obligation to ensure program accessibility (§ 85.42(a)(2)).

              One commenter stated that the provisions of § 85.42(a)(1) were negatively worded and may reflect a misinterpretation of the decision of the Supreme Court in Grove City College v. Bell, 465 U.S. 555 (1984), and argued for deletion of this language.
              The language is identical to that in the section 504 regulation for federally assisted programs or activities. We believe that the inclusion of this language is necessary in order to make clear that, while every aspect of every Federal program or activity need not be accessible, each program or activity, when viewed as a whole, must be accessible.
              Another commenter recommended adding the language “where other methods are equally effective in achieving compliance from § 84.42(b) to § 84.42(a)(1). We believe that, because § 84.42 (a) and (b) treat different aspects of the subject, their language must necessarily differ.

              Paragraph (a)(2) generally codifies recent case law that defines the scope of the agency's obligation to ensure program accessibility. This paragraph provides that in meeting the program accessibility requirement, the agency is not required to take any action that would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity, or in undue financial and administrative burdens. A similar limitation is provided in § 85.51(d). This provision is based on the Supreme Court's holding in Southeastern Community College v. Davis, 442 U.S. 397 (1979), that section 504 does not require program modifications that result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program, and on the Court's statement that section 504 does not require modifications that would result in “undue financial and administrative burdens.” 442 U.S. at 412. Since Davis, circuit courts have applied this limitation on a showing that only one of the two “undue burdens” would be created as a result of the modification sought to be imposed under section 504. See, e.g., Dopico v. Goldschmidt, 687 F.2d 644 (2d Cir. 1982); American Public Transit Association v. Lewis, 655 F.2d 1272 (D.C. Cir. 1981).

              Paragraph (a)(2) and § 85.51(d) are also supported by the Supreme Court's decision in Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287 (1985). Alexander involved a challenge to the State of Tennessee's reduction of inpatient hospital care coverage under Medicaid from 20 to 14 days per year. Plaintiffs argued that this reduction violated section 504 because it had an adverse impact on handicapped persons. The Court assumed without deciding that section 504 reaches at least some conduct that has an unjustifiable disparate impact on handicapped people, but held that the reduction was not “the sort of disparate impact” discrimination that might be prohibited by section 504 or its implementing regulation. Id at 299.
              Relying on Davis, the Court said that section 504 guarantees qualified handicapped persons “meaningful access to the benefits the grantee offers,” id. at 301, and that “reasonable adjustments in the nature of the benefit offered must at times be made to assure meaningful access.” Id. n.21 (emphasis added). However, section 504 does not require “ ‘changes,’ ‘adjustments,’ or ‘modifications’ to existing programs that would be ‘substantial’ * * * or that would constitute ‘fundamental alteration[s] in the nature of a program.’ ” Id. at n.20 (citations omitted). Alexander supports the position, based on Davis and the earlier lower court decisions, that in some situations, certain accommodations for a handicapped person may so alter an agency's program or activity, or entail such extensive costs and administrative burdens that the refusal to undertake the accommodations is not discriminatory. Thus, failure to include such an “undue burdens” provision could lead to judicial invalidation of the regulation or reversal of a particular enforcement action taken pursuant to the regulation.

              This paragraph, however, does not establish an absolute defense; it does not relieve the agency of all obligations to individuals with handicaps. Although the agency is not required to take actions that would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens, it nevertheless must take any other steps necessary to ensure that individuals with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the federally conducted program or activity.
              
              It is our view that compliance with § 85.42(a) would in most cases not result in undue financial and administrative burdens on the agency. In determining whether financial and administrative burdens are undue, all agency resources available for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity should be considered. The burden of proving that compliance with § 85.42(a) would fundamentally alter the nature of a program or activity or would result in undue financial and administrative burdens rests with the agency. The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the agency head or his or her designee, and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. Any person who believes that he or she or any specific class of persons has been injured by the agency head's decision or failure to make a decision may file a complaint under the compliance procedures established in § 85.61. The opportunity to file such a complaint responds to one commenter's suggestion that review by a high level Department official be assured.
              Paragraph (b)(1) sets forth a number of means by which program accessibility may be achieved, including redesign of equipment, reassignment of services to accessible buildings, and provision of aides. In choosing among methods, the agency shall give priority consideration to those that will be consistent with provision of services in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of individuals with handicaps. Structural changes in existing facilities are required only when there is no other feasible way to make the agency's program accessible. (It should be noted that “structural changes” include all physical changes to a facility; the term does not refer only to changes to structural features, such as removal of or alteration to a load-bearing structural member.) The agency may comply with the program accessibility requirement by delivering services at alternate accessible sites or making home visits as appropriate.
              One commenter proposed that methods other than structural changes to ensure accessibility should be “equally effective”. The regulations implementing section 504 for federally assisted programs do not contain such language. The addition of the proposed language would impose a regulatory standard on the Department not required of recipients. In view of the fact that the 1978 amendments were intended to apply the same requirements to federally conducted programs as apply to federally assisted programs, the proposed language is not being adopted.
              Paragraphs (c) and (d) establish time periods for complying with the program accessibility requirement. As currently required for federally assisted programs by 28 CFR 41.57(b), the agency must make any necessary structural changes in facilities as soon as practicable, but in no event later than three (3) years after the effective date of this part. Where structural modifications are required and it is not expected that these can be completed within six months, a transition plan should be developed within six months of the effective date of this part. Aside from structural changes, all other necessary steps to achieve compliance shall be taken within sixty days.
              One commenter proposes to limit the time allowed for making structural modifications to one year. We note that the basic requirement is that these changes be made “as soon as practicable,” and that the three-year limit is the maximum period of time. Furthermore, the three-year maximum for transition plans is identical to that contained in the regulations for federally assisted recipients.
              Section 85.43 Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.
              Overlapping coverage exists with respect to new construction and alterations under section 504 and the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157). Section 85.43 provides that those buildings that are constructed or altered by, on behalf of, or for the use of the agency shall be designed, constructed, or altered to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps in accordance with 41 CFR part 101-19, 101-19.600 to 101-19.607 (GSA regulation which incorporates the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards). This standard was promulgated pursuant to the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157). We believe that it is appropriate to adopt the existing Architectural Barriers Act standard for section 504 compliance because new and altered buildings subject to this regulation are also subject to the Architectural Barriers Act and because adoption of the standard will avoid duplicative and possibly inconsistent standards.
              Existing buildings leased by the agency after the effective date of this regulation are not required by the regulation to meet accessibility standards simply by virtue of being leased. They are subject, however, to the program accessibility standards for existing facilities in § 85.42. To the extent the buildings are newly constructed or altered, they must also meet the new constructions and alteration requirements of § 85.43.

              Federal practice under section 504 has always treated newly leased buildings as subject to the existing facility program accessibility standard. Unlike the construction of new buildings where architectural barriers can be avoided at little or no cost, the application of new construction standards to an existing building being leased raises the same prospect of retrofitting buildings as the use of an existing Federal facility, and the agency believes that same program accessibility standards should apply to both owned and leased existing buildings.
              In Rose v. United States Postal Service, 774 F.2d 1355 (9th Cir. 1985), the Ninth Circuit held that the Architectural Barriers Act requires accessibility at the time of lease. The Rose court did not address the question of whether section 504 likewise requires accessibility as a condition of lease, and the case was remanded to the District Court for, among other things, consideration of this issue. Two commenters urged that leased buildings be required to be accessible at the time of lease. The agency may provide more specific guidance on section 504 requirements for leased buildings after the litigation is completed.
              Section 85.51 Communications.

              Section 85.51 requires the agency to take appropriate steps to ensure effective communication with personnel of other Federal entities, applicants, participants, and members of the public. These steps shall include procedures for determining when auxiliary aids are necessary under § 85.1(a)(1) to afford an individual with handicaps an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, the agency's program or activity. They shall also include an opportunity for individuals with handicaps to request the auxiliary aids of their choice. This expressed choice shall be given primary consideration by the agency (§ 85.51(a)(1)(i)). The agency shall honor the choice unless it can demonstrate that another effective means of communication exists or that use of the means chosen would not be required under § 85.51(d). That paragraph limits the obligations of the agency to ensure effective communication in accordance with Davis and the circuit court opinions interpreting it (see supra preamble discussion of § 85.42(c)(2)). Unless not required by § 85.51(d), the agency shall provide auxiliary aids at no cost to the individual with handicaps.
              One commenter proposed that the choice of auxiliary aid made by the individual with handicaps should govern unless it would constitute an undue hardship on the agency. We believe that the language set out above is adequate to ensure consideration of an individual's preference.
              Another commenter proposed that the regulation require all films and videotapes produced by the agency to be captioned for the hearing-impaired. The Department intends to examine all appropriate methods of ensuring effective communication.
              The same commenter applauded HHS for the inclusion of the language requiring HHS to inform individuals with handicaps of their section 504 rights.
              The discussion of § 85.42(a), Program accessibility, Existing facilities, regarding the determination of what constitutes undue financial and administrative burdens, also applies to § 85.51(d) and should be referred to for a complete understanding of the agency's obligation to comply with § 85.51.

              In some circumstances, a notepad and written materials may be sufficient to permit effective communication with a hearing-impaired person. In many circumstances, however, they may not be, particularly when the information being communicated is complex or exchanged for a lengthy period of time (e.g. a meeting) or where the hearing-impaired applicant or participant is not skilled in spoken or written language. In these cases, a sign language interpreter may be appropriate.
              One commenter proposed changing the language to state that notepads rarely suffice for communication with the hearing-impaired. Considering that a significant number of the hearing-impaired may not be skilled in sign language, we believe that the language used is appropriate.
              For vision-impaired persons, effective communication might be achieved by several means, including readers and audio recordings. In general, the agency intends to inform the public of (1) the communications services it offers to afford individuals with handicaps an equal opportunity to participate in or benefit from its programs and activities, (2) the opportunity to request a particular mode of communication, and (3) the agency's preferences regarding auxiliary aids if it can demonstrate that several different modes are effective.
              The agency shall ensure effective communication with vision-impaired and hearing-impaired persons involved in proceedings conducted by the agency. Auxiliary aids must be afforded where necessary to ensure effective communication at the proceedings. If sign language interpreters are necessary, the agency may require that it be given reasonable notice prior to the proceedings of the need for an interpreter. Moreover, the agency need not provide individually prescribed devices, readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal nature (§ 85.51(a)(1)(ii)). For example, the agency need not provide eye glasses or hearing aids to applicants or participants in its programs. Similarly, the regulation does not require the agency to provide wheelchairs to persons with mobility impairments.
              One commenter proposed that the items which agencies are not required to provide and the circumstances involved be described in more detail. We believe that the description given is sufficient, because the interpretation of this provision will be made on a case-by-case basis.

              Paragraph (b) requires the agency to ensure that individuals with handicaps can obtain information concerning accessible services, activities, and facilities.
              
              Paragraph (c) requires the agency to provide signage at inaccessible facilities that direct users to locations with information about accessible facilities.
              One commenter suggested specifically mentioning the international symbol for deafness, and placing such signs at the main entrance of buildings equipped to service the hearing-impaired. We believe that the language contained in § 85.51 (b) and (c) requires the agency to ensure that individuals with handicaps, including those with impaired hearing, can obtain information regarding accessibility, and that this requirement is sufficient to afford flexibility on the part of the agency regarding use of appropriate signage.

              One commenter proposed adding the words “in the most integrated setting appropriate” to the language in § 85.51(d). This language already appears elsewhere in the regulation, e.g. in § 85.42(b)(2), and it is the Department's intention to act in accordance with that provision.
              Section 85.61 Compliance procedures.
              Paragraph (a) specifies that paragraphs (b) and (d) through (l) of this section establish the procedures for processing complaints other than employment complaints. Paragraph (c) provides that the agency will process employment complaints according to procedures established in existing regulations of the EEOC (29 CFR part 1613) pursuant to section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791).
              Paragraph (b) designates the official responsible for coordinating implementation of § 85.61. The NPRM stated that responsibility for the implementation and operation of this “part” shall be vested in the OCR Director/Special Assistant. The final rule has been revised by replacing the word “part” with the word “section” to clarify the responsibility for coordinating implementation of § 85.61.
              The agency is required to accept and investigate all complete complaints (§ 85.61(d)). Two commenters suggested that a complainant have an opportunity to remedy an incomplete complaint. Current administrative procedures provide for this practice and it need not be included in the text of the regulation.
              If the agency determines that it does not have jurisdiction over a complaint, it shall promptly notify the complainant and make reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate entity of the Federal Government (§ 85.61(e)). One commenter pointed out that where a reference to another entity of the Federal government is required, the obligation to refer should be absolute, not limited to reasonable efforts. The language “shall make reasonable efforts to refer” is not intended to minimize the Department's obligation.
              Paragraph (f) requires the agency to notify the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (ATBCB) upon receipt of a complaint alleging that a building or facility subject to the Architectural Barriers Act was designed, constructed, or altered in a manner that does not provide ready access and use by individuals with handicaps.
              Paragraph (g) requires the agency to provide to the complainant, in writing, findings of fact and conclusions of law, the relief granted if noncompliance is found, and notice of the right to appeal (§ 85.61(g)). One appeal within the agency shall be provided (§ 85.61(i)). The appeal will not be heard by the same person who made the initial determination of compliance or noncompliance.
              Paragraph (1) permits the agency to delegate its authority for investigating complaints to other Federal agencies. However, the statutory obligation of the agency to make a final determination of compliance or noncompliance may not be delegated.
              Commenters have suggested the following:
              Notifying complainants whenever their complaints are referred to another agency. Current administrative procedures provide for this practice and it need not be included in the text of the regulation.
              Describing the basic parameters for submitting or obtaining evidence used to decide appeals. Since the grounds for appeal may be extremely varied, it would not be practicable to set out parameters for every appeal.
              Including a statement as to complainants' rights to judicial review. These rights are statutory and beyond the scope of this regulation.
              Obtaining the expertise of ATBCB in appropriate cases. A provision regarding notification of ATBCB is already included in the regulation.
              Including a statement that all other regulations, forms and directives issued by HHS are superseded by the nondiscrimination requirements of this part. The Department views any other issuances falling short of the requirements of this regulation as insufficient to ensure compliance and therefore such a statement is unnecessary.
              Provisions for attorneys fees and compensation to the prevailing party. Such provisions are statutory and beyond the scope of this regulation.
              Section 85.62 Coordination and compliance responsibilities.
              Section 85.62 sets out the respective responsibilities of the components of HHS and of the Director, OCR/Special Assistant in the implementation of section 504 to programs and activities conducted by HHS.

              Paragraph (c) specifies the respective roles of OCR and of the HHS component in cases in which noncompliance is found.
              
              In the event that OCR and the HHS component cannot agree on a resolution of any particular matter, such matter will be submitted to the Secretary for resolution.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 86
          PART 86—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF SEX IN EDUCATION PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
          
            
              Subpart A—Introduction
              Sec.
              86.1
              Purpose and effective date.
              86.2
              Definitions.
              86.3
              Remedial and affirmative action and self-evaluation.
              86.4
              Assurance required.
              86.5
              Transfers of property.
              86.6
              Effect of other requirements.
              86.7
              Effect of employment opportunities.
              86.8
              Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              86.9
              Dissemination of policy.
            
            
              Subpart B—Coverage
              86.11
              Application.
              86.12
              Educational institutions controlled by religious organizations.
              86.13
              Military and merchant marine educational institutions.
              86.14
              Membership practices of certain organizations.
              86.15
              Admissions.
              86.16
              Educational institutions eligible to submit transition plans.
              86.17
              Transition plans.
              86.18-86.20
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart C—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex In Admission and Recruitment Prohibited
              86.21
              Admission.
              86.22
              Preference in admission.
              86.23
              Recruitment.
              86.24-86.30
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart D—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
              86.31
              Education programs or activities.
              86.32
              Housing.
              86.33
              Comparable facilities.
              86.34
              Access to course offerings.
              86.35
              Access to schools operated by L.E.A.s.
              86.36
              Counseling and use of appraisal and counseling materials.
              86.37
              Financial assistance.
              86.38
              Employment assistance to students.
              86.39
              Health and insurance benefits and services.
              86.40
              Marital or parental status.
              86.41
              Athletics.
              86.42
              Textbooks and curricular material.
              86.43-86.50
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart E—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex In Employment in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
              86.51
              Employment.
              86.52
              Employment criteria.
              86.53
              Recruitment.
              86.54
              Compensation.
              86.55
              Job classification and structure.
              86.56
              Fringe benefits.
              86.57
              Marital or parental status.
              86.58
              Effect of State or local law or other requirements.
              86.59
              Advertising.
              86.60
              Pre-employment inquiries.
              86.61
              Sex as bona-fide occupational qualification.
              86.62-86.70
              [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart F—Procedures [Interim]
              86.71
              Interim procedures.
              Subject Index to Title IX Preamble and Regulation
              Appendix A to Part 86—Guidelines For Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs [Note]
            
          
          
            Source:
            40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—Introduction
            
              § 86.1
              Purpose and effective date.
              The purpose of this part is to effectuate title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended by Pub. L. 93-568, 88 Stat. 1855 (except sections 904 and 906 of those Amendments) which is designed to eliminate (with certain exceptions) discrimination on the basis of sex in any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, whether or not such program or activity is offered or sponsored by an educational institution as defined in this part. This part is also intended to effectuate section 844 of the Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93-380, 88 Stat. 484. The effective date of this part shall be July 21, 1975.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, as amended by Pub. L. 93-568, 88 Stat. 1855, and sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, 88 Stat. 484, Pub. L. 93-380)
            
            
              
              § 86.2
              Definitions.
              As used in this part, the term—
              (a) Title IX means title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. 92-318, as amended by section 3 of Pub. L. 93-568, 88 Stat. 1855, except sections 904 and 906 thereof; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1683, 1685, 1686.
              (b) Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (c) Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
              (d) Director means the Director of the Office for Civil Rights of the Department.
              (e) Reviewing Authority means that component of the Department delegated authority by the Secretary to appoint, and to review the decisions of, administrative law judges in cases arising under this part.
              (f) Administrative law judge means a person appointed by the reviewing authority to preside over a hearing held under this part.
              (g) Federal financial assistance means any of the following, when authorized or extended under a law administered by the Department:
              (1) A grant or loan of Federal financial assistance, including funds made available for:
              (i) The acquisition, construction, renovation, restoration, or repair of a building or facility or any portion thereof; and
              (ii) Scholarships, loans, grants, wages or other funds extended to any entity for payment to or on behalf of students admitted to that entity, or extended directly to such students for payment to that entity.
              (2) A grant of Federal real or personal property or any interest therein, including surplus property, and the proceeds of the sale or transfer of such property, if the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not, upon such sale or transfer, properly accounted for to the Federal Government.
              (3) Provision of the services of Federal personnel.
              (4) Sale or lease of Federal property or any interest therein at nominal consideration, or at consideration reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of public interest to be served thereby, or permission to use Federal property or any interest therein without consideration.
              (5) Any other contract, agreement, or arrangement which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance to any education program or activity, except a contract of insurance or guaranty.
              (h) Program or activity and program means all of the operations of—
              (1)(i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
              (ii) The entity of such a State or local government that distributes Federal financial assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
              (2)(i) A college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or
              (ii) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 7801), system of vocational education, or other school system;
              (3)(i) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
              (A) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
              (B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
              (ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
              (4) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (h)(1), (2), or (3) of this section; any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
              (i) Recipient means any State or political subdivision thereof, or any instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any person, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and which operates an education program or activity which receives such assistance, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee thereof.
              (j) Applicant means one who submits an application, request, or plan required to be approved by a Department official, or by a recipient, as a condition to becoming a recipient.
              (k) Educational institution means a local educational agency (L.E.A.) as defined by section 801(f) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 881), a preschool, a private elementary or secondary school, or an applicant or recipient of the type defined by paragraph (l), (m), (n), or (o) of this section.
              (l) Institution of graduate higher education means an institution which:
              (1) Offers academic study beyond the bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degree, whether or not leading to a certificate of any higher degree in the liberal arts and sciences; or
              (2) Awards any degree in a professional field beyond the first professional degree (regardless of whether the first professional degree in such field is awarded by an institution of undergraduate higher education or professional education); or
              (3) Awards no degree and offers no further academic study, but operates ordinarily for the purpose of facilitating research by persons who have received the highest graduate degree in any field of study.
              (m) Institution of undergraduate higher education means:
              (1) An institution offering at least two but less than four years of college level study beyond the high school level, leading to a diploma or an associate degree, or wholly or principally creditable toward a baccalaureate degree; or
              (2) An institution offering academic study leading to a baccalaureate degree; or
              (3) An agency or body which certifies credentials or offers degrees, but which may or may not offer academic study.
              (n) Institution of professional education means an institution (except any institution of undergraduate higher education) which offers a program of academic study that leads to a first professional degree in a field for which there is a national specialized accrediting agency recognized by the United States Commissioner of Education.
              (o) Institution of vocational education means a school or institution (except an institution of professional or graduate or undergraduate higher education) which has as its primary purpose preparation of students to pursue a technical, skilled, or semiskilled occupation or trade, or to pursue study in a technical field, whether or not the school or institution offers certificates, diplomas, or degrees and whether or not it offers fulltime study.
              (p) Administratively separate unit means a school, department or college of an educational institution (other than a local educational agency) admission to which is independent of admission to any other component of such institution.
              (q) Admission means selection for part-time, full-time, special, associate, transfer, exchange, or any other enrollment, membership, or matriculation in or at an education program or activity operated by a recipient.
              (r) Student means a person who has gained admission.
              (s) Transition plan means a plan subject to the approval of the United States Commissioner of Education pursuant to section 901(a)(2) of the Education Amendments of 1972, under which an educational institution operates in making the transition from being an educational institution which admits only students of one sex to being one which admits students of both sexes without discrimination.
              (Secs. 901, 902, 908, Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1687)
              [40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24320, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 86.3
              Remedial and affirmative action and self-evaluation.
              (a) Remedial action. If the Director finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, such recipient shall take such remedial action as the Director deems necessary to overcome the effects of such discrimination.
              (b) Affirmative action. In the absence of a finding of discrimination on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, a recipient may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limited participation therein by persons of a particular sex. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to alter any affirmative action obligations which a recipient may have under Executive Order 11246.
              (c) Self-evaluation. Each recipient education institution shall, within one year of the effective date of this part:
              (1) Evaluate, in terms of the requirements of this part, its current policies and practices and the effects thereof concerning admission of students, treatment of students, and employment of both academic and non-academic personnel working in connection with the recipient's education program or activity;
              (2) Modify any of these policies and practices which do not or may not meet the requirements of this part; and
              (3) Take appropriate remedial steps to eliminate the effects of any discrimination which resulted or may have resulted from adherence to these policies and practices.
              (d) Availability of self-evaluation and related materials. Recipients shall maintain on file for at least three years following completion of the evaluation required under paragraph (c) of this section, and shall provide to the Director upon request, a description of any modifications made pursuant to paragraph (c) (2) of this section and of any remedial steps taken pursuant to paragraph (c) (3) of this section.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24128, June 4, 1975; 40 FR 39506, Aug. 28, 1975]
            
            
              § 86.4
              Assurance required.
              (a) General. Every application for Federal financial assistance for any education program or activity shall as condition of its approval contain or be accompanied by an assurance from the applicant or recipient, satisfactory to the Director, that the education program or activity operated by the applicant or recipient and to which this part applies will be operated in compliance with this part. An assurance of compliance with this part shall not be satisfactory to the Director if the applicant or recipient to whom such assurance applies fails to commit itself to take whatever remedial action is necessary in accordance with § 86.3(a) to eliminate existing discrimination on the basis of sex or to eliminate the effects of past discrimination whether occurring prior or subsequent to the submission to the Director of such assurance.
              (b) Duration of obligation. (1) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide real property or structures thereon, such assurance shall obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the real property or structures are used to provide an education program or activity.
              (2) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide personal property, such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which it retains ownership or possession of the property.
              (3) In all other cases such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended.
              (c) Form. The Director will specify the form of the assurances required by paragraph (a) of this section and the extent to which such assurances will be required of the applicant's or recipient's subgrantees, contractors, subcontractors, transferees, or successors in interest.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 86.5
              Transfers of property.
              If a recipient sells or otherwise transfers property financed in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance to a transferee which operates any education program or activity, and the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not upon such sale or transfer properly accounted for to the Federal Government both the transferor and the transferee shall be deemed to be recipients, subject to the provisions of subpart B of this part.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              
              § 86.6
              Effect of other requirements.
              (a) Effect of other Federal provisions. The obligations imposed by this part are independent of, and do not alter, obligations not to discriminate on the basis of sex imposed by Executive Order 11246, as amended; sections 799A and 845 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295h-9 and 298b-2); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.); the Equal Pay Act (29 U.S.C. 206 and 206(d)); and any other Act of Congress or Federal regulation.
              
              (Secs. 901, 902, 905, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374, 375; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1685)
              
              (b) Effect of State or local law or other requirements. The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement which would render any applicant or student ineligible, or limit the eligibility of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, to practice any occupation or profession.
              (c) Effect of rules or regulations of private organizations. The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any rule or regulation of any organization, club, athletic or other league, or association which would render any applicant or student ineligible to participate or limit the eligibility or participation of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, in any education program or activity operated by a recipient and which receives Federal financial assistance.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 86.7
              Effect of employment opportunities.
              The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated because employment opportunities in any occupation or profession are or may be more limited for members of one sex than for members of the other sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.8
              Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              (a) Designation of responsible employee. Each recipient shall designate at least one employee to coordinate its efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under this part, including any investigation of any complaint communicated to such recipient alleging its noncompliance with this part or alleging any actions which would be prohibited by this part. The recipient shall notify all its students and employees of the name, office address and telephone number of the employee or employees appointed pursuant to this paragraph.
              (b) Complaint procedure of recipient. A recipient shall adopt and publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and employee complaints alleging any action which would be prohibited by this part.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.9
              Dissemination of policy.
              (a) Notification of policy. (1) Each recipient shall implement specific and continuing steps to notify applicants for admission and employment, students and parents of elementary and secondary school students, employees, sources of referral of applicants for admission and employment, and all unions or professional organizations holding collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient, that it does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the educational programs or activities which it operates, and that is required by title IX and this part not to discriminate in such a manner. Such notification shall contain such information, and be made in such manner, as the Director finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by title IX and this part, but shall state at least that the requirement not to discriminate in education programs and activities extends to employment therein, and to admission thereto unless Subpart C does not apply to the recipient, and that inquiries concerning the application of title IX and this part to such recipient may be referred to the employee designated pursuant to § 86.8, or to the Director.
              (2) Each recipient shall make the initial notification required by paragraph (a) (1) of this section within 90 days of the effective date of this part or of the date this part first applies to such recipient, whichever comes later, which notification shall include publication in:
              (i) Local newspapers;
              (ii) Newspapers and magazines operated by such recipient or by student, alumnae, or alumni groups for or in connection with such recipient; and
              (iii) Memoranda or other written communications distributed to every student and employee of such recipient.
              (b) Publications. (1) Each recipient shall prominently include a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section in each announcement, bulletin, catalog, or application form which it makes available to any person of a type, described in paragraph (a) of this section, or which is otherwise used in connection with the recruitment of students or employees.
              (2) A recipient shall not use or distribute a publication of the type described in this paragraph which suggests, by text or illustration, that such recipient treats applicants, students, or employees differently on the basis of sex except as such treatment is permitted by this part.
              (c) Distribution. Each recipient shall distribute without discrimination on the basis of sex each publication described in paragraph (b) of this section, and shall apprise each of its admission and employment recruitment representatives of the policy of nondiscrimination described in paragraph (a) of this section, and require such representatives to adhere to such policy.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Coverage
            
              § 86.11
              Application.
              Except as provided in this subpart, this part 86 applies to every recipient and to the education program or activity operated by such recipient which receives Federal financial assistance.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 86.12
              Educational institutions controlled by religious organizations.
              (a) Application. This part does not apply to an educational institution which is controlled by a religious organization to the extent application of this part would not be consistent with the religious tenets of such organization.
              (b) Exemption. An educational institution which wishes to claim the exemption set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, shall do so by submitting in writing to the Director a statement by the highest ranking official of the institution, identifying the provisions of this part which conflict with a specific tenet of the religious organization.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.13
              Military and merchant marine educational institutions.
              This part does not apply to an educational institution whose primary purpose is the training of individuals for a military service of the United States or for the merchant marine.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.14
              Membership practices of certain organizations.
              (a) Social fraternities and sororities. This part does not apply to the membership practices of social fraternities and sororities which are exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the active membership of which consists primarily of students in attendance at institutions of higher education.
              (b) YMCA, YWCA, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and Camp Fire Girls. This part does not apply to the membership practices of the Young Men's Christian Association, the Young Women's Christian Association, the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts and Camp Fire Girls.
              (c) Voluntary youth service organizations. This part does not apply to the membership practices of voluntary youth service organizations which are exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and the membership of which has been traditionally limited to members of one sex and principally to persons of less than nineteen years of age.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; sec. 3(a) of Pub. L. 93-568, 88 Stat. 1862 amending sec. 901)
            
            
              § 86.15
              Admissions.
              (a) Admissions to educational institutions prior to June 24, 1973, are not covered by this part.
              (b) Administratively separate units. For the purposes only of this section, §§ 86.16 and 86.17, and subpart C, each administratively separate unit shall be deemed to be an educational institution.
              (c) Application of subpart C. Except as provided in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, subpart C applies to each recipient. A recipient to which subpart C applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of that subpart.
              (d) Educational institutions. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section as to recipients which are educational institutions, Subpart C applies only to institutions of vocational education, professional education, graduate higher education, and public institutions of undergraduate higher education.
              (e) Public institutions of undergraduate higher education. Subpart C does not apply to any public institution of undergraduate higher education which traditionally and continually from its establishment has had a policy of admitting only students of one sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24128, June 4, 1975; 40 FR 39506, Aug. 28, 1975]
            
            
              § 86.16
              Educational institutions eligible to submit transition plans.
              (a) Application. This section applies to each educational institution to which subpart C applies which:
              (1) Admitted only students of one sex as regular students as of June 23, 1972; or
              (2) Admitted only students of one sex as regular students as of June 23, 1965, but thereafter admitted as regular students, students of the sex not admitted prior to June 23, 1965.
              (b) Provision for transition plans. An educational institution to which this section applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of subpart C unless it is carrying out a transition plan approved by the United States Commissioner of Education as described in § 86.17, which plan provides for the elimination of such discrimination by the earliest practicable date but in no event later than June 23, 1979.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.17
              Transition plans.
              (a) Submission of plans. An institution to which § 86.16 applies and which is composed of more than one administratively separate unit may submit either a single transition plan applicable to all such units, or a separate transition plan applicable to each such unit.
              (b) Content of plans. In order to be approved by the United States Commissioner of Education, a transition plan shall:
              (1) State the name, address, and Federal Interagency Committee on Education (FICE) Code of the educational institution submitting such plan, the administratively separate units to which the plan is applicable, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom questions concerning the plan may be addressed. The person who submits the plan shall be the chief administrator or president of the institution, or another individual legally authorized to bind the institution to all actions set forth in the plan.
              (2) State whether the educational institution or administratively separate unit admits students of both sexes, as regular students and, if so, when it began to do so.

              (3) Identify and describe with respect to the educational institution or administratively separate unit any obstacles to admitting students without discrimination on the basis of sex.
              
              (4) Describe in detail the steps necessary to eliminate as soon as practicable each obstacle so identified and indicate the schedule for taking these steps and the individual directly responsible for their implementation.
              (5) Include estimates of the number of students, by sex, expected to apply for, be admitted to, and enter each class during the period covered by the plan.
              (c) Nondiscrimination. No policy or practice of a recipient to which § 86.16 applies shall result in treatment of applicants to or students of such recipient in violation of Subpart C unless such treatment is necessitated by an obstacle identified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section and a schedule for eliminating that obstacle has been provided as required by paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
              (d) Effects of past exclusion. To overcome the effects of past exclusion of students on the basis of sex, each educational institution to which § 86.16 applies shall include in its transition plan, and shall implement, specific steps designed to encourage individuals of the previously excluded sex to apply for admission to such institution. Such steps shall include instituting recruitment programs which emphasize the institution's commitment to enrolling students of the sex previously excluded.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24128, June 4, 1975; 40 FR 39506, Aug. 28, 1975]
            
            
              §§ 86.18-86.20
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Admission and Recruitment Prohibited
            
              § 86.21
              Admission.
              (a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be denied admission, or be subjected to discrimination in admission, by any recipient to which this subpart applies, except as provided in §§ 86.16 and 86.17.
              (b) Specific prohibitions. (1) In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which this subpart applies shall not:
              (i) Give preference to one person over another on the basis of sex, by ranking applicants separately on such basis, or otherwise;
              (ii) Apply numerical limitations upon the number or proportion of persons of either sex who may be admitted; or
              (iii) Otherwise treat one individual differently from another on the basis of sex.
              (2) A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for admission which has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless the use of such test or criterion is shown to predict validly success in the education program or activity in question and alternative tests or criteria which do not have such a disproportionately adverse effect are shown to be unavailable.
              (c) Prohibitions relating to marital or parental status. In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which this subpart applies:
              (1) Shall not apply any rule concerning the actual or potential parental, family, or marital status of a student or applicant which treats persons differently on the basis of sex;
              (2) Shall not discriminate against or exclude any person on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom, or establish or follow any rule or practice which so discriminates or excludes;
              (3) Shall treat disabilities related to pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability or physical condition; and
              (4) Shall not make pre-admission inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for admission, including whether such applicant is “Miss” or “Mrs.” A recipient may make pre-admission inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for admision, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by this part.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              
              § 86.22
              Preference in admission.
              A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not give preference to applicants for admission, on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or other school or entity which admits as students or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preference has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.23
              Recruitment.
              (a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and admission of students. A recipient may be required to undertake additional recruitment efforts for one sex as remedial action pursuant to § 86.3(a), and may choose to undertake such efforts as affirmative action pursuant to § 86.3(b).
              (b) Recruitment at certain institutions. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at educational institutions, schools or entities which admit as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              §§ 86.24-86.30
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
            
              § 86.31
              Education programs or activities.
              (a) General. Except as provided elsewhere in this part, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives Federal financial assistance. This subpart does not apply to actions of a recipient in connection with admission of its students to an education program or activity of (1) a recipient to which Subpart C does not apply, or (2) an entity, not a recipient, to which Subpart C would not apply if the entity were a recipient.
              (b) Specific prohibitions. Except as provided in this subpart, in providing any aid, benefit, or service to a student, a recipient shall not, on the basis of sex:
              (1) Treat one person differently from another in determining whether such person satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such aid, benefit, or service;
              (2) Provide different aid, benefits, or services or provide aid, benefits, or services in a different manner;
              (3) Deny any person any such aid, benefit, or service;
              (4) Subject any person to separate or different rules of behavior, sanctions, or other treatment;
              (5) Discriminate against any person in the application of any rules of appearance;
              (6) Apply any rule concerning the domicile or residence of a student or applicant, including eligibility for in-state fees and tuition;
              (7) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees;
              (8) Otherwise limit any person in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity.
              (c) Assistance administered by a recipient educational institution to study at a foreign institution. A recipient educational institution may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other awards established by foreign or domestic wills, trusts, or similar legal instruments, or by acts of foreign governments and restricted to members of one sex, which are designed to provide opportunities to study abroad, and which are awarded to students who are already matriculating at or who are graduates of the recipient institution; Provided, a recipient educational institution which administers or assists in the administration of such scholarships, fellowship, or other awards which are restricted to members of one sex provides, or otherwise makes available reasonable opportunities for similar studies for members of the other sex. Such opportunities may be derived from either domestic or foreign sources.
              (d) Aid, benefits, or services not provided by recipient. (1) This paragraph applies to any recipient which requires participation by any applicant, student, or employee in any education program or activity not operated wholly by such recipient, or which facilitates, permits, or considers such participation as part of or equivalent to an education program or activity operated by such recipient, including participation in educational consortia and cooperative employment and student-teaching assignments.
              (2) Such recipient;
              (i) Shall develop and implement a procedure designed to assure itself that the operator or sponsor of such other education program or activity takes no action affecting any applicant, student, or employee of such recipient which this part would prohibit such recipient from taking; and
              (ii) Shall not facilitate, require, permit, or consider such participation if such action occurs.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 86.32
              Housing.
              (a) Generally. A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, apply different rules or regulations, impose different fees or requirements, or offer different services or benefits related to housing, except as provided in this section (including housing provided only to married students).
              (b) Housing provided by recipient. (1) A recipient may provide separate housing on the basis of sex.
              (2) Housing provided by a recipient to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, shall be as a whole:
              (i) Proportionate in quantity to the number of students of that sex applying for such housing; and
              (ii) Comparable in quality and cost to the student.
              (c) Other housing. (1) A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, administer different policies or practices concerning occupancy by its students of housing other than provided by such recipient.
              (2) A recipient which, through solicitation, listing, approval of housing, or otherwise, assists any agency, organization, or person in making housing available to any of its students, shall take such reasonable action as may be necessary to assure itself that such housing as is provided to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, is as a whole: (i) Proportionate in quantity and (ii) comparable in quality and cost to the student. A recipient may render such assistance to any agency, organization, or person which provides all or part of such housing to students only of one sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, 907, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374, 375; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1686)
            
            
              § 86.33
              Comparable facilities.
              A recipient may provide separate toilet, locker room, and shower facilities on the basis of sex, but such facilities provided for students of one sex shall be comparable to such facilities provided for students of the other sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374)
            
            
              § 86.34
              Access to course offerings.
              A recipient shall not provide any course or otherwise carry out any of its education program or activity separately on the basis of sex, or require or refuse participation therein by any of its students on such basis, including health, physical education, industrial, business, vocational, technical, home economics, music, and adult education courses.

              (a) With respect to classes and activities in physical education at the elementary school level, the recipient shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than one year from the effective date of this regulation. With respect to physical education classes and activities at the secondary and post-secondary levels, the recipient shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than three years from the effective date of this regulation.
              (b) This section does not prohibit grouping of students in physical education classes and activities by ability as assessed by objective standards of individual performance developed and applied without regard to sex.
              (c) This section does not prohibit separation of students by sex within physical education classes or activities during participation in wrestling, boxing, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
              (d) Where use of a single standard of measuring skill or progress in a physical education class has an adverse effect on members of one sex, the recipient shall use appropriate standards which do not have such effect.
              (e) Portions of classes in elementary and secondary schools which deal exclusively with human sexuality may be conducted in separate sessions for boys and girls.
              (f) Recipients may make requirements based on vocal range or quality which may result in a chorus or choruses of one or predominantly one sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.35
              Access to schools operated by L.E.A.s.
              A recipient which is a local educational agency shall not, on the basis of sex, exclude any person from admission to:
              (a) Any institution of vocational education operated by such recipient; or
              (b) Any other school or educational unit operated by such recipient, unless such recipient otherwise makes available to such person, pursuant to the same policies and criteria of admission, courses, services, and facilities comparable to each course, service, and facility offered in or through such schools.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.36
              Counseling and use of appraisal and counseling materials.
              (a) Counseling. A recipient shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex in the counseling or guidance of students or applicants for admission.
              (b) Use of appraisal and counseling materials. A recipient which uses testing or other materials for appraising or counseling students shall not use different materials for students on the basis of their sex or use materials which permit or require different treatment of students on such basis unless such different materials cover the same occupations and interest areas and the use of such different materials is shown to be essential to eliminate sex bias. Recipients shall develop and use internal procedures for ensuring that such materials do not discriminate on the basis of sex. Where the use of a counseling test or other instrument results in a substantially disproportionate number of members of one sex in any particular course of study or classification, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination in the instrument or its application.
              (c) Disproportion in classes. Where a recipient finds that a particular class contains a substantially disproportionate number of individuals of one sex, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination on the basis of sex in counseling or appraisal materials or by counselors.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.37
              Financial assistance.
              (a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, in providing financial assistance to any of its students, a recipient shall not: (1) On the basis of sex, provide different amount or types of such assistance, limit eligibility for such assistance which is of any particular type or source, apply different criteria, or otherwise discriminate; (2) through solicitation, listing, approval, provision of facilities or other services, assist any foundation, trust, agency, organization, or person which provides assistance to any of such recipient's students in a manner which discriminates on the basis of sex; or (3) apply any rule or assist in application of any rule concerning eligibility for such assistance which treats persons of one sex differently from persons of the other sex with regard to marital or parental status.
              (b) Financial aid established by certain legal instruments. (1) A recipient may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance established pursuant to domestic or foreign wills, trusts, bequests, or similar legal instruments or by acts of a foreign government which requires that awards be made to members of a particular sex specified therein; Provided, That the overall effect of the award of such sex-restricted scholarships, fellowships, and other forms of financial assistance does not discriminate on the basis of sex.
              (2) To ensure nondiscriminatory awards of assistance as required in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, recipients shall develop and use procedures under which:
              (i) Students are selected for award of financial assistance on the basis of nondiscriminatory criteria and not on the basis of availability of funds restricted to members of a particular sex;
              (ii) An appropriate sex-restricted scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance is allocated to each student selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section; and
              (iii) No student is denied the award for which he or she was selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section because of the absence of a scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance designated for a member of that student's sex.
              (c) Athletic scholarships. (1) To the extent that a recipient awards athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid, it must provide reasonable opportunities for such awards for members of each sex in proportion to the number of students of each sex participating in interscholastic or intercollegiate athletics.
              (2) Separate athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid for members of each sex may be provided as part of separate athletic teams for members of each sex to the extent consistent with this paragraph and § 86.41.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; and sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93-380, 88 Stat. 484)
              [40 FR 24128, June 4, 1975; 40 FR 39506, Aug. 28, 1975]
            
            
              § 86.38
              Employment assistance to students.
              (a) Assistance by recipient in making available outside employment. A recipient which assists any agency, organization or person in making employment available to any of its students:
              (1) Shall assure itself that such employment is made available without discrimination on the basis of sex; and
              (2) Shall not render such services to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in its employment practices.
              (b) Employment of students by recipients. A recipient which employs any of its students shall not do so in a manner which violates subpart E of this part.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.39
              Health and insurance benefits and services.
              In providing a medical, hospital, accident, or life insurance benefit, service, policy, or plan to any of its students, a recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex, or provide such benefit, service, policy, or plan in a manner which would violate Subpart E of this part if it were provided to employees of the recipient. This section shall not prohibit a recipient from providing any benefit or service which may be used by a different proportion of students of one sex than of the other, including family planning services. However, any recipient which provides full coverage health service shall provide gynecological care.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.40
              Marital or parental status.
              (a) Status generally. A recipient shall not apply any rule concerning a student's actual or potential parental, family, or marital status which treats students differently on the basis of sex.
              (b) Pregnancy and related conditions. (1) A recipent shall not discriminate against any student, or exclude any student from its education program or activity, including any class or extracurricular activity, on the basis of such student's pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy or recovery therefrom, unless the student requests voluntarily to participate in a separate portion of the program or activity of the recipient.
              (2) A recipient may require such a student to obtain the certification of a physician that the student is physically and emotionally able to continue participation so long as such a certification is required of all students for other physical or emotional conditions requiring the attention of a physician.
              (3) A recipient which operates a portion of its education program or activity separately for pregnant students, admittance to which is completely voluntary on the part of the student as provided in paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall ensure that the separate portion is comparable to that offered to non-pregnant students.
              (4) A recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability with respect to any medical or hospital benefit, service, plan or policy which such recipient administers, operates, offers, or participates in with respect to students admitted to the recipient's educational program or activity.
              (5) In the case of a recipient which does not maintain a leave policy for its students, or in the case of a student who does not otherwise qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence for so long a period of time as is deemed medically necessary by the student's physician, at the conclusion of which the student shall be reinstated to the status which she held when the leave began.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 86.41
              Athletics.
              (a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, be treated differently from another person or otherwise be discriminated against in any interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics offered by a recipient, and no recipient shall provide any such athletics separately on such basis.
              (b) Separate teams. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, a recipient may operate or sponsor separate teams for members of each sex where selection for such teams is based upon competitive skill or the activity involved is a contact sport. However, where a recipient operates or sponsors a team in a particular sport for members of one sex but operates or sponsors no such team for members of the other sex, and athletic opportunities for members of that sex have previously been limited, members of the excluded sex must be allowed to try-out for the team offered unless the sport involved is a contact sport. For the purposes of this part, contact sports include boxing, wrestling, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball and other sports the purpose of major activity of which involves bodily contact.
              (c) Equal opportunity. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics shall provide equal athletic opportunity for members of both sexes. In determining whether equal opportunities are available the Director will consider, among other factors:
              (1) Whether the selection of sports and levels of competition effectively accommodate the interests and abilities of members of both sexes;
              (2) The provision of equipment and supplies;
              (3) Scheduling of games and practice time;
              (4) Travel and per diem allowance;
              
              (5) Opportunity to receive coaching and academic tutoring;
              (6) Assignment and compensation of coaches and tutors;
              (7) Provision of locker rooms, practice and competitive facilities;
              (8) Provision of medical and training facilities and services;
              (9) Provision of housing and dining facilities and services;
              (10) Publicity.
              Unequal aggregate expenditures for members of each sex or unequal expenditures for male and female teams if a recipient operates or sponsors separate teams will not constitute noncompliance with this section, but the Director may consider the failure to provide necessary funds for teams for one sex in assessing equality of opportunity for members of each sex.
              (d) Adjustment period. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics at the elementary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than one year from the effective date of this regulation. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics at the secondary or post-secondary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than three years from the effective date of this regulation.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; and sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93-380, 88 Stat. 484)
              [40 FR 24128, June 4, 1975; 40 FR 39506, Aug. 28, 1975]
            
            
              § 86.42
              Textbooks and curricular material.
              Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted as requiring or prohibiting or abridging in any way the use of particular textbooks or curricular materials.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              §§ 86.43-86.50
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Employment in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
            
              § 86.51
              Employment.
              (a) General. (1) No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination in employment, or recruitment, consideration, or selection therefor, whether full-time or part-time, under any education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives Federal financial assistance.
              (2) A recipient shall make all employment decisions in any education program or activity operated by such recipient in a nondiscriminatory manner and shall not limit, segregate, or classify applicants or employees in any way which could adversely affect any applicant's or employee's employment opportunities or status because of sex.
              (3) A recipient shall not enter into any contractual or other relationship which directly or indirectly has the effect of subjecting employees or students to discrimination prohibited by this subpart, including relationships with employment and referral agencies, with labor unions, and with organizations providing or administering fringe benefits to employees of the recipient.
              (4) A recipient shall not grant preferences to applicants for employment on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or entity which admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preferences has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this part.
              (b) Application. The provisions of this subpart apply to:
              (1) Recruitment, advertising, and the process of application for employment;

              (2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, consideration for and award of tenure, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, application of nepotism policies, right of return from layoff, and rehiring;
              
              (3) Rates of pay or any other form of compensation, and changes in compensation;
              (4) Job assignments, classifications and structure, including position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
              (5) The terms of any collective bargaining agreement;
              (6) Granting and return from leaves of absence, leave for pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, leave for persons of either sex to care for children or dependents, or any other leave;
              (7) Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, whether or not administered by the recipient;
              (8) Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related activities, selection for tuition assistance, selection for sabbaticals and leaves of absence to pursue training;
              (9) Employer-sponsored activities, including those that are social or recreational; and
              (10) Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24137, June 4, 1975, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 86.52
              Employment criteria.
              A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for any employment opportunity which has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless:
              (a) Use of such test or other criterion is shown to predict validly successful performance in the position in question; and
              (b) Alternative tests or criteria for such purpose, which do not have such disproportionately adverse effect, are shown to be unavailable.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.53
              Recruitment.
              (a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment and hiring. A recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and hiring of employees. Where a recipient has been found to be presently discriminating on the basis of sex in the recruitment or hiring of employees, or has been found to have in the past so discriminated, the recipient shall recruit members of the sex so discriminated against so as to overcome the effects of such past or present discrimination.
              (b) Recruitment patterns. A recipient shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at entities which furnish as applicants only or predominantly members of one sex if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.54
              Compensation.
              A recipient shall not make or enforce any policy or practice which, on the basis of sex:
              (a) Makes distinctions in rates of pay or other compensation;
              (b) Results in the payment of wages to employees of one sex at a rate less than that paid to employees of the opposite sex for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility, and which are performed under similar working conditions.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.55
              Job classification and structure.
              A recipient shall not:
              (a) Classify a job as being for males or for females;
              (b) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority lists, career ladders, or tenure systems based on sex; or
              (c) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority systems, career ladders, or tenure systems for similar jobs, position descriptions, or job requirements which classify persons on the basis of sex, unless sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for the positions in question as set forth in § 86.61.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
              [40 FR 24128, June 4, 1975; 40 FR 39506, Aug. 28, 1975]
            
            
              
              § 86.56
              Fringe benefits.
              (a) Fringe benefits defined. For purposes of this part, fringe benefits means: Any medical, hospital, accident, life insurance or retirement benefit, service, policy or plan, any profit-sharing or bonus plan, leave, and any other benefit or service of employment not subject to the provision of § 86.54.
              (b) Prohibitions. A recipient shall not:
              (1) Discriminate on the basis of sex with regard to making fringe benefits available to employees or make fringe benefits available to spouses, families, or dependents of employees differently upon the basis of the employee's sex;
              (2) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a fringe benefit plan which does not provide either for equal periodic benefits for members of each sex, or for equal contributions to the plan by such recipient for members of each sex; or
              (3) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a pension or retirement plan which establishes different optional or compulsory retirement ages based on sex or which otherwise discriminates in benefits on the basis of sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.57
              Marital or parental status.
              (a) General. A recipient shall not apply any policy or take any employment action:
              (1) Concerning the potential marital, parental, or family status of an employee or applicant for employment which treats persons differently on the basis of sex; or
              (2) Which is based upon whether an employee or applicant for employment is the head of household or principal wage earner in such employee's or applicant's family unit.
              (b) Pregnancy. A recipient shall not discriminate against or exclude from employment any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom.
              (c) Pregnancy as a temporary disability. A recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, and recovery therefrom and any temporary disability resulting therefrom as any other temporary disability for all job related purposes, including commencement, duration and extensions of leave, payment of disability income, accrual of seniority and any other benefit or service, and reinstatement, and under any fringe benefit offered to employees by virtue of employment.
              (d) Pregnancy leave. In the case of a recipient which does not maintain a leave policy for its employees, or in the case of an employee with insufficient leave or accrued employment time to qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence without pay for a reasonable period of time, at the conclusion of which the employee shall be reinstated to the status which she held when the leave began or to a comparable position, without decrease in rate of compensation or loss of promotional opportunities, or any other right or privilege of employment.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.58
              Effect of State or local law or other requirements.
              (a) Prohibitory requirements. The obligation to comply with this subpart is not obviated or alleviated by the existence of any State or local law or other requirement which imposes prohibitions or limits upon employment of members of one sex which are not imposed upon members of the other sex.
              (b) Benefits. A recipient which provides any compensation, service, or benefit to members of one sex pursuant to a State or local law or other requirement shall provide the same compensation, service, or benefit to members of the other sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.59
              Advertising.

              A recipient shall not in any advertising related to employment indicate preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sex unless sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for the particular job in question.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.60
              Pre-employment inquiries.
              (a) Marital status. A recipient shall not make pre-employment inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for employment, including whether such applicant is “Miss or Mrs.”
              (b) Sex. A recipient may make pre-employment inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for employment, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by this part.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              § 86.61
              Sex as a bona-fide occupational qualification.
              A recipient may take action otherwise prohibited by this subpart provided it is shown that sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for that action, such that consideration of sex with regard to such action is essential to successful operation of the employment function concerned. A recipient shall not take action pursuant to this section which is based upon alleged comparative employment characteristics or stereotyped characterizations of one or the other sex, or upon preference based on sex of the recipient, employees, students, or other persons, but nothing contained in this section shall prevent a recipient from considering an employee's sex in relation to employment in a locker room or toilet facility used only by members of one sex.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              §§ 86.62-86.70
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Procedures [Interim]
            
              § 86.71
              Interim procedures.
              For the purposes of implementing this part during the period between its effective date and the final issuance by the Department of a consolidated procedural regulation applicable to title IX and other civil rights authorities administered by the Department, the procedural provisions applicable to title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. These procedures may be found at 45 CFR 80-6 through 80-11 and 45 CFR part 81.
              (Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682)
            
            
              Pt. 86, Index
              Subject Index to Title IX Preamble and Regulation 1
                
              
              
                
                  1 Preamble paragraph numbers are in brackets [ ].
              
              A
              Access to Course Offerings [43, 55, 56, 57, 58]; 86.34
              Access to Schools Operated by LEA's, [44]; 86.35
              Admissions, [5, 6, 30]; 86.15, 86.21
              Affirmative and remedial action, [16, 17, 24]; 86.3 (a), (b)
              Administratively separate units, [30];86.15(b), 86.2(o)
              Educational Institutions, [30], 86.15(d), 86.2(n)
              General, 86.21(a), 86.2(p),
              Prohibitions relating to marital and parental status, [32, 36]; 86.21(c)
              Professional schools, [30], 86.2(m)
              Public institutions of undergraduate higher education, 86.15(e)
              Recruitment, [34, 35]; 86.23
              Specific prohibitions, 86.21(b)
              Tests, [31]; 86.21(b)(2)
              Preference in admission, [35]; 86.22
              Advertising, 86.59
              Affirmative Action, see “Remedial and Affirmative Actions”
              Assistance to “outside” discriminatory organizations, [40, 53]; 86.31(b)(7), (c)
              Assurances, [18]; 86.4
              Duration of obligation, 86.4(b)
              Form, 86.4(c)
              Athletics, [69 to 78]; 86.41
              Adjustment period, [78]; 86.41(d)
              Contact sport defined, 86.41(d)
              Equal opportunity, [76, 77]; 86.41(d)
              Determining factors, 86.41(c) (i) to (x)
              Equipment, 86.41(c)
              Expenditures, 86.41(c)
              Facilities, 86.41(c)
              Travel, 86.41(c)
              Scholarships, [64, 65]; 86.37(d)
              General, [69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75]; 86.41(a)
              Separate teams, [75]; 86.41(b)
              B
              BFOQ, [96]; 86.61
              
              C
              Comparable facilities
              Housing, [42, 54]; 86.32
              Other, 86.33, 86.35(b)
              Compensation, [84, 87, 92]; 86.54
              Counseling
              Disproportionate classes, [45, 59]; 86.36(c)
              General, [45, 59]; 86.36(a)
              Materials, [45, 59]; 86.36(b)
              Course Offerings
              Adjustment period, [55]; 86.34(a) (i)
              General, [7, 43]; 86.34
              Music classes, [43]; 86.34(f)
              Physical education, [43, 56, 58];
              Sex education, [43, 57]; 86.34(e)
              Coverage, [5]; 86.11 to 86.17
              Exemptions
              Curricular materials, [52]; 86.42(a)
              D
              Definitions, [14, 15]; 86.2(a) to (r)
              Designation of responsible employee, [20, 22]; 86.8(a), (b)
              Dissemination of policy, [21]; 86.9
              Distribution, 86.9(c)
              Notification of policy, [21]; 86.9(a)
              Publications, 86.9(b)
              Dress codes 86.31(b) (4)
              E
              Education Institutions
              Controlled by religious organizations, 86.12
              Application, [28, 29]; 86.12(a)
              Exemption, [26]; 86.12(b)
              Education Program and Activities
              Benefiting from Federal financial assistance, [10, 11]; 86.11
              General, [10, 11, 53]; 86.31(a)
              Programs not operated by recipient, [41, 54]; 86.31(c)
              Specific prohibitions, [38, 39, 40, 53]; 86.31 (b)
              Effective Date, [3]
              Employee responsible for Title IX, see “Designation of Responsible Employee”
              Employment
              Advertising, 86.59
              Application, 86.51(b)
              Compensation, [84, 92]; 86.54
              Employment criteria, 86.52
              Fringe benefits, [88, 89]; 86.56
              General, [81, 82, 87]; 86.51
              Job Classification and Structure, 86.55
              Marital and Parental Status, 86.57
              Pregnancy, [85, 93]; 86.57(b)
              Pregnancy as Temporary Disability, [85, 93]; 86.57(c)
              Pregnancy Leave, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57(d)
              Pre-Employment Inquiry
              Recruitment, [83, 90, 91, 95]
              Sex as a BFOQ, [96]; 86.61
              Student Employment, [66]; 86.38
              Tenure, 86.51(b) (2)
              Exemptions, [5, 27, 28, 29, 30, 53]; 86.12(b), 86.13, 86.14, 86.15(a), 86.15(d), 86.16
              F
              Federal Financial Assistance, 86.2(a)
              Financial Assistance to students, [46, 60, 61]; 86.37
              Athletic Scholarships, [46, 64, 65]; 86.37(d)
              Foreign institutions, study at [63]; 86.31(c)
              General, 86.37
              Non-need scholarships, [62]; 86.37(b)
              Pooling of sex-restrictive, [46, 61, 62]; 86.37(b)
              Sex-restrictive assistance through foreign or domestic wills [46, 61, 62]; 86.37(b)
              Foreign Scholarships, see “Financial assistance” 86.37 and “Assistance to ‘outside’ discriminatory organizations”, 86.31(c)
              Fraternities/Sororities
              Social, [53, 27, 28]; 86.14(a)
              Business/professional, [40, 53, 27, 28]; 86.31(b) (7)
              Honor societies, [40, 53]; 86.31(b) (7)
              Fringe benefits, [67, 88, 89]; 86.56, 86.39
              Part-time employees, [89]
              G
              Grievance Procedure, see “Designation of responsible employee”, 86.8(a) (b)
              H
              Health and Insurance Benefits and Services, [67, 88, 93]; 86.39, 86.56
              Honor societies, [40, 53]; 86.31(b) (7)
              Housing, 86.32
              Generally, [42]; 86.32(b)
              Provided by recipient, 86.32(b)
              Other housing, [54]; 86.32(c)
              J
              Job Classification and Structure, 86.55
              L
              LEA's, [44]; 86.35
              M
              Marital and Parental Status
              Employment
              General, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57
              Pregnancy, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57(b)
              Pregnancy as a temporary disability, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57(c)
              Pregnancy leave, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57(d)
              Students
              General, [49]; 86.40(a) (b)
              Pregnancy and related conditions, [50]; 86.40(b) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
              Class participation, [50]; 86.40(b) (1)
              Physician certification, [50]; 86.40(b) (2)
              Special classes, [50]; 86.40(b) (3)
              Temporary leave, [50]; 86.40(b) (4) (5)
              Membership Practices of Social fraternities and sororities, [27, 28, 53]; 86.14(a)
              Voluntary youth service organizations, [27, 28, 53]; 86.14(c)

              YMCA, YWCA and others, [27, 28, 53]; 86.14(b)
              
              Military and Merchant Marine Educational Institutions, [29]; 86.13
              P
              Pooling, see “Financial Assistance”, 86.37
              Pre-employment Inquiries
              Marital status, [86, 95]; 86.60(a)
              Sex, 86.60(b)
              Preference in Admissions, [35]; 86.22
              See also “Remedial and Affirmative Action”
              Pregnancy, Employment
              General, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57
              Pregnancy, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57(b)
              Pregnancy as temporary disability, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57(c)
              Pregnancy leave, [85, 93, 94]; 86.57(d)
              Students
              General, [49, 50]; 86.40(a) and (b)
              Pregnancy and related conditions; [50]; 86.40(b) (1) to (5)
              Class Participation, [50, 55, 58]; 86.40(b) (1)
              Physical certification, [50]; 86.40(b) (2)
              Special class, [50]; 86.40 (b) (3)
              Temporary leave, [50]; 86.40(b) (4), (5)
              Private Undergraduate Professional Schools, [30]; 86.15(d)
              Purpose of Regulation, [13]; 86.1
              R
              Real Property, 86.2(g)
              Recruitment
              Employment
              Nondiscrimination, [83, 91]; 86.53(a)
              Patterns, 86.53(b)
              Student
              Nondiscrimination, [34, 35]; 86.23(a)
              Recruitment at certain institutions, 86.23 (b)
              Religious Organizations
              Application, [29, 28]; 86.12(a)
              Exemption, [26]; 86.12(b)
              Remedial and Affirmative Actions, [16, 17, 24]; 86.3
              S
              Scholarships, see “Financial Assistance”, 86.37
              Self-evaluation, [16, 22]; 86.3(c) (d)
              Surplus Property (see Transfer of Property 86.5)
              Duration of obligation 86.4(b)
              Real Property 86.4(b) (1)
              T
              Textbooks and curricular materials, [52, 79, 80]; 86.42
              Termination of funds, [10, 11]
              Transfer of property, 86.5
              Transition Plans
              Content of plans, 86.17(b)
              Different from Adjustment period, [78]; 86.41(d)
               Submission of plans, 86.17(a)
            
          
          
             
            
              Pt. 86, App. A
              Appendix A to Part 86—Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs [Note]
              
                Note:
                For the text of these guidelines, see 45 CFR part 80, appendix B.
              
              [44 FR 17168, Mar. 21, 1979]
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 87
          PART 87—EQUAL TREATMENT FOR FAITH-BASED ORGANIZATIONS
          
            Sec.
            87.1
            Definitions.
            87.2
            Applicability.
            87.3
            Grants.
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301.
          
          
            Source:
            81 FR 19426, Apr. 4, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 87.1
            Definitions.
            (a) These are the definitions for terms used in this part. Different definitions may be found in Federal statutes or regulations that apply more specifically to particular program or activities.
            (b) The terms direct Federal financial assistance, Federal financial assistance provided directly,
              direct funding, and directly funded mean that the government or a pass-through entity (under this part) selects the provider and either purchases services from that provider (e.g., via a contract) or awards funds to that provider to carry out a service (e.g., via grant or cooperative agreement). In general, Federal financial assistance shall be treated as direct, unless it meets the definition of “indirect Federal financial assistance” or “Federal financial assistance provided indirectly.”
            (c) The term indirect Federal financial assistance or Federal financial assistance provided indirectly means that the choice of the service provider is placed in the hands of the beneficiary, and the cost of that service is paid through a voucher, certificate, or other similar means of government-funded payment.
            (1) Federal financial assistance provided to an organization is considered indirect when:

            (i) The Government program through which the beneficiary receives the voucher, certificate, or other similar means of Government-funded payment is neutral toward religion;
            (ii) The organization receives the assistance as a result of a decision of the beneficiary, not a decision of the government; and
            (iii) The beneficiary has at least one adequate secular option for the use of the voucher, certificate, or other similar means of Government-funded payment.
            (2) The recipients of sub-grants that receive Federal financial assistance through State-administered programs are not considered recipients of “indirect Federal financial assistance” [or recipients of “Federal funds provided indirectly”] as those terms are used in this part.
            (d) Pass-through entity means a non-Federal entity that provides a subaward to a subrecipient to carry out part of a Federal program.
            (e) Recipient means a non-Federal entity that receives a Federal award directly from a Federal awarding agency to carry out an activity under a Federal program. The term recipient does not include subrecipients.
          
          
            § 87.2
            Applicability.
            This part applies to grants awarded in HHS social service programs governed by either the Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements at 45 CFR part 75 or Block Grant regulations at 45 CFR part 96, except as provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
            (a) Discretionary grants. This part is not applicable to the discretionary grant programs that are governed Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Charitable Choice regulations found at 42 CFR part 54a. This part is also not applicable to discretionary grant programs that are governed by the Community Services Block Grant (CSBG) Charitable Choice regulations at 45 CFR part 1050, with the exception of §§ 87.1 and 87.3(i) through (l) which do apply to such CSBG discretionary grants. Discretionary grants authorized by the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act are also not governed by this part.
            (b) Formula and block grants. This part does not apply to non-discretionary and block grant programs governed by the SAMHSA Charitable Choice regulations found at 42 CFR part 54, or the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) Charitable Choice regulations at 45 CFR part 260. Block grants governed by the CSBG Charitable Choice regulations at 45 CFR part 1050 are not subject to this part, with the exception that §§ 87.1 and 87.3(i) through (l) do apply to such CSBG block grants. This part is not applicable to Child Care and Development Block Grants governed by 45 CFR part 98.
          
          
            § 87.3
            Grants.
            (a) Faith-based or religious organizations are eligible, on the same basis as any other organization, to participate in any HHS awarding agency program for which they are otherwise eligible. Neither the HHS awarding agency, nor any State or local government and other pass-through entity receiving funds under any HHS awarding agency program shall, in the selection of service providers, discriminate for or against an organization on the basis of the organization's religious character or affiliation. As used in this section, “program” refers to activities supported by discretionary, formula or block grants.

            (b) Organizations that apply for or receive direct financial assistance from an HHS awarding agency may not support or engage in any explicitly religious activities (including activities that involve overt religious content such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization), as part of the programs or services funded with direct financial assistance from the HHS awarding agency, or in any other manner prohibited by law. If an organization conducts such activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or services funded with direct financial assistance from the HHS awarding agency, and participation must be voluntary for beneficiaries of the programs or services funded with such assistance. The use of indirect Federal financial assistance is not subject to this restriction. Nothing in this part restricts HHS's authority under applicable Federal law to fund activities, such as the provision of chaplaincy services, that can be directly funded by the Government consistent with the Establishment Clause.
            (c) A faith-based or religious organization that participates in HHS awarding agency-funded programs or services will retain its independence from Federal, State, and local governments, and may continue to carry out its mission, including the definition, practice, and expression of its religious beliefs, provided that it does not use direct financial assistance from an HHS awarding agency (including through a prime or sub-award) to support or engage in any explicitly religious activities (including activities that involve overt religious content such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization). A faith-based or religious organization may use space in its facilities to provide programs or services funded with financial assistance from the HHS awarding agency without removing religious art, icons, scriptures, or other religious symbols. In addition, a faith-based or religious organization that receives financial assistance from the HHS awarding agency retains its authority over its internal governance, and it may retain religious terms in its organization's name, select its board members on a religious basis, and include religious references in its organization's mission statements and other governing documents in accordance with all program requirements, statutes, and other applicable requirements governing the conduct of HHS funded activities.
            (d) An organization that participates in any programs funded by financial assistance from an HHS awarding agency shall not, in providing services or in outreach activities related to such services, discriminate against a program beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of religion, a religious belief, a refusal to hold a religious belief, or a refusal to attend or participate in a religious practice. However, an organization that participates in a program funded by indirect financial assistance need not modify its program activities to accommodate a beneficiary who chooses to expend the indirect aid on the organization's program.
            (e) No grant document, agreement, covenant, memorandum of understanding, policy, or regulation that is used by an HHS awarding agency or a State or local government in administering financial assistance from the HHS awarding agency shall require only faith-based or religious organizations to provide assurances that they will not use monies or property for explicitly religious activities. Any restrictions on the use of grant funds shall apply equally to religious and non-religious organizations. All organizations that participate in HHS awarding agency programs, including organizations with religious character or affiliations, must carry out eligible activities in accordance with all program requirements and other applicable requirements governing the conduct of HHS awarding agency-funded activities, including those prohibiting the use of direct financial assistance to engage in explicitly religious activities. No grant document, agreement, covenant, memorandum of understanding, policy, or regulation that is used by the HHS awarding agency or a State or local government in administering financial assistance from the HHS awarding agency shall disqualify faith-based or religious organizations from participating in the HHS awarding agency's programs because such organizations are motivated or influenced by religious faith to provide social services, or because of their religious character or affiliation.

            (f) A faith-based or religious organization's exemption from the Federal prohibition on employment discrimination on the basis of religion, set forth in section 702(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-1, is not forfeited when the faith-based or religious organization receives direct or indirect financial assistance from an HHS awarding agency. Some HHS awarding agency programs, however, contain independent statutory provisions requiring that all recipients agree not to discriminate in employment on the basis of religion. Accordingly, recipients should consult with the appropriate HHS awarding agency program office if they have questions about the scope of any applicable requirement.
            (g) In general, the HHS awarding agency does not require that a recipient, including a faith-based or religious organization, obtain tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code to be eligible for funding under HHS awarding agency programs. Many grant programs, however, do require an organization to be a “nonprofit organization” in order to be eligible for funding. Funding announcements and other grant application solicitations that require organizations to have nonprofit status will specifically so indicate in the eligibility section of the solicitation. In addition, any solicitation that requires an organization to maintain tax-exempt status will expressly state the statutory authority for requiring such status. Recipients should consult with the appropriate HHS awarding agency program office to determine the scope of any applicable requirements. In HHS awarding agency programs in which an applicant must show that it is a nonprofit organization, the applicant may do so by any of the following means:
            (1) Proof that the Internal Revenue Service currently recognizes the applicant as an organization to which contributions are tax deductible under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
            (2) A statement from a State or other governmental taxing body or the State secretary of State certifying that:
            (i) The organization is a nonprofit organization operating within the State; and
            (ii) No part of its net earnings may benefit any private shareholder or individual;
            (3) A certified copy of the applicant's certificate of incorporation or similar document that clearly establishes the nonprofit status of the applicant; or
            (4) Any item described in paragraphs (g)(1) through (3) of this section, if that item applies to a State or national parent organization, together with a statement by the State or parent organization that the applicant is a local nonprofit affiliate.
            (h) If a recipient contributes its own funds in excess of those funds required by a matching or grant agreement to supplement HHS awarding agency-supported activities, the recipient has the option to segregate those additional funds or commingle them with the Federal award funds. If the funds are commingled, the provisions of this section shall apply to all of the commingled funds in the same manner, and to the same extent, as the provisions apply to the Federal funds. With respect to the matching funds, the provisions of this section apply irrespective of whether such funds are commingled with Federal funds or segregated.
            (i)(1) Faith-based or religious organizations providing social services in the United States to beneficiaries under an HHS program that is supported by direct Federal financial assistance must give written notice to beneficiaries or prospective beneficiaries of certain protections. This written notice must be given to beneficiaries prior to the time they enroll in the program or receive services from such programs. Notice must be given in a manner prescribed by the HHS awarding agency. This notice must state that:
            (i) The organization may not discriminate against beneficiaries or prospective beneficiaries on the basis of religion, a religious belief, a refusal to hold a religious belief, or a refusal to attend or participate in a religious practice;
            (ii) The organization may not require beneficiaries to attend or participate in any explicitly religious activities that are offered by the organization, and any participation by beneficiaries in such activities must be purely voluntary;
            (iii) The organization must separate in time or location any privately funded explicitly religious activities from activities supported by direct Federal financial assistance;
            (iv) If a beneficiary or prospective beneficiary objects to the religious character of the organization, the organization will undertake reasonable efforts to identify and refer the beneficiary to an alternative provider to which the beneficiary has no objection; however, the organization cannot guarantee that in every instance an alternative provider will be available; and

            (v) Beneficiaries or prospective beneficiaries may report violations of these protections, including any denials of services or benefits that violate these regulations, by contacting or filing a written complaint with the HHS awarding entity.
            (2) When the nature of the service provided or exigent circumstances make it impracticable to provide such written notice in advance of the actual service, service providers must advise beneficiaries of their protections at the earliest available opportunity.
            (j) If a beneficiary or prospective beneficiary of a social service program supported by the HHS awarding agency objects to the religious character of an organization that provides services in the United States under the program, that organization must promptly undertake reasonable efforts to identify and refer the beneficiary to an alternative provider to which the beneficiary has no objection. A referral may be made to another faith-based or religious organization, if the beneficiary has no objection to that provider. But if the beneficiary requests a secular provider, and a secular provider is available, then a referral must be made to that provider. Except for services provided by telephone, internet, or similar means, the referral must be to an alternative provider that is in reasonable geographic proximity to the organization making the referral and that offers services that are similar in substance and quality to those offered by the organization. The alternative provider also must have the capacity to accept additional beneficiaries.
            (k) When the organization determines that it is unable to identify an alternative provider, the organization must promptly notify the prime recipient entity from which it has received funds. The prime recipient of Federal financial assistance must notify the HHS awarding agency when a sub-recipient is unable to identify an alternative provider. If the organization is successful in making a referral, it shall maintain a record of the referral.
            (l) Decisions about awards of Federal financial assistance must be free from political interference or even the appearance of such interference and must be made on the basis of merit, not on the basis of the religious affiliation, or lack thereof, of a recipient organization.
            (m) If a pass-through entity, acting under a contract, grant, or other agreement with the Federal Government or with a State or local government that is administering a program supported by Federal financial assistance, is given the authority under the contract, grant, or agreement to select non-governmental organizations to provide services funded by the Federal Government, the pass-through entity must ensure compliance with the provisions of this part and any implementing regulations or guidance by the sub-recipient. If the pass-through entity is a non-governmental organization, it retains all other rights of a non-governmental organization under the program's statutory and regulatory provisions.
          
        
        
          Pt. 88
          PART 88—PROTECTING STATUTORY CONSCIENCE RIGHTS IN HEALTH CARE; DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY
          
            Sec.
            88.1
            Purpose.
            88.2
            Definitions.
            88.3
            Applicable requirements and prohibitions.
            88.4
            Assurance and certification of compliance requirements.
            88.5
            Notice of rights under Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws.
            88.6
            Compliance requirements.
            88.7
            Enforcement authority.
            88.8
            Relationship to other laws.
            88.9
            Rule of construction.
            88.10
            Severability.
            Appendix A to Part 88—Model Text: Notice of Rights Under Federal Conscience and Anti-Discrimination Laws
          
          
            Authority:

            42 U.S.C. 300a-7 (the Church Amendments); 42 U.S.C. 238n (Coats-Snowe Amendment); the Weldon Amendment (e.g., Pub. L. 115-245, Div. B, sec. 507(d)); 42 U.S.C. 18113 (Section 1553 of the Affordable Care Act); Medicare Advantage (e.g., Pub. L. 115-245, Div. B, sec. 209); the Helms, Biden, 1978, and 1985 Amendments, 22 U.S.C. 2151b(f) (e.g., Pub. L. 116-6, Div. F, sec. 7018); 22 U.S.C. 7631(d); 29 U.S.C. 669(a)(5); 42 U.S.C. 300gg-92; 42 U.S.C. 1302(a); 42 U.S.C. 18041(a) (Section 1321 of the Affordable Care Act); 42 U.S.C. 18081 (Section 1411 of the Affordable Care Act); 42 U.S.C. 18023 (Section 1303 of the Affordable Care Act); 26 U.S.C. 5000A(d)(2); 42 U.S.C. 18031; 42 U.S.C. 280g-1(d); 42 U.S.C. 290bb-36(f); 42 U.S.C. 1315; 42 U.S.C. 1315a; 42 U.S.C. 1320a-1; 42 U.S.C. 1320c-11; 42 U.S.C. 1395cc(f); 42 U.S.C. 1395i-3; 42 U.S.C. 1395i-5; 42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(j)(3)(B); 42 U.S.C. 1395w-26; 42 U.S.C. 1395w-27; 42 U.S.C. 1395x; 42 U.S.C. 1396a; 42 U.S.C. 1396a(w)(3); 42 U.S.C. 1396f; 42 U.S.C. 1396r; 42 U.S.C. 1396s(c)(2)(B)(ii); 42 U.S.C. 1396u-2(b)(3)(B); 42 U.S.C. 1397j-1(b); 42 U.S.C. 5106i(a); 42 U.S.C. 14406; 5 U.S.C. 301; 40 U.S.C. 121(c); 42 U.S.C. 263a(f)(1)(E); 45 CFR parts 75 and 96; 48 CFR chapter 1; 48 CFR parts 300 thru 370; 2 CFR part 376.
          
          
            Source:
            84 FR 23263, May 21, 2019, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 88.1
            Purpose.
            The purpose of this part is to provide for the implementation and enforcement of the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws listed in § 88.3. Such laws, for example, protect the rights of individuals, entities, and health care entities to refuse to perform, assist in the performance of, or undergo certain health care services or research activities to which they may object for religious, moral, ethical, or other reasons. Such laws also protect patients from being subjected to certain health care or services over their conscientious objection. Consistent with their objective to protect the conscience and associated anti-discrimination rights of individuals, entities, and health care entities, the statutory provisions and the regulatory provisions contained in this part are to be interpreted and implemented broadly to effectuate their protective purposes.
          
          
            § 88.2
            Definitions.
            For the purposes of this part:
            
              Assist in the performance means to take an action that has a specific, reasonable, and articulable connection to furthering a procedure or a part of a health service program or research activity undertaken by or with another person or entity. This may include counseling, referral, training, or otherwise making arrangements for the procedure or a part of a health service program or research activity, depending on whether aid is provided by such actions.
            
              Department means the Department of Health and Human Services and any component thereof.
            
              Discriminate or discrimination includes, as applicable to, and to the extent permitted by, the applicable statute:
            (1) To withhold, reduce, exclude from, terminate, restrict, or make unavailable or deny any grant, contract, subcontract, cooperative agreement, loan, license, certification, accreditation, employment, title, or other similar instrument, position, or status;
            (2) To withhold, reduce, exclude from, terminate, restrict, or make unavailable or deny any benefit or privilege or impose any penalty; or
            (3) To utilize any criterion, method of administration, or site selection, including the enactment, application, or enforcement of laws, regulations, policies, or procedures directly or through contractual or other arrangements, that subjects individuals or entities protected under this part to any adverse treatment with respect to individuals, entities, or conduct protected under this part on grounds prohibited under an applicable statute encompassed by this part.
            (4) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (3) of this definition, an entity subject to any prohibition in this part shall not be regarded as having engaged in discrimination against a protected entity where the entity offers and the protected entity voluntarily accepts an effective accommodation for the exercise of such protected entity's protected conduct, religious beliefs, or moral convictions. In determining whether any entity has engaged in discriminatory action with respect to any complaint or compliance review under this part, OCR will take into account the degree to which an entity had implemented policies to provide effective accommodations for the exercise of protected conduct, religious beliefs, or moral convictions under this part and whether or not the entity took any adverse action against a protected entity on the basis of protected conduct, beliefs, or convictions before the provision of any accommodation.

            (5) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (3) of this definition, an entity subject to any prohibition in this part may require a protected entity to inform it of objections to performing, referring for, participating in, or assisting in the performance of specific procedures, programs, research, counseling, or treatments, but only to the extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that the protected entity may be asked in good faith to perform, refer for, participate in, or assist in the performance of, any act or conduct just described. Such inquiry may only occur after the hiring of, contracting with, or awarding of a grant or benefit to a protected entity, and once per calendar year thereafter, unless supported by a persuasive justification.
            (6) The taking of steps by an entity subject to prohibitions in this part to use alternate staff or methods to provide or further any objected-to conduct identified in paragraph (5) of this definition would not, by itself, constitute discrimination or a prohibited referral, if such entity does not require any additional action by, or does not take any adverse action against, the objecting protected entity (including individuals or health care entities), and if such methods do not exclude protected entities from fields of practice on the basis of their protected objections. Entities subject to prohibitions in this part may also inform the public of the availability of alternate staff or methods to provide or further the objected-to conduct, but such entity may not do so in a manner that constitutes adverse or retaliatory action against an objecting entity.
            
              Entity means a “person” as defined in 1 U.S.C. 1; the Department; a State, political subdivision of any State, instrumentality of any State or political subdivision thereof; any public agency, public institution, public organization, or other public entity in any State or political subdivision of any State; or, as applicable, a foreign government, foreign nongovernmental organization, or intergovernmental organization (such as the United Nations or its affiliated agencies).
            
              Federal financial assistance includes:
            (1) Grants and loans of Federal funds;
            (2) The grant or loan of Federal property and interests in property;
            (3) The detail of Federal personnel;
            (4) The sale or lease of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or transient basis), Federal property or any interest in such property without consideration or at a nominal consideration, or at a consideration which is reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of the public interest to be served by such sale or lease to the recipient; and
            (5) Any agreement or other contract between the Federal government and a recipient that has as one of its purposes the provision of a subsidy to the recipient.
            
              Health care entity includes:
            (1) For purposes of the Coats-Snowe Amendment (42 U.S.C. 238n) and the subsections of this part implementing that law (§ 88.3(b)), an individual physician or other health care professional, including a pharmacist; health care personnel; a participant in a program of training in the health professions; an applicant for training or study in the health professions; a post-graduate physician training program; a hospital; a medical laboratory; an entity engaging in biomedical or behavioral research; a pharmacy; or any other health care provider or health care facility. As applicable, components of State or local governments may be health care entities under the Coats-Snowe Amendment; and
            (2) For purposes of the Weldon Amendment (e.g., Department of Defense and Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education Appropriations Act, 2019, and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2019, Pub. L. 115-245, Div. B., sec. 507(d), 132 Stat. 2981, 3118 (Sept. 28, 2018)), Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act section 1553 (42 U.S.C. 18113), and to sections of this part implementing those laws (§ 88.3(c) and (e)), an individual physician or other health care professional, including a pharmacist; health care personnel; a participant in a program of training in the health professions; an applicant for training or study in the health professions; a post-graduate physician training program; a hospital; a medical laboratory; an entity engaging in biomedical or behavioral research; a pharmacy; a provider-sponsored organization; a health maintenance organization; a health insurance issuer; a health insurance plan (including group or individual plans); a plan sponsor or third-party administrator; or any other kind of health care organization, facility, or plan. As applicable, components of State or local governments may be health care entities under the Weldon Amendment and Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act section 1553.
            
              Health service program includes the provision or administration of any health or health-related services or research activities, health benefits, health or health-related insurance coverage, health studies, or any other service related to health or wellness, whether directly; through payments, grants, contracts, or other instruments; through insurance; or otherwise.
            
              Instrument is the means by which Federal funds are conveyed to a recipient and includes grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, grants under a contract, memoranda of understanding, loans, loan guarantees, stipends, and any other funding or employment instrument or contract.
            
              OCR means the Office for Civil Rights of the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
              Recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, instrumentality of any State or political subdivision thereof, and any person or any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity in any State, including any successor, assign, or transferee thereof, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly from the Department or a component of the Department, or who otherwise receives Federal funds directly from the Department or a component of the Department, but such term does not include any ultimate beneficiary. The term may include a foreign government, foreign nongovernmental organization, or intergovernmental organization (such as the United Nations or its affiliated agencies).
            
              Referral or refer for includes the provision of information in oral, written, or electronic form (including names, addresses, phone numbers, email or web addresses, directions, instructions, descriptions, or other information resources), where the purpose or reasonably foreseeable outcome of provision of the information is to assist a person in receiving funding or financing for, training in, obtaining, or performing a particular health care service, program, activity, or procedure.
            
              State includes, in addition to the several States, the District of Columbia. For those provisions related to or relying upon the Public Health Service Act, the term “State” includes the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. For those provisions related to or relying upon the Social Security Act, such as Medicaid or the Children's Health Insurance Program, the term “State” shall be defined in accordance with the definition of “State” found at 42 U.S.C. 1301.
            
              Sub-recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, instrumentality of any State or political subdivision thereof, or any person or any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity in any State, including any successor, assign, or transferee thereof, to whom there is a pass-through of Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department through a recipient or another sub-recipient, but such term does not include any ultimate beneficiary. The term may include a foreign government, foreign nongovernmental organization, or intergovernmental organization (such as the United Nations or its affiliated agencies).
            
              Workforce means employees, volunteers, trainees, contractors, and other persons whose conduct, in the performance of work for an entity or health care entity, is under the direct control of such entity or health care entity, whether or not they are paid by the entity or health care entity, as well as health care providers holding privileges with the entity or health care entity.
          
          
            § 88.3
            Applicable requirements and prohibitions.
            (a) The Church Amendments, 42 U.S.C. 300a-7—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraphs (a)(2)(i) through (vii) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.

            (ii) Any State or local government or subdivision thereof and any other public entity is required to comply with paragraphs (a)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section.
            

            (iii) Any entity that receives a grant, contract, loan, or loan guarantee under the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) after June 18, 1973, is required to comply with paragraph (a)(2)(iv) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (iv) Any entity that receives a grant or contract for biomedical or behavioral research under any program administered by the Secretary of Health and Human Services after July 12, 1974, is required to comply with paragraph (a)(2)(v) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (v) The Department and any entity that receives funds for any health service program or research activity under any program administered by the Secretary of Health and Human Services is required to comply with paragraph (a)(2)(vi) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.

            (vi) Any entity that receives, after September 29, 1979, any grant, contract, loan, loan guarantee, or interest subsidy under the Public Health Service Act or the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000 [42 U.S.C. 15001 et seq.] is required to comply with paragraph (a)(2)(vii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements and prohibitions. (i) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 300a-7(b)(1), the receipt of a grant, contract, loan, or loan guarantee under the Public Health Service Act by any individual does not authorize entities to which this paragraph (a)(2)(i) applies to require such individual to perform or assist in the performance of any sterilization procedure or abortion if his performance or assistance in the performance of such procedure or abortion would be contrary to his religious beliefs or moral convictions.
            (ii) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 300a-7(b)(2)(A), the receipt of a grant, contract, loan, or loan guarantee under the Public Health Service Act by any recipient does not authorize entities to which this paragraph (a)(2)(ii) applies to require such recipient to make its facilities available for the performance of any sterilization procedure or abortion if the performance of such procedure or abortion in such facilities is prohibited by the recipient on the basis of religious beliefs or moral convictions.
            (iii) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 300a-7(b)(2)(B), the receipt of a grant, contract, loan, or loan guarantee under the Public Health Service Act by any recipient does not authorize entities to which this paragraph (a)(2)(iii) applies to require such recipient to provide personnel for the performance or assistance in the performance of any sterilization procedure or abortion if the performance or assistance in the performance of such procedure or abortion by such personnel would be contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of such personnel.
            (iv) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 300a-7(c)(1), entities to which this paragraph (a)(2)(iv) applies shall not discriminate against any physician or other health care personnel in employment, promotion, termination of employment, or extension of staff or other privileges because such physician or other health care personnel performed or assisted in the performance of a lawful sterilization procedure or abortion, because he refused to perform or assist in the performance of a lawful sterilization procedure or abortion on the grounds that his performance or assistance in the performance of such procedure or abortion would be contrary to his religious beliefs or moral convictions, or because of his religious beliefs or moral convictions respecting sterilization procedures or abortions.

            (v) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 300a-7(c)(2), entities to which this paragraph (a)(2)(v) applies shall not discriminate against any physician or other health care personnel in employment, promotion, termination of employment, or extension of staff or other privileges because such physician or other health care personnel performed or assisted in the performance of any lawful health service or research activity, because he refused to perform or assist in the performance of any such service or activity on the grounds that his performance or assistance in the performance of such service or activity would be contrary to his religious beliefs or moral convictions, or because of his religious beliefs or moral convictions respecting any such service or activity.
            
            (vi) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 300a-7(d), entities to which this paragraph (a)(2)(vi) applies shall not require any individual to perform or assist in the performance of any part of a health service program or research activity funded in whole or in part under a program administered by the Secretary of Health and Human Services if the individual's performance or assistance in the performance of such part of such program or activity would be contrary to his religious beliefs or moral convictions.
            (vii) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 300a-7(e), entities to which this paragraph (a)(2)(vii) applies shall not deny admission to or otherwise discriminate against any applicant (including applicants for internships and residencies) for training or study because of the applicant's reluctance or willingness to counsel, suggest, recommend, assist, or in any way participate in the performance of abortions or sterilizations contrary to, or consistent with, the applicant's religious beliefs or moral convictions.
            (b) The Coats-Snowe Amendment (Section 245 of the Public Health Service Act), 42 U.S.C. 238n—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraphs (b)(2)(i) through (ii) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any State or local government or subdivision thereof that receives Federal financial assistance, including Federal payments provided as reimbursement for carrying out health-related activities, is required to comply with paragraphs (b)(2)(i) through (ii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements and prohibitions. (i) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 238n(a)(1), (2), and (3), entities to which this paragraph (b)(2)(i) applies shall not subject any health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the health care entity—
            (A) Refuses to undergo training in the performance of induced abortions, to require or provide such training, to perform such abortions, or to provide referrals for such training or such abortions;
            (B) Refuses to make arrangements for any of the activities specified in (b)(2)(i)(A); or
            (C) Attends or attended a post-graduate physician training program or any other program of training in the health professions that does not or did not perform induced abortions or require, provide, or refer for training in the performance of induced abortions, or make arrangements for the provision of such training.
            (ii) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 238n(b), entities to which this paragraph (b)(2)(ii) applies shall not, for the purposes of granting a legal status to a health care entity (including a license or certificate), or providing such entity with financial assistance, services, or benefits, fail to deem accredited any postgraduate physician training program that would be accredited but for the accrediting agency's reliance upon accreditation standards that require an entity to perform an induced abortion or that require an entity to require, provide, or refer for training in the performance of induced abortions or make arrangements for such training, regardless of whether such standards provide exceptions or exemptions. Entities to which this paragraph (b)(2)(ii) applies and which are involved in such matters shall formulate such regulations or other mechanisms, or enter into such agreements with accrediting agencies, as are necessary to comply with this paragraph.
            (c) Weldon Amendment (See, e.g., Pub. L. 115-245, Div. B, sec. 507(d))—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department and its programs, while operating under an appropriations act that contains the Weldon Amendment, are required to comply with paragraph (c)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any State or local government that receives funds under an appropriations act for the Department that contains the Weldon Amendment is required to comply with paragraph (c)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Prohibition. The entities to which this paragraph (c)(2) applies shall not subject any institutional or individual health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the health care entity does not provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or refer for, abortion.
            
            (d) Medicare Advantage (See, e.g., Pub. L. 115-245, Div. B, sec. 209)—(1) Applicability. The Department, while operating under an appropriations act that contains a provision with respect to the Medicare Advantage program as set forth by Public Law 115-245, Div. B, sec. 209, is required to comply with paragraph (d)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Prohibition. The entities to which this paragraph (d)(2) applies shall not deny participation in the Medicare Advantage program to an otherwise eligible entity (including a Provider Sponsored Organization) because that entity informs the Secretary that it will not provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or provide referrals for abortions.
            (e) Section 1553 of the Affordable Care Act, 42 U.S.C. 18113—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraph (e)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any State or local government that receives Federal financial assistance under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (or under an amendment made by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) is required to comply with paragraph (e)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (iii) Any health care provider that receives Federal financial assistance under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (or under an amendment made by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) is required to comply with paragraph (e)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (iv) Any health plan created under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (or under an amendment made by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) is required to comply with paragraph (e)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Prohibition. The entities to which this paragraph (e)(2) applies shall not subject an individual or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the entity does not provide any health care item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or for the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to apply to, or to affect, any limitation relating to:
            (i) The withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment or medical care;
            (ii) The withholding or withdrawing of nutrition or hydration;
            (iii) Abortion; or
            (iv) The use of an item, good, benefit, or service furnished for the purpose of alleviating pain or discomfort, even if such use may increase the risk of death, so long as such item, good, benefit, or service is not also furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, death, for any reason.
            (f) Section 1303 of the Affordable Care Act, 42 U.S.C. 18023—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraph (f)(2)(i) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Qualified health plans, as defined under 42 U.S.C. 18021, offered through any Exchange created under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, are required to comply with paragraphs (f)(2)(i) and (ii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements and prohibitions. (i) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 18023(b)(1)(A)(i), entities to which this paragraph (f)(2)(i) applies shall not construe anything in Title I of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (or any amendment made by Title I of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) to require a qualified health plan to provide coverage of abortion or abortion-related services as described in 42 U.S.C. 18023(b)(1)(B)(i) or (ii) as part of its essential health benefits for any plan year.
            (ii) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 18023(b)(4), entities to which this paragraph (f)(2)(ii) applies shall not discriminate against any individual health care provider or health care facility because of its unwillingness to provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or refer for abortions.
            (g) Section 1411 of the Affordable Care Act, 42 U.S.C. 18081—(1) Applicability. The Department shall comply with paragraph (g)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirement. The Department shall provide a certification documenting a religious exemption from the individual responsibility requirement and penalty under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and shall coordinate with State Health Benefit Exchanges in the implementing of the certification requirements of 42 U.S.C. 18031(d)(4)(H)(ii) where applicable to:
            (i) Any applicant for such a certificate for any month who provides information demonstrating that the applicant:
            (A) Is an adherent of religious tenets or teachings by reason of which he is conscientiously opposed to acceptance of the benefits of any private or public insurance which makes payments in the event of death, disability, old-age, or retirement or makes payments toward the cost of, or provides services for, medical care (including the benefits of any insurance system established by the Social Security Act), or
            (B) Is an adherent of religious tenets or teachings that are not described in paragraph (g)(2)(i)(A) of this section, who relies solely on a religious method of healing, and for whom the acceptance of medical health services would be inconsistent with the religious beliefs of the individual, and the application for the certificate includes an attestation that the individual has not received medical health services during the preceding taxable year.
            (1) For purposes of this paragraph (g)(2)(i)(B), “medical health services” does not include routine dental, vision and hearing services, midwifery services, vaccinations, necessary medical services provided to children, services required by law or by a third party, and such other services as the Secretary may provide in implementing section 1311(d)(4)(H) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; and
            (2) [Reserved]
            (ii) Any applicant for such a certificate for any month who provides information demonstrating that the applicant is a member of a “health care sharing ministry,” as defined in 26 U.S.C. 5000A(d)(2)(B)(ii), for the month.
            (h) Counseling and referral provisions of 42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(j)(3)(B) and 1396u-2(b)(3)(B))—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraphs (h)(2)(i) and (ii) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any State agency that administers a Medicaid program is required to comply with paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements and prohibitions. (i) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(j)(3)(B), entities to which this paragraph (h)(2)(i) applies shall not construe 42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(j)(3)(A) or 42 CFR 422.206(a) to require a Medicare Advantage organization to provide, reimburse for, or provide coverage of, a counseling or referral service if the organization offering the plan:
            (A) Objects to the provision of such service on moral or religious grounds, and
            (B) In the manner and through the written instrumentalities such organization deems appropriate, makes available information on its policies regarding such service to prospective enrollees before or during enrollment and to enrollees within 90 days after the date that the organization adopts a change in policy regarding such a counseling or referral service.
            (ii) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1396u-2(b)(3)(B), entities to which this paragraph (h)(2)(ii) applies shall not construe 42 U.S.C. 1396u-2(b)(3)(A) or 42 CFR 438.102(a)(1) to require a Medicaid managed care organization to provide, reimburse for, or provide coverage of, a counseling or referral service if the organization:
            (A) Objects to the provision of such service on moral or religious grounds, and
            (B) In the manner and through the written instrumentalities such organization deems appropriate, makes available information on its policies regarding such service to prospective enrollees before or during enrollment and to enrollees within 90 days after the date that the organization adopts a change in policy regarding such a counseling or referral service.
            (i) Advance Directives, 42 U.S.C. 1395cc(f), 1396a(w)(3), and 14406—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraph (i)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part with respect to the Medicare and Medicaid programs.

            (ii) Any State agency that administers a Medicaid program is required to comply with paragraph (i)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part with respect to its Medicaid program.
            (2) Prohibitions. The entities to which this paragraph (i)(2) applies shall not:
            (i) Construe 42 U.S.C. 1395cc(f) or 1396a(w)(3) to require any provider or organization, or any employee of such a provider or organization, to inform or counsel any individual regarding any right to obtain an item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of the individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing; or to apply to or affect any requirement with respect to a portion of an advance directive that directs the purposeful causing of, or the purposeful assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing; or
            (ii) Construe 42 U.S.C. 1396a to prohibit the application of a State law which allows for an objection on the basis of conscience for any health care provider or any agent of such provider which as a matter of conscience cannot implement an advance directive.
            (j) Global Health Programs, 22 U.S.C. 7631(d)—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraph (j)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any entity that is authorized by statute, regulation, or agreement to obligate Federal financial assistance under section 104A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151b-2), under Chapter 83 of Title 22 of the U.S. Code or under the Tom Lantos and Henry J. Hyde United States Global Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Reauthorization Act of 2008, to the extent such Federal financial assistance is administered by the Secretary, is required to comply with paragraph (j)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Prohibitions. The entities to which this paragraph (j)(2) applies shall not:
            (i) Require an organization, including a faith-based organization, that is otherwise eligible to receive assistance under section 104A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151b-2), under Chapter 83 of Title 22 of the U.S. Code, or under the Tom Lantos and Henry J. Hyde United States Global Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Reauthorization Act of 2008, to the extent such assistance is administered by the Secretary, for HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, or care to, as a condition of such assistance:
            (A) Endorse or utilize a multisectoral or comprehensive approach to combating HIV/AIDS; or
            (B) Endorse, utilize, make a referral to, become integrated with, or otherwise participate in any program or activity to which the organization has a religious or moral objection.
            (ii) Discriminate against an organization, including a faith-based organization, that is otherwise eligible to receive assistance under section 104A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151b-2), under Chapter 83 of Title 22 of the U.S. Code, or under the Tom Lantos and Henry J. Hyde United States Global Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Reauthorization Act of 2008, to the extent such assistance is administered by the Secretary, for HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, or care, in the solicitation or issuance of grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements under such provisions of law for refusing to meet any requirement described in paragraph (j)(2)(i) of this section.
            (k) The Helms, Biden, 1978, and 1985 Amendments, 22 U.S.C. 2151b(f); see, e.g., Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019, Public Law 116-6, Div. F, sec. 7018—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraph (k)(2)(i) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any entity that is authorized by statute, regulation, or agreement to obligate or expend Federal financial assistance under part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2151b-2), to the extent administered by the Secretary, is required to comply with paragraph (k)(2)(i) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.

            (iii) Any entity that receives Federal financial assistance under part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2151b-2), to the extent administered by the Secretary, is required to comply with paragraph (k)(2)(ii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            
            (2) Prohibitions. (i) The entities to which this paragraph (k)(2)(i) applies shall not:

            (A) Permit Federal financial assistance identified in paragraph (k)(1)(ii) of this section to be used in a manner that would violate provisions in paragraphs (k)(2)(ii)(A)(1) through (5) of this section related to abortions and involuntary sterilizations.

            (B) Obligate or expend Federal financial assistance under an appropriations act that contains the 1985 Amendment and identified in paragraph (k)(1)(ii) of this section for any country or organization if the President certifies that the use of these funds by any such country or organization would violate provisions in paragraphs (k)(2)(ii)(A)(1) through (5) of this section related to abortions and involuntary sterilizations.
            (ii) The entities to which this paragraph (k)(2)(ii) applies shall not:
            (A) Use such Federal financial assistance identified in paragraph (k)(1)(iii) of this section to:
            (1) Pay for the performance of abortions as a method of family planning;
            (2) Motivate or coerce any person to practice abortions;
            (3) Pay for the performance of involuntary sterilizations as a method of family planning;
            (4) Coerce or provide any financial incentive to any person to undergo sterilizations; or
            (5) Pay for any biomedical research that relates in whole or in part, to methods of, or the performance of, abortions or involuntary sterilization as a means of family planning.

            (B) Obligate or expend Federal financial assistance under an appropriations act that contains the 1985 Amendment and identified in paragraph (k)(1)(iii) of this section for any country or organization if the President certifies that the use of these funds by any such country or organization would violate provisions in paragraphs (k)(2)(ii)(A)(1) through (5) of this section related to abortions and involuntary sterilizations.
            (l) Newborn and Infant Hearing Loss Screening, 42 U.S.C. 280g-1(d)—(1) Applicability. The Department is required to comply with paragraph (l)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirement. The Department shall not construe 42 U.S.C. 280g-1 to preempt or prohibit any State law that does not require the screening for hearing loss of children of parents who object to the screening on the grounds that it conflicts with the parents' religious beliefs.
            (m) Medical Screening, Examination, Diagnosis, Treatment, or Other Health Care or Services, 42 U.S.C. 1396f—(1) Applicability. The Department is required to comply with paragraph (m)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements and prohibitions. The Department shall not construe anything in 42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq. to require a State agency that administers a State Medicaid Plan to compel any person to undergo any medical screening, examination, diagnosis, or treatment or to accept any other health care or services provided under such plan for any purpose (other than for the purpose of discovering and preventing the spread of infection or contagious disease or for the purpose of protecting environmental health), if such person objects (or, in case such person is a child, his parent or guardian objects) thereto on religious grounds.
            (n) Occupational Illness Examinations and Tests, 29 U.S.C. 669(a)(5)—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraph (n)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any recipient of grants or contracts under 29 U.S.C. 669, to the extent administered by the Secretary, is required to comply with paragraph (n)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements. Entities to which this paragraph (n)(2) applies shall not deem any provision of 29 U.S.C. 651 et seq. to authorize or require medical examination, immunization, or treatment, as provided under 29 U.S.C. 669, for those who object thereto on religious grounds, except where such is necessary for the protection of the health or safety of others.
            (o) Vaccination, 42 U.S.C. 1396s(c)(2)(B)(ii)—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraph (o)(2) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            
            (ii) Any State agency that administers a pediatric vaccine distribution program under 42 U.S.C. 1396s is required to comply with paragraph (o)(2) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirement. The entities to which this paragraph (o)(2) applies shall ensure that, under any State-administered pediatric vaccine distribution program under 42 U.S.C. 1396s, the provider agreement executed by any program-registered provider, as defined under 42 U.S.C. 1396s(c)(1), includes the requirement that the program-registered provider will provide pediatric vaccines in compliance with all applicable State law relating to any religious or other exemption. Such State law may include State statutory, regulatory, or constitutional protections for conscience and religious freedom, where applicable.
            (p) Specific Assessment, Prevention and Treatment Services, 42 U.S.C. 290bb-36(f), 5106i(a)—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraphs (p)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any State, political subdivision, public organization, private nonprofit organization, institution of higher education, or tribal organization actively involved with the State-sponsored statewide or tribal youth suicide early intervention and prevention strategy, designated by a State to develop or direct the State-sponsored Statewide youth suicide early intervention and prevention strategy under 42 U.S.C. 290bb-36 and that receives a grant or cooperative agreement thereunder, is required to comply with paragraph (p)(2)(iii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.

            (iii) Any federally recognized Indian tribe or tribal organization (as defined in the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.)) or an urban Indian organization (as defined in the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)) that is actively involved in the development and continuation of a tribal youth suicide early intervention and prevention strategy under 42 U.S.C. 290bb-36 and that receives a grant or cooperative agreement thereunder is required to comply with paragraph (p)(2)(iii) of this section.
            (iv) Any entity that receives funds under 42 U.S.C. chapter 67, subchapters I or III is required to comply with paragraphs (p)(2)(i) and (ii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements and prohibitions. (i) Entities to which this paragraph (p)(2)(i) applies shall not construe the receipt of funds under or anything in 42 U.S.C. chapter 67, subchapters I or III as establishing any Federal requirement that a parent or legal guardian provide a child any medical service or treatment against the religious beliefs of the parent or legal guardian.
            (ii) Entities to which this paragraph (p)(2)(ii) applies shall not construe the receipt of funds under or anything in 42 U.S.C. chapter 67, subchapters I or III as requiring a State to find, or prohibiting a State from finding, child abuse or neglect in cases in which a parent or legal guardian relies solely or partially upon spiritual means rather than medical treatment, in accordance with the religious beliefs of the parent or legal guardian.
            (iii) Entities to which this paragraph (p)(2)(iii) applies shall not construe anything in 42 U.S.C. 290bb-36 to require suicide assessment, early intervention, or treatment services for youth whose parents or legal guardians object based on the parents' or legal guardians' religious beliefs or moral objections.
            (q) Religious nonmedical health care, 42 U.S.C. 1320a-1(h), 1320c-11, 1395i-5, 1395x(e), 1395x(y)(1), 1396a(a), and 1397j-1(b)—(1) Applicability. (i) The Department is required to comply with paragraphs (q)(2)(i) through (iv) of this section and § 88.6 of this part.
            (ii) Any State agency that makes an agreement with the Secretary pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1320a-1(b) is required to comply with paragraph (q)(2)(i) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (iii) Any entity receiving Federal financial assistance from participating in Medicare is required to comply with paragraphs (q)(2)(ii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.

            (iv) Any entity, including a State, receiving Federal financial assistance from participating in Medicaid, including any entity receiving Federal financial assistance through CHIP that is used to expand Medicaid, is required to comply with paragraphs (q)(2)(iii) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (v) Any entity, including a State or local government or subdivision thereof, receiving Federal financial assistance under subtitle B of Title XX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397j-1397m-5) is required to comply with paragraph (q)(2)(iv) of this section and §§ 88.4 and 88.6 of this part.
            (2) Requirements and prohibitions. (i) The entities to which this paragraph (q)(2)(i) applies shall not apply the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 1320a-1 to a religious nonmedical health care institution as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1395x(ss)(1).
            (ii) With respect to a religious nonmedical health care institution as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1395x(ss)(1), the entities to which this paragraph (q)(2)(ii) applies shall not:
            (A) Fail or refuse to make a payment under part A of subchapter XVIII of chapter 7 of Title 42 of the U.S. Code for inpatient hospital services, post-hospital extended care services, or home health services furnished to an individual by a religious nonmedical health care institution that is a hospital as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1395x(e), a skilled nursing facility as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1395x(y), or a home health agency as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1395x(aaa), respectively, if the condition under 42 U.S.C. 1395i-5(a)(2) is satisfied and an individual makes an election pursuant to 1395i-5(b) that:
            (1) Such individual is conscientiously opposed to acceptance of medical care or treatment other than medical care or treatment (including medical and other health services) that is:
            (i) Received involuntarily, or
            (ii) Required under Federal or State law or law of a political subdivision of a State; and
            (2) Acceptance of such medical treatment would be inconsistent with such individual's sincere religious beliefs, or
            (B) In administering 42 U.S.C. 1395i-5 or 1395x(ss)(1):
            (1) Require any patient of a religious nonmedical health care institution to undergo medical screening, examination, diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment or to accept any other medical health care service, if such patient (or legal representative of the patient) objects to such service on religious grounds, or
            (2) Subject a religious nonmedical health care institution or its personnel to any medical supervision, regulation, or control, insofar as such supervision, regulation, or control would be contrary to the religious beliefs observed by the institution or such personnel, or
            (C) Subject religious nonmedical health care institution to the provisions of part B of subchapter XI of Chapter 7 of Title 42 of the U.S. Code.
            (iii) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1396a(a), the entities to which this paragraph (q)(2)(iii) applies shall not fail or refuse to exempt a religious nonmedical health care institution from the Medicaid requirements to:
            (A) Meet State standards described in 42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(9)(A);
            (B) Be evaluated under 42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(33), on the appropriateness and quality of care and services;
            (C) Undergo a regular program, under 42 U.S.C. 1396(a)(31), of independent professional review, including medical evaluation, of services in an intermediate care facility for persons with mental disabilities; and
            (D) Meet the requirements of 42 U.S.C. 1396(b)(i)(4) to establish a utilization review plan consistent with, or superior to, the utilization review plan criteria under 42 U.S.C. 1395x(k) for Medicare.
            (iv) Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1397j-1(b), the entities to which this paragraph (q)(2)(iv) applies shall not construe subtitle B of Title XX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397j-1397m-5) to interfere with or abridge an elder's right to practice his or her religion through reliance on prayer alone for healing when this choice:
            (A) Is contemporaneously expressed, either orally or in writing, with respect to a specific illness or injury which the elder has at the time of the decision by an elder who is competent at the time of the decision;

            (B) Is previously set forth in a living will, health care proxy, or other advance directive document that is validly executed and applied under State law; or
            
            (C) May be unambiguously deduced from the elder's life history.
          
          
            § 88.4
            Assurance and certification of compliance requirements.
            (a) In general—(1) Assurance. Except for an application or recipient to which paragraph (c) of this section applies, every application for Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department to which § 88.3 of this part applies shall, as a condition of the approval, renewal, or extension of any Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department pursuant to the application, provide, contain, or be accompanied by an assurance that the applicant or recipient will comply with applicable Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part.
            (2) Certification. Except for an application or recipient to which paragraph (c) of this section applies, every application for Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department to which § 88.3 of this part applies, shall, as a condition of the approval, renewal, or extension of any Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department pursuant to the application, provide, contain, or be accompanied by, a certification that the applicant or recipient will comply with applicable Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part.
            (b) Specific requirements—(1) Timing. Entities who are already recipients as of the effective date of this part or any applicants shall submit the assurance required in paragraph (a)(1) of this section and the certification required in paragraph (a)(2) of this section as a condition of any application or reapplication for funds to which this part applies, through any instrument or as a condition of an amendment or modification of the instrument that extends the term of such instrument or adds additional funds to it. Submission may be required more frequently if:
            (i) The applicant or recipient fails to meet a requirement of this part, or
            (ii) OCR or the relevant Department component has reason to suspect or cause to investigate the possibility of such failure.
            (2) Form and manner. Applicants or recipients shall submit the assurance required in paragraph (a)(1) of this section and the certification required in paragraph (a)(2) of this section in the form and manner that OCR, in coordination with the relevant Department component, specifies, or shall submit them in a separate writing signed by the applicant's or recipient's officer or other person authorized to bind the applicant or recipient.
            (3) Duration of obligation. The assurance required in paragraph (a)(1) of this section and the certification required in paragraph (a)(2) of this section will obligate the recipient for the period during which the Department extends Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department to a recipient.
            (4) Compliance requirement. Submission of an assurance or certification required under this section will not relieve a recipient of the obligation to take and complete any action necessary to come into compliance with Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part prior to, at the time of, or subsequent to, the submission of such assurance or certification.
            (5) Condition of continued receipt. Provision of a compliant assurance and certification shall constitute a condition of continued receipt of Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department and is binding upon the applicant or recipient, its successors, assigns, or transferees for the period during which such Federal financial assistance or Federal funds from the Department are provided.
            (6) Assurances and certifications in applications. An applicant or recipient may incorporate the assurances and certifications by reference in subsequent applications to the Department or Department component if prior assurances or certifications are initially provided in the same fiscal or calendar year, as applicable.
            (7) Enforcement of assurances and certifications. The Department, Department components, and OCR shall have the right to seek enforcement of the assurances and certifications required in this section.
            (8) Remedies for failure to make assurances and certifications. If an applicant or recipient fails or refuses to furnish an assurance or certification required under this section, OCR, in coordination with the relevant Department component, may effect compliance by any of the mechanisms provided in § 88.7.
            (c) Exceptions. The following persons or entities shall not be required to comply with paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section, provided that such persons or entities are not recipients of Federal financial assistance or other Federal funds from the Department through another instrument, program, or mechanism, other than those set forth in paragraphs (c)(1) through (4) of this section:
            (1) A physician, as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1395x(r), physician office, pharmacist, pharmacy, or other health care practitioner participating in Part B of the Medicare program;
            (2) A recipient of Federal financial assistance or other Federal funds from the Department awarded under certain grant programs currently administered by the Administration for Children and Families, the purpose of which is either solely financial assistance unrelated to health care or which is otherwise unrelated to health care provision, and which, in addition, does not involve—
            (i) Medical or behavioral research;
            (ii) Health care providers; or
            (iii) Any significant likelihood of referral for the provision of health care;
            (3) A recipient of Federal financial assistance or other Federal funds from the Department awarded under certain grant programs currently administered by the Administration on Community Living, the purpose of which is either solely financial assistance unrelated to health care or which is otherwise unrelated to health care provision, and which, in addition, does not involve—
            (i) Medical or behavioral research;
            (ii) Health care providers; or
            (iii) Any significant likelihood of referral for the provision of health care.
            (4) Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations when contracting with the Indian Health Service under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
          
          
            § 88.5
            Notice of rights under Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws.
            (a) In general. In investigating a complaint or conducting a compliance review, OCR will consider an entity's voluntary posting of a notice of nondiscrimination as non-dispositive evidence of compliance with the applicable substantive provisions of this part, to the extent such notices are provided according to the provisions of this section and are relevant to the particular investigation or compliance review.
            (b) Placement of the notice text. In evaluating the Department's or a recipient's compliance with this part, OCR will take into account whether, as applicable and appropriate, the Department or recipient has provided the notice under this section:
            (1) On the Department or recipient's website(s);
            (2) In a prominent and conspicuous physical location in Department or recipient establishments where notices to the public and notices to its workforce are customarily posted to permit ready observation;
            (3) In a personnel manual or other substantially similar document for members of the Department or recipient's workforce;
            (4) In applications to the Department or recipient for inclusion in the workforce or for participation in a service, benefit, or other program, including for training or study; and
            (5) In any student handbook or other substantially similar document for students participating in a program of training or study, including for post-graduate interns, residents, and fellows.
            (6) Such that the text of the notice is large and conspicuous enough to be read easily and is presented in a format, location, or manner that impedes or prevents the notice being altered, defaced, removed, or covered by other material.
            (c) Content of the notice text. The recipient and the Department should consider using the model text provided in appendix A for the notice, but may tailor its notice to address its particular circumstances and to more specifically address the laws that apply to it under this rule.
            
            (d) Combined nondiscrimination notices. The Department and each recipient may post the notice text provided in appendix A of this part, or a notice it drafts itself, along with the content of other notices (such as other non-discrimination notices).
          
          
            § 88.6
            Compliance requirements.
            (a) In general. The Department and each recipient has primary responsibility to ensure that it is in compliance with Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part, and shall take steps to eliminate any violations of the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part. If a sub-recipient is found to have violated the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws, the recipient from whom the sub-recipient received funds may be subject to the imposition of funding restrictions or any appropriate remedies available under this part, depending on the facts and circumstances.
            (b) Records and information. The Department, each recipient, and each sub-recipient shall maintain complete and accurate records evidencing compliance with Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part, and afford OCR, upon request, reasonable access to such records and information in a timely manner and to the extent OCR finds necessary to determine compliance with the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part. Such records:
            (1) Shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date the record was created or obtained by the recipient or sub-recipient;
            (2) Shall contain any information maintained by the recipient or sub-recipient that pertains to discrimination on the basis of religious belief or moral conviction, including, without limitation, any complaints; statements, policies, or notices concerning discrimination on the basis of religious belief or moral conviction; procedures for accommodating employees' or other protected individuals' religious beliefs or moral convictions; and records of requests for such religious or moral accommodation and the recipient or sub-recipient's response to such requests; and
            (3) May be maintained in any form and manner that affords OCR with reasonable access to them in a timely manner.
            (c) Cooperation. The Department, each recipient, and each sub-recipient shall cooperate with any compliance review, investigation, interview, or other part of OCR's enforcement process, which may include production of documents, participation in interviews, response to data requests, and making available of premises for inspection where relevant. Failure to cooperate may result in an OCR referral to the Department of Justice, in coordination with the Department's Office of the General Counsel, for further enforcement in Federal court or otherwise. Each recipient or sub-recipient shall permit access by OCR during normal business hours to such of its books, records, accounts, and other sources of information, as well as its facilities, as may be pertinent to ascertain compliance with this part. Asserted considerations of privacy or confidentiality may not operate to bar OCR from evaluating or seeking to enforce compliance with this part. Information of a confidential nature obtained in connection with compliance reviews, investigations, or other enforcement activities shall not be disclosed except as required in formal enforcement proceedings or as otherwise required by law.
            (d) Reporting requirement. If a recipient or sub-recipient is subject to a determination by OCR of noncompliance with this part, the recipient or sub-recipient must, in any application for new or renewed Federal financial assistance or Departmental funding in the three years following such determination, disclose the existence of the determination of noncompliance. This includes a requirement that recipients disclose any OCR determinations made against their sub-recipients.
            (e) Intimidating or retaliatory acts prohibited. Neither the Department nor any recipient or sub-recipient shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any entity for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege under the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part, or because such entity has made a complaint or participated in any manner in an investigation or review under the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part.
          
          
            § 88.7
            Enforcement authority.
            (a) In general. OCR has been delegated the authority to facilitate and coordinate the Department's enforcement of the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws, which includes the authority to:
            (1) Receive and handle complaints;
            (2) Initiate compliance reviews;
            (3) Conduct investigations;
            (4) Coordinate compliance within the Department;
            (5) Seek voluntary resolutions of complaints;
            (6) In coordination with the relevant component or components of the Department and the Office of the General Counsel, make enforcement referrals to the Department of Justice;
            (7) In coordination with the relevant Departmental funding component, utilize existing regulations for involuntary enforcement, such as those that apply to grants, contracts, or CMS programs; and
            (8) In coordination with the relevant component or components of the Department, coordinate other appropriate remedial action as the Department deems necessary and as allowed by law and applicable regulation.
            (b) Complaints. Any entity, whether individually, as a member of a class, on behalf of others, or on behalf of an entity, may file a complaint with OCR alleging any potential violation of Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part. OCR shall coordinate handling of complaints with the relevant Department component(s). The complaint filer is not required to be the entity whose rights under the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part have been potentially violated.
            (c) Compliance reviews. OCR may conduct compliance reviews or use other similar procedures as necessary to permit OCR to investigate and review the practices of the Department, Department components, recipients, and sub-recipients to determine whether they are complying with Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part. OCR may initiate a compliance review of an entity subject to this part based on information from a complaint or other source that causes OCR to suspect non-compliance by such entity with this part or the laws implemented by this part.
            (d) Investigations. OCR shall make a prompt investigation, whenever a compliance review, report, complaint, or any other information found by OCR indicates a threatened, potential, or actual failure to comply with Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part. The investigation should include, where appropriate, a review of the pertinent practices, policies, communications, documents, compliance history, circumstances under which the possible noncompliance occurred, and other factors relevant to determining whether the Department, Department component, recipient, or sub-recipient has failed to comply. OCR shall use fact-finding methods including site visits; interviews with the complainants, Department component, recipients, sub-recipients, or third-parties; and written data or discovery requests. OCR may seek the assistance of any State agency.
            (e) Failure to respond. Absent good cause, the failure of an entity that is subject to this part to respond to a request for information or to a data or document request within 45 days of OCR's request shall constitute a violation of this part.
            (f) Related administrative or judicial proceeding. Consistent with other applicable Federal laws, testimony and other evidence obtained in an investigation or compliance review conducted under this part may be used by the Department for, and offered into evidence in, any administrative or judicial proceeding related to this part.
            (g) Supervision and coordination. If as a result of an investigation, compliance review, or other enforcement activity, OCR determines that a Department component appears to be in noncompliance with its responsibilities under Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part, OCR will undertake appropriate action with the component to assure compliance. In the event that OCR and the Department component are unable to agree on a resolution of any particular matter, the matter shall be submitted to the Secretary for resolution. OCR may from time to time request the assistance of officials of the Department in carrying out responsibilities in connection with the enforcement of Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws and this part, including the achievement of effective coordination and maximum uniformity within the Department.
            (h) Referral to the Department of Justice. If as a result of an investigation, compliance review, or other enforcement activity, OCR determines that a recipient or sub-recipient is not in compliance with the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part, OCR may, in coordination with the relevant Department component and the Office of the General Counsel, make referrals to the Department of Justice, for further enforcement in Federal court or otherwise. OCR may also make referrals to the Department of Justice, in coordination with the Office of the General Counsel, concerning potential violations of 18 U.S.C. 1001 or 42 U.S.C. 300a-8 for enforcement or other appropriate action.
            (i) Resolution of matters. (1) If an investigation or compliance review reveals that no action is warranted, OCR will so inform any party who has been notified of the existence of the investigation or compliance review, if any, in writing.
            (2) If an investigation or compliance review indicates a failure to comply with Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part, OCR will so inform the relevant parties and the matter will be resolved by informal means whenever possible. Attempts to resolve matters informally shall not preclude OCR from simultaneously pursuing any action described in paragraphs (a)(5) through (7) of this section.

            (3) If OCR determines that there is a failure to comply with Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws or this part, compliance with these laws and this part may be effected by the following actions, taken in coordination with the relevant Department component, and pursuant to statutes and regulations which govern the administration of contracts (e.g., Federal Acquisition Regulation), grants (e.g., 45 CFR part 75) and CMS funding arrangements (e.g., the Social Security Act):
            (i) Temporarily withholding Federal financial assistance or other Federal funds, in whole or in part, pending correction of the deficiency;
            (ii) Denying use of Federal financial assistance or other Federal funds from the Department, including any applicable matching credit, in whole or in part;
            (iii) Wholly or partly suspending award activities;
            (iv) Terminating Federal financial assistance or other Federal funds from the Department, in whole or in part;
            (v) Denying or withholding, in whole or in part, new Federal financial assistance or other Federal funds from the Department administered by or through the Secretary for which an application or approval is required, including renewal or continuation of existing programs or activities or authorization of new activities;
            (vi) In coordination with the Office of the General Counsel, referring the matter to the Attorney General for proceedings to enforce any rights of the United States, or obligations of the recipient or sub-recipient, under Federal law or this part; and
            (vii) Taking any other remedies that may be legally available.
            (j) Noncompliance with § 88.4. If a recipient of Federal financial assistance or applicant therefor fails or refuses to furnish an assurance or certification required under § 88.4 or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with a requirement imposed by or pursuant to that section, OCR, in coordination with the relevant Department component, may effect compliance by any of the remedies provided in paragraph (i) of this section. The Department shall not be required to provide assistance in such a case during the pendency of the administrative proceedings brought under such paragraph.
          
          
            § 88.8
            Relationship to other laws.

            Nothing in this part shall be construed to preempt any Federal, State, or local law that is equally or more protective of religious freedom and moral convictions. Nothing in this part shall be construed to narrow the meaning or application of any State or Federal law protecting free exercise of religious beliefs or moral convictions.
          
          
            § 88.9
            Rule of construction.
            This part shall be construed in favor of a broad protection of the free exercise of religious beliefs and moral convictions, to the maximum extent permitted by the Constitution and the terms of the Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws.
          
          
            § 88.10
            Severability.
            Any provision of this part held to be invalid or unenforceable either by its terms or as applied to any entity or circumstance shall be construed so as to continue to give the maximum effect to the provision permitted by law, unless such holding shall be one of utter invalidity or unenforceability, in which event such provision shall be severable from this part, which shall remain in full force and effect to the maximum extent permitted by law. A severed provision shall not affect the remainder of this part or the application of the provision to other persons or entities not similarly situated or to other, dissimilar circumstances.
          
          
            Pt. 88, App. A
            Appendix A to Part 88—Model Text: Notice of Rights Under Federal Conscience and Anti-Discrimination Laws
            [Name of recipient, the Department, or Department component] complies with applicable Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws prohibiting exclusion, adverse treatment, coercion, or other discrimination against individuals or entities on the basis of their religious beliefs or moral convictions. You may have the right under Federal law to decline to perform, assist in the performance of, refer for, undergo, or pay for certain health care-related treatments, research, or services (such as abortion or assisted suicide, among others) that violate your conscience, religious beliefs, or moral convictions.

            If you believe that [Name of recipient, the Department, or Department component] has failed to accommodate your conscientious, religious, or moral objection, or has discriminated against you on those grounds, you can file a conscience and religious freedom complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Rights Complaint Portal, available at https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf or by mail or phone at: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 200 Independence Avenue SW, Room 509F, HHH Building Washington, DC 20201, 1-800-368-1019, 800-537-7697 (TDD). Complaint forms and more information about Federal conscience and anti-discrimination laws are available at http://www.hhs.gov/conscience.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 89
          PART 89—ORGANIZATIONAL INTEGRITY OF ENTITIES IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES UNDER THE LEADERSHIP ACT
          
            Sec.
            89.1
            Applicability and requirements.
            89.2
            Definitions.
            89.3
            Organizational integrity of recipients.
          
          
            Authority:
            Section 301(f) of the Leadership Act, Pub. L. 108-25, as amended (22 U.S.C. 7631(f)) and 5 U.S.C. 301.
          
          
            Source:
            75 FR 18763, Apr. 13, 2010, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 89.1
            Applicability and requirements.
            (a) This regulation applies to all recipients unless they are exempted from the policy requirement by the Leadership Act or other statute.
            (b) The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) components shall include in the public announcement of the availability of the grant, cooperative agreement, contract, or other funding instrument involving Leadership Act HIV/AIDS funds the requirement that recipients agree that they are opposed to the practices of prostitution and sex trafficking because of the psychological and physical risks they pose for women, men, and children. This requirement shall also be included in the award documents for any grant, cooperative agreement or other funding instrument involving Leadership Act HIV/AIDS funds entered into with the recipient.
          
          
            § 89.2
            Definitions.
            For the purposes of this part:
            
              Commercial sex act means any sex act on account of which anything of value is given to or received by any person.
            
              Leadership Act means the United States Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Act of 2003, Public Law 108-25, as amended (22 U.S.C. 7601-7682).
            
              Prostitution means procuring or providing any commercial sex act.
            
              Recipients are contractors, grantees, applicants or awardees who receive Leadership Act funds for HIV/AIDS programs directly or indirectly from HHS.
            
              Sex trafficking means the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for the purpose of a commercial sex act.
          
          
            § 89.3
            Organizational integrity of recipients.
            A recipient must have objective integrity and independence from any affiliated organization that engages in activities inconsistent with the recipient's opposition to the practices of prostitution and sex trafficking because of the psychological and physical risks they pose for women, men and children (“restricted activities”). A recipient will be found to have objective integrity and independence from such an organization if:
            (a) The affiliated organization receives no transfer of Leadership Act HIV/AIDS funds, and Leadership Act HIV/AIDS funds do not subsidize restricted activities; and
            (b) The recipient is, to the extent practicable in the circumstances, separate from the affiliated organization. Mere bookkeeping separation of Leadership Act HIV/AIDS funds from other funds is not sufficient. HHS will determine, on a case-by-case basis and based on the totality of the facts, whether sufficient separation exists. The presence or absence of any one or more factors relating to legal, physical, and financial separation will not be determinative. Factors relevant to this determination shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
            (1) Whether the organization is a legally separate entity;
            (2) The existence of separate personnel or other allocation of personnel that maintains adequate separation of the activities of the affiliated organization from the recipient;
            (3) The existence of separate accounting and timekeeping records;
            (4) The degree of separation of the recipient's facilities from facilities in which restricted activities occur; and
            (5) The extent to which signs and other forms of identification that distinguish the recipient from the affiliated organization are present.
          
        
        
          Pt. 90
          PART 90—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF AGE IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
          
            
              Subpart A—General
              Sec.
              90.1
              What is the purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975?
              90.2
              What is the purpose of these regulations?
              90.3
              What programs or activities does the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 cover?
              90.4
              How are the terms in the regulations defined?
            
            
              Subpart B—What is Age Discrimination?
              
                Standards for Determining Discriminatory Practices
                90.11
                Purpose of this subpart.
                90.12
                Rules against age discrimination.
                90.13
                Definitions of normal operation and statutory objective.
                90.14
                Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination. Normal operation or statutory objective of any program or activity.
                90.15
                Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination. Reasonable factors other than age.
                90.16
                Burden of proof.
              
            
            
              Subpart C—What are the Responsibilities of the Federal Agencies?
              90.31
              Issuance of regulations.
              90.32
              Review of agency policies and administrative practices.
              90.33
              Interagency cooperation.
              90.34
              Agency reports.
            
            
              Subpart D—Investigation, Conciliation and Enforcement Procedures
              90.41
              What is the purpose of this subpart?
              90.42
              What responsibilities do recipients and agencies have generally to ensure compliance with the Act?
              90.43
              What specific responsibilities do agencies and recipients have to ensure compliance with the Act?
              90.44
              Compliance reviews.
              90.45
              Information requirements.
              
              90.46
              Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
              90.47
              What further provisions must an agency make in order to enforce its regulations after an investigation indicates that a violation of the Act has been committed?
              90.48
              Alternate funds disbursal procedure.
              90.49
              Remedial and affirmative action by recipients.
              90.50
              Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
            
            
              Subpart E—Future Review of Age Discrimination Regulations
              90.61
              Review of general regulations.
              90.62
              Review of agency regulations.
            
          
          
            Authority:

            Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.
            
          
          
            Source:
            44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General
            
              § 90.1
              What is the purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975?
              The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, is designed to prohibit discrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance. The Act also permits federally assisted programs or activities, and recipients of Federal funds, to continue to use certain age distinctions and factors other than age which meet the requirements of the Act and these regulations.
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 90.2
              What is the purpose of these regulations?
              (a) The purpose of these regulations is to state general, government-wide rules for the implementation of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, and to guide each agency in the preparation of agency-specific age discrimination regulations.
              (b) These regulations apply to each Federal agency which provides Federal financial assistance to any program or activity.
            
            
              § 90.3
              What programs or activities does the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 cover?

              (a) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 applies to any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, including programs or activities receiving funds under the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (31 U.S.C. 1221 et seq.).
              (b) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 does not apply to:
              (1) An age distinction contained in that part of a Federal, State or local statute or ordinance adopted by an elected, general purpose legislative body which:
              (i) Provides any benefits or assistance to persons based on age; or
              (ii) Establishes criteria for participation in age-related terms; or
              (iii) Describes intended beneficiaries or target groups in age-related terms.

              (2) Any employment practice of any employer, employment agency, labor organization, or any labor-management joint apprenticeship training program, except for any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance for public service employment under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1974 (CETA), (29 U.S.C. 801 et seq.).
            
            
              § 90.4
              How are the terms in these regulations defined?
              As used in these regulations, the term:
              
                Act means the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, (Title III of Pub. L. 94-135).
              
                Action means any act, activity, policy, rule, standard, or method of administration; or the use of any policy, rule, standard, or method of administration.
              
                Age means how old a person is, or the number of elapsed years form the date of a person's birth.
              
                Age distinction means any action using age or an age-related term.
              
                Age-related term means a word or words which necessarily imply a particular age or range of ages (for example, children, adult, older persons, but not student).
              
                Agency means a Federal department or agency that is empowered to extend financial assistance.
              
                Federal financial assistance means any grant, entitlement, loan, cooperative agreement, contract (other than a procurement contract or a contract of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by which the agency provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
              (a) Funds;
              (b) Services of Federal personnel; or
              (c) Real and personal property or any interest in or use of property, including:
              (1) Transfers or leases of property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
              (2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal Government.
              
                Program or activity means all of the operations of—
              (a)(1) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
              (2) The entity of such State or local government that distributes Federal financial assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
              (b)(1) A college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or
              (2) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 7801), system of vocational education, or other school system;
              (c)(1) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
              (i) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
              (ii) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
              (2) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
              (d) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (a), (b), or (c) of this definition; any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
              
                Recipient means any State or its political subdivision, any instrumentality of a State or its political sub-division, any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any person to which Federal financial assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient. Recipient includes any successor, assignee, or transferee, but excludes the ultimate beneficiary of the assistance.
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services.
              
                United States means the fifty States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Northern Marianas, and the territories and possessions of the United States.
              (42 U.S.C. 6107)
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—What is Age Discrimination?
            
              Standards for Determining Discriminatory Practices
              
                § 90.11
                Purpose of this subpart.
                The purpose of this subpart is to set forth the prohibitions against age discrimination and the exceptions to those prohibitions.
              
              
                § 90.12
                Rules against age discrimination.
                The rules stated in this section are limited by the exceptions contained in §§ 90.14, and 90.15 of these regulations.
                (a) General rule: No person in the United states shall, on the basis of age, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
                (b) Specific rules: A recipient may not, in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements use age distinctions or take any other actions which have the effect, on the basis of age, of:
                (1) Excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under, a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, or
                (2) Denying or limiting individuals in their opportunity to participate in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
                (c) The specific forms of age discrimination listed in paragraph (b) of this section do not necessarily constitute a complete list.
              
              
                § 90.13
                Definitions of normal operation and statutory objective.
                For purposes of §§ 90.14, and 90.15, the terms normal operation and statutory objective shall have the following meaning:
                (a) Normal operation means the operation of a program or activity without significant changes that would impair its ability to meet its objectives.
                (b) Statutory objective means any purpose of a program or activity expressly stated in any Federal statute, State statute, or local statute or ordinance adopted by an elected, general purpose legislative body.
              
              
                § 90.14
                Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination. Normal operation or statutory objective of any program or activity.
                A recipient is permitted to take an action, otherwise prohibited by § 90.12, if the action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity. An action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity, if:
                (a) Age is used as a measure or approximation of one or more other characteristics; and
                (b) The other characteristic(s) must be measured or approximated in order for the normal operation of the program or activity to continue, or to achieve any statutory objective of the program or activity; and
                (c) The other characteristic(s) can be reasonably measured or approximated by the use of age; and
                (d) The other characteristic(s) are impractical to measure directly on an individual basis.
              
              
                § 90.15
                Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination. Reasonable factors other than age.
                A recipient is permitted to take an action otherwise prohibited by § 90.12 which is based on a factor other than age, even though that action may have a disproportionate effect on persons of different ages. An action may be based on a factor other than age only if the factor bears a direct and substantial relationship to the normal operation of the program or activity or to the achievement of a statutory objective.
              
              
                § 90.16
                Burden of proof.
                The burden of proving that an age distinction or other action falls within the exceptions outlined in §§ 90.14 and 90.15 is on the recipient of Federal financial assistance.
              
            
          
          
            Subpart C—What are the Responsibilities of the Federal Agencies?
            
              § 90.31
              Issuance of regulations.

              (a) The head of each agency which extends Federal financial assistance to any program or activity shall publish proposed and final age discrimination regulations in the Federal Register to:
              (1) Carry out the provisions of section 303 of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975; and
              (2) Provide for appropriate investigative, conciliation, and enforcement procedures.
              (b) Each agency shall publish its proposed agency age discrimination regulations no later than 90 days after the publication date of the final general, government-wide age discrimination regulations.
              (c) Each agency shall submit its final agency regulations to HHS for review no later than 120 days after publication of proposed agency age discrimination regulations.

              (d) Final agency age discrimination regulations shall be consistent with these general, government-wide age discrimination regulations and shall not be published until the Secretary approves them.
              (e) Each agency shall include in its regulations a provision governing the operation of an alternate funds disbursal procedure as described in § 90.48 of these regulations.
              (f) Each agency shall publish an appendix to its final age discrimination regulations containing a list of each age distinction provided in a Federal statute or in regulations affecting financial assistance administered by the agency.
            
            
              § 90.32
              Review of agency policies and administrative practices.
              (a) Each agency shall conduct a review of age distinctions it imposes on its recipients by regulations, policies, and administrative practices. The purpose of this review is to identify how age distinctions are used by each Federal agency and whether those age distinctions are permissible under the Act and implementing regulations.

              (b) No later than 12 months from the date the agency published its final regulations, the agency shall publish, for public comment, a report in the Federal Register containing:
              (1) The results of the review conducted under paragraph (a) of this section;
              (2) A list of the age distinctions contained in regulations which are to be continued;
              (3) The justification under the requirements of the Act and these regulations for each age distinction to be continued;
              (4) A list of the age distinctions not contained in regulations but which will be adopted by regulation under the Administrative Procedure Act using the notice and comment procedures specified in 5 U.S.C. 553; and
              (5) A list of the age distinctions to be eliminated.
              (c) Beginning with the effective date of an agency's final regulations, the agency may not impose a new age distinction unless the age distinction is adopted by regulation under the Administrative Procedure Act using the notice and comment procedures specified in 5 U.S.C. 553.
              (d) Beginning 12 months after the publication of its age discrimination regulations, an agency may not continue an existing age distinction, unless the age distinction has already been adopted by regulation or is adopted by regulation under the Administrative Procedure Act using the notice and comment procedures specified in 5 U.S.C. 553.
            
            
              § 90.33
              Interagency cooperation.
              Where two or more agencies provide Federal financial assistance to a recipient or class of recipients, the Secretary may designate one of the agencies as the sole agency for all compliance and enforcement purposes with respect to those recipients, except for the ordering of termination of funds and the notification of the appropriate committees of Congress.
            
            
              § 90.34
              Agency reports.
              Each agency shall submit to the Secretary not later than December 31 of each year, beginning in 1979, a report which:
              (a) Describes in detail the steps taken during the preceding fiscal year to carry out the Act; and
              (b) Contains data on the frequency, type, and resolution of complaints and on any compliance reviews, sufficient to permit analysis of the agency's progress in reducing age discrimination in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance from the agency; and
              (c) Contains data directly relevant to the extent of any pattern or practice of age discrimination which the agency has identified in any programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance from the agency and to progress toward eliminating it; and
              (d) Contains evaluative or interpretative information which the agency determines is useful in analyzing agency progress in reducing age discrimination in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance from the agency; and
              (e) Contains whatever other data the Secretary may require.
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24321, May 9, 2005]
            
          
          
            
            Subpart D—Investigation, Conciliation and Enforcement Procedures
            
              § 90.41
              What is the purpose of this subpart?
              This subpart sets forth requirements for the establishment of compliance, investigation, conciliation, and enforcement procedures by agencies which extend Federal financial assistance.
            
            
              § 90.42
              What responsibilities do recipients and agencies have generally to ensure compliance with the Act?
              (a) A recipient has primary responsibility to ensure that its programs or activities are in compliance with the Age Discrimination Act and shall take steps to eliminate violations of the Act. A recipient also has responsibility to maintain records, provide information, and to afford access to its records to an agency to the extent required to determine whether it is in compliance with the Act.
              (b) An agency has responsibility to attempt to secure recipient compliance with the Act by voluntary means. This may include the use of the services of appropriate Federal, State, local, or private organizations. An agency also has the responsibility to enforce the Age Discrimination Act when a recipient fails to eliminate violations of the Act.
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 90.43
              What specific responsibilities do agencies and recipients have to ensure compliance with the Act?
              (a) Written notice, technical assistance, and educational materials. Each agency shall: (1) Provide written notice to each recipient of its obligations under the Act. The notice shall include a requirement that where the recipient initially receiving funds makes the funds available to a sub-recipient, the recipient must notify the sub-recipient of its obligations under the Act.
              (2) Provide technical assistance, where necessary, to recipients to aid them in complying with the Act.
              (3) Make available educational materials setting forth the rights and obligations of beneficiaries and recipients under the Act.
              (b) Self-evaluation. (1) Each agency shall require each recipient employing the equivalent of 15 or more full time employees to complete a written self-evaluation of its compliance under the Act within 18 months of the effective date of the agency regulations.
              (2) Each recipient's self-evaluation shall identify and justify each age distinction imposed by the recipient.
              (3) Each recipient shall take corrective and remedial action whenever a self-evaluation indicates a violation of the Act.
              (4) Each recipient shall make the self-evaluation available on request to the agency and to the public for a period of 3 years following its completion.
              (c) Complaints—(1) Receipt of complaints. Each agency shall establish a complaint processing procedure which includes the following:
              (i) A procedure for the filing of complaints with the agency;
              (ii) A review of complaints to assure that they fall within the coverage of the Act and contain all information necessary for further processing;
              (iii) Notice to the complainant and the recipient of their rights and obligations under the complaint procedure, including the right to have a representative at all stages of the complaint procedure; and
              (iv) Notice to the complainant and the recipient (or their representatives) of their right to contact the agency for information and assistance regarding the complaint resolution process.
              (2) Prompt resolution of complaints. Each agency shall establish procedures for the prompt resolution of complaints. These procedures shall require each recipient and complainant to participate actively in efforts toward speedy resolution of the complaint.
              (3) Mediation of complaints. Each agency shall promptly refer all complaints which fall within the coverage of the Act to a mediation agency designated by the Secretary.

              (i) The referring agency shall require the participation of the recipient and the complainant in the mediation process, although both parties need not meet with the mediator at the same time.
              (ii) If the complainant and recipient reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of the complaint during the mediation period, they shall reduce the agreement to writing. The mediator shall send a copy of the settlement to the referring agency. No further action shall be taken based on that complaint unless it appears that the complainant or the recipient is failing to comply with the agreement.
              (iii) Not more than 60 days after the agency receives the complaint, the mediator shall return a still unresolved complaint to the referring agency for initial investigation. The mediator may return a complaint at any time before the end of the 60 day period if it appears that the complaint cannot be resolved through mediation.
              (iv) The mediator shall protect the confidentiality of all information obtained in the course of the mediation process. No mediator shall testify in any adjudicative proceeding, produce any document, or otherwise disclose any information obtained in the course of the mediation process without prior approval of the head of the agency appointing the mediator.
              (4) Federal initial investigation. Each agency shall investigate complaints unresolved after mediation or reopened because of a violation of the mediation agreement. As part of the initial investigation, the agency shall use informal fact finding methods including joint or individual discussions with the complainant and the recipient to establish the facts, and, if possible, resolve the complaint to the mutual satisfaction of the parties. The agency may seek the assistance of any involved State agency.
              (5) Formal investigation, conciliation, and hearing. If the agency cannot resolve the complaint during the early stages of the investigation, it shall:
              (i) Complete the investigation of the complaint.
              (ii) Attempt to achieve voluntary compliance satisfactory to the agency, if the investigation indicates a violation.
              (iii) Arrange for enforcement as described in § 90.47, if necessary.
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 90.44
              Compliance reviews.
              (a) Each agency shall provide in its regulations that it may conduct compliance reviews, pre-award reviews, and other similar procedures which permit the agency to investigate, and correct, violations of the Act without regard to its procedures for handling complaints.
              (b) If a compliance review or pre-award review indicates a violation of the Act, the agency shall attempt to achieve voluntary compliance with the Act. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, the agency shall arrange for enforcement as described in § 90.47.
            
            
              § 90.45
              Information requirements.
              Each agency shall provide in its regulations a requirement that the recipient:
              (a) Provide to the agency information necessary to determine whether the recipient is in compliance with the Act; and
              (b) Permit reasonable access by the agency to the books, records, accounts, and other recipient facilities and sources of information to the extent necessary to determine whether a recipient is in compliance with the Act.
            
            
              § 90.46
              Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
              Each agency shall provide in its regulations that recipients may not engage in acts of intimidation or retaliation against any person who:
              (a) Attempts to assert a right protected by the Act; or
              (b) Cooperates in any mediation, investigation, hearing, or other part of the agency's investigation, conciliation, and enforcement process.
            
            
              § 90.47
              What further provisions must an agency make in order to enforce its regulations after an investigation indicates that a violation of the Act has been committed?

              (a) Each agency shall provide for enforcement of its regulations through:
              
              (1) Termination of a recipient's Federal financial assistance under the program or activity involved where the recipient has violated the Act or the agency's regulations. The determination of the recipient's violation may be made only after a recipient has had an opportunity for a hearing on the record before an administrative law judge.
              (2) Any other means authorized by law including but not limited to:
              (i) Referral to the Department of Justice for proceedings to enforce any rights of the United States or obligations of the recipient created by the Act or the agency's regulations.
              (ii) Use of any requirement of or referral to any Federal, State, or local government agency which will have the effect of correcting a violation of the Act or implementing regulations.
              (b) Any termination under paragraph (a)(1) shall be limited to the particular recipient and particular program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance or portion thereof found to be in violation of the Act or agency regulations. No termination shall be based in whole or in part on a finding with respect to any program or activity which does not receive Federal financial assistance.
              (c) No action under paragraph (a) of this section may be taken until:
              (1) The head of the agency involved has advised the recipient of its failure to comply with the Act or the agency's regulations and has determined that voluntary compliance cannot be obtained.
              (2) Thirty days have elapsed after the head of the agency involved has sent a written report of the circumstances and grounds of the action to the committees of the Congress having legislative jurisdiction over the program or activity involved. A report shall be filed whenever any action is taken under paragraph (a) of this section.
              (d) An agency may defer granting new Federal financial assistance to a recipient when termination proceedings under paragraph (a)(1) of this section are initiated.
              (1) New Federal financial assistance includes all assistance administered by or through the agency for which an application or approval, including renewal or continuation of existing activities, or authorization of new activities, is required during the deferral period. New Federal financial assistance does not include assistance approved prior to the beginning of termination proceedings or to increases in funding as a result of changed computation of formula awards.
              (2) A deferral may not begin until the recipient has received a notice of opportunity for a hearing under paragraph (a)(1). A deferral may not continue for more than 60 days unless a hearing has begun within that time or the time for beginning the hearing has been extended by mutual consent of the recipient and the agency. A deferral may not continue for more than 30 days after the close of the hearing, unless the hearing results in a finding against the recipient.
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 90.48
              Alternate funds disbursal procedure.
              When an agency withholds funds from a recipient under its regulations issued under § 90.31, the head of the agency may disburse the withheld funds so directly to any public or non-profit private organization or agency, or State or political subdivision of the State. These alternate recipients must demonstrate the ability to comply with the agency's regulations issued under this Act and to achieve the goals of the Federal statute authorizing the Federal financial assistance.
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 90.49
              Remedial and affirmative action by recipients.
              (a) Where a recipient is found to have discriminated on the basis of age, the recipient shall take any remedial action which the agency may require to overcome the effects of the discrimination. If another recipient exercises control over the recipient that has discriminated, both recipients may be required to take remedial action.

              (b) Even in the absence of a finding of discrimination, a recipient may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in the recipient's program or activity on the basis of age.
              
              (c) If a recipient operating a program or activity which serves the elderly or children in addition to persons of other ages, provides special benefits to the elderly or to children the provision of those benefits shall be presumed to be voluntary affirmative action provided that it does not have the effect of excluding otherwise eligible persons from participation in the program or activity.
              [44 FR 33776, June 12, 1979, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 90.50
              Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
              (a) The agency shall provide in its regulations that a complainant may file a civil action following the exhaustion of adminstrative remedies under the Act. Administrative remedies are exhausted if:
              (1) 180 days have elapsed since the complainant filed the complaint and the agency has made no finding with regard to the complaint; or
              (2) The agency issues any finding in favor of the recipient.
              (b) If either of the conditions set forth in § 90.50(a) is satisfied the agency shall:
              (1) Promptly advise the complainant of this fact; and
              (2) Advise the complainant of his or her right, under section 305(e) of the Act, to bring a civil action for injunctive relief that will effect the purposes of the Act; and
              (3) Inform the complainant:
              (i) That a civil action can only be brought in a United States district court for the district in which the recipient is found or transacts business;
              (ii) That a complainant prevailing in a civil action has the right to be awarded the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney's fees, but that these costs must be demanded in the complaint;
              (iii) That before commencing the action the complainant shall give 30 days notice by registered mail to the Secretary, the Attorney General of the United States, the head of the granting agency, and the recipient;
              (iv) That the notice shall state: the alleged violation of the Act; the relief requested; the court in which the action will be brought; and whether or not attorney's fees are demanded in the event the complainant prevails; and
              (v) That no action shall be brought if the same alleged violation of the Act by the same recipient is the subject of a pending action in any court of the United States.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Future Review of Age Discrimination Regulations
            
              § 90.61
              Review of general regulations.

              The Secretary shall review the effectiveness of these regulations in securing compliance with the Act. As part of this review, 30 months after the effective date of these regulations, the Secretary shall publish a notice of opportunity for public comment on the effectiveness of the regulations. The Secretary will assess the comments and publish the results of the review and assessment in the Federal Register.
              
            
            
              § 90.62
              Review of agency regulations.

              Each agency shall review the effectiveness of its regulations in securing compliance with the Act. As part of this review, 30 months after the effective date of its regulations, each agency shall publish a notice of opportunity for public comment on the effectiveness of the agency regulations. Each agency shall assess the comments and publish the results of the review in the Federal Register.
              
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 91
          PART 91—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF AGE IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM HHS
          
            
              Subpart A—General
              Sec.
              91.1
              What is the purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975?
              91.2
              What is the purpose of HHS' age discrimination regulations?
              91.3
              To what programs or activities do these regulations apply?
              91.4
              Definition of terms used in these regulations.
            
            
              Subpart B—Standards for Determining Age Discrimination
              91.11
              Rules against age discrimination.
              
              91.12
              Definitions of normal operation and statutory objective.
              91.13
              Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination: Normal operation or statutory objective of any program or activity.
              91.14
              Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination: Reasonable factors other than age.
              91.15
              Burden of proof.
              91.16
              Affirmative action by recipient.
              91.17
              Special benefits for children and the elderly.
              91.18
              Age distinctions contained in HHS regulations.
            
            
              Subpart C—Duties of HHS Recipients
              91.31
              General responsibilities.
              91.32
              Notice to subrecipients and beneficiaries.
              91.33
              Assurance of compliance and recipient assessment of age distinctions.
              91.34
              Information requirements.
            
            
              Subpart D—Investigation, Conciliation, and Enforcement Procedures
              91.41
              Compliance reviews.
              91.42
              Complaints.
              91.43
              Mediation.
              91.44
              Investigation.
              91.45
              Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
              91.46
              Compliance procedure.
              91.47
              Hearings, decisions, post-termination proceedings.
              91.48
              Remedial action by recipient.
              91.49
              Alternate funds disbursal procedure.
              91.50
              Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
            
          
          
            Authority:

            Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq. (45 CFR part 90).
          
          
            Source:
            47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General
            
              § 91.1
              What is the purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975?
              The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, is designed to prohibit discrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance. The Act also permits federally assisted programs or activities, and recipients of Federal funds, to continue to use certain age distinctions and factors other than age which meet the requirements of the Act and these regulations.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.2
              What is the purpose of HHS' age discrimination regulations?
              The purpose of these regulations is to set out HHS' policies and procedures under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 and the general age discrimination regulations at 45 CFR part 90. 1
                 The Act and the general regulations prohibit discrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance. The Act and the general regulations permit federally assisted programs or activities, and recipients of Federal funds, to continue to use age distinctions and factors other than age which meet the requirements of the Act and its implementing regulations.
              
                
                  1 Published at 44 FR 33768, June 12, 1979.
              
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.3
              To what programs or activities do these regulations apply?
              (a) The Act and these regulations apply to each HHS recipient and to each program or activity operated by the recipient which receives Federal financial assistance provided by HHS.
              (b) The Act and these regulations do not apply to:
              (1) An age distinction contained in that part of a Federal, State, or local statute or ordinance adopted by an elected, general purpose legislative body which:
              (i) Provides any benefits or assistance to persons based on age; or
              (ii) Establishes criteria for participation in age-related terms; or
              (iii) Describes intended beneficiaries or target groups in age-related terms.

              (2) Any employment practice of any employer, employment agency, labor organization, or any labor-management joint apprenticeship training program, except for any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance for public service employment under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA), (29 U.S.C. 801 et seq.)
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.4
              Definition of terms used in these regulations.
              As used in these regulations, the term:
              
                Act means the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, (Title III of Pub. L. 94-135).
              
                Action means any act, activity, policy, rule, standard, or method of administration; or the use of any policy, rule, standard, or method of administration.
              
                Age means how old a person is, or the number of years from the date of a person's birth.
              
                Age distinction means any action using age or an age-related term.
              
                Age-related term means a word or words which necessarily imply a particular age or range of ages (for example, children, adult, older persons, but not student).
              
                Agency means a Federal department or agency that is empowered to extend financial assistance.
              
                Federal financial assistance means any grant, entitlement, loan, cooperative agreement, contract (other than a procurement contract or a contract of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by which the agency provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
              (a) Funds; or
              (b) Services of Federal personnel; or
              (c) Real and personal property or any interest in or use of property, including:
              (1) Transfers or leases of property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
              (2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal Government.
              
                HHS means the United States Department of Health and Human Services.
              
                Program or activity means all of the operations of—
              (a)(1) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
              (2) The entity of such State or local government that distributes Federal financial assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
              (b)(1) A college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or
              (2) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 7801), system of vocational education, or other school system;
              (c)(1) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
              (i) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
              (ii) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
              (2) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
              (d) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (a), (b), or (c) of this definition; any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
              
                Recipient means any State or its political subdivision, any instrumentality of a State or its political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any person to which Federal financial assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient. Recipient includes any successor, assignee, or transferee, but excludes the ultimate beneficiary of the assistance.
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or his or her designee.
              
                Subrecipient means any of the entities in the definition of recipient to which a recipient extends or passes on Federal financial assistance. A subrecipient is generally regarded as a recipient of Federal financial assistance and has all the duties of a recipient in these regulations.
              
              
                United States means the fifty States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Northern Marianas, and the territories and possessions of the United States.
              (Authority: 42 U.S.C. 6107)
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Standards for Determining Age Discrimination
            
              § 91.11
              Rules against age discrimination.
              The rules stated in this section are limited by the exceptions contained in §§ 91.13 and 91.14 of these regulations.
              (a) General rule: No person in the United States shall, on the basis of age, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
              (b) Specific rules: A recipient may not, in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, directly or through contractual licensing, or other arrangements, use age distinctions or take any other actions which have the effect, on the basis of age, of:
              (1) Excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under, a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance; or
              (2) Denying or limiting individuals in their opportunity to participate in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
              (c) The specific forms of age discrimination listed in paragraph (b) of this section do not necessarily constitute a complete list.
            
            
              § 91.12
              Definitions of normal operation and statutory objective.
              For purposes of §§ 91.13 and 91.14, the terms normal operation and statutory objective shall have the following meaning:
              (a) Normal operation means the operation of a program or activity without significant changes that would impair its ability to meet its objectives.
              (b) Statutory objective means any purpose of a program or activity expressly stated in any Federal statute, State statute, or local statute or ordinance adopted by an elected, general purpose legislative body.
            
            
              § 91.13
              Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination: Normal operation or statutory objective of any program or activity.
              A recipient is permitted to take an action, otherwise prohibited by § 91.11, if the action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity. An action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity, if:
              (a) Age is used as a measure or approximation of one or more other characteristics; and
              (b) The other characteristic(s) must be measured or approximated in order for the normal operation of the program or activity to continue, or to achieve any statutory objective of the program or activity; and
              (c) The other characteristic(s) can be reasonably measured or approximated by the use of age; and
              (d) The other characteristic(s) are impractical to measure directly on an individual basis.
            
            
              § 91.14
              Exceptions to the rules against age discrimination: Reasonable factors other than age.
              A recipient is permitted to take an action otherwise prohibited by § 91.11 which is based on a factor other than age, even though that action may have a disproportionate effect on persons of different ages. An action may be based on a factor other than age only if the factor bears a direct and substantial relationship to the normal operation of the program or activity or to the achievement of a statutory objective.
            
            
              § 91.15
              Burden of proof.

              The burden of proving that an age distinction or other action falls within the exceptions outlined in §§ 91.13 and 91.14 is on the recipient of Federal financial assistance.
            
            
              § 91.16
              Affirmative action by recipient.
              Even in the absence of a finding of discrimination, a recipient may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in the recipient's program or activity on the basis of age.
            
            
              § 91.17
              Special benefits for children and the elderly.
              If a recipient operating a program or activity provides special benefits to the elderly or to children, such use of age distinctions shall be presumed to be necessary to the normal operation of the program or activity, notwithstanding the provisions of § 91.13.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.18
              Age distinctions contained in HHS regulations.
              Any age distinctions contained in a rule or regulation issued by HHS shall be presumed to be necessary to the achievement of a statutory objective of the program or activity to which the rule or regulation applies, notwithstanding the provisions of § 91.13.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Duties of HHS Recipients
            
              § 91.31
              General responsibilities.
              Each HHS recipient has primary responsibility to ensure that its programs or activities are in compliance with the Act and these regulations, and shall take steps to eliminate violations of the Act. A recipient also has responsibility to maintain records, provide information, and to afford HHS access to its records to the extent HHS finds necessary to determine whether the recipient is in compliance with the Act and these regulations.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.32
              Notice to subrecipients and beneficiaries.
              (a) Where a recipient passes on Federal financial assistance from HHS to subrecipients, the recipient shall provide the subrecipients written notice of their obligations under the Act and these regulations.
              (b) Each recipient shall make necessary information about the Act and these regulations available to its beneficiaries in order to inform them about the protections against discrimination provided by the Act and these regulations.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.33
              Assurance of compliance and recipient assessment of age distinctions.
              (a) Each recipient of Federal financial assistance from HHS shall sign a written assurance as specified by HHS that it will comply with the Act and these regulations.
              (b) Recipient assessment of age distinctions. (1) As part of a compliance review under § 91.41 or complaint investigation under § 91.44, HHS may require a recipient employing the equivalent of 15 or more employees to complete a written self-evaluation, in a manner specified by the responsible Department official, of any age distinction imposed in its program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from HHS to assess the recipient's compliance with the Act.
              (2) Whenever an assessment indicates a violation of the Act and the HHS regulations, the recipient shall take corrective action.
            
            
              § 91.34
              Information requirements.
              Each recipient shall:
              (a) Keep records in a form and containing information which HHS determines may be necessary to ascertain whether the recipient is complying with the Act and these regulations.
              (b) Provide to HHS, upon request, information and reports which HHS determines are necessary to ascertain whether the recipient is complying with the Act and these regulations.
              (c) Permit reasonable access by HHS to the books, records, accounts, and other recipient facilities and sources of information to the extent HHS determines is necessary to ascertain whether the recipient is complying with the Act and these regulations.
            
          
          
            
            Subpart D—Investigation, Conciliation, and Enforcement Procedures
            
              § 91.41
              Compliance reviews.
              (a) HHS may conduct compliance reviews and pre-award reviews or use other similar procedures that will permit it to investigate and correct violations of the Act and these regulations. HHS may conduct these reviews even in the absence of a complaint against a recipient. The reviews may be as comprehensive as necessary to determine whether a violation of the Act and these regulations has occurred.
              (b) If a compliance review or pre-award review indicates a violation of the Act or these regulations, HHS will attempt to achieve voluntary compliance with the Act. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, HHS will arrange for enforcement as described in § 91.46.
            
            
              § 91.42
              Complaints.
              (a) Any person, individually or as a member of a class or on behalf of others, may file a complaint with HHS, alleging discrimination prohibited by the Act or these regulations based on an action occurring on or after July 1, 1979. A complainant shall file a complaint within 180 days from the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged act of discrimination. However, for good cause shown, HHS may extend this time limit.
              (b) HHS will consider the date a complaint is filed to be the date upon which the complaint is sufficent to be processed.
              (c) HHS will attempt to facilitate the filing of complaints wherever possible, including taking the following measures:
              (1) Accepting as a sufficient complaint, any written statement which identifies the parties involved and the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged violation, describes generally the action or practice complained of, and is signed by the complainant.
              (2) Freely permitting a complainant to add information to the complaint to meet the requirements of a sufficient complaint.
              (3) Notifying the complainant and the recipient of their rights and obligations under the complaint procedure, including the right to have a representative at all stages of the complaint procedure.
              (4) Notifying the complainant and the recipient (or their representatives) of their right to contact HHS for information and assistance regarding the complaint resolution process.
              (d) HHS will return to the complainant any complaint outside the jurisdiction of these regulations, and will state the reason(s) why it is outside the jurisdiction of these regulations.
            
            
              § 91.43
              Mediation.
              (a) HHS will promptly refer to a mediation agency designated by the Secretary all sufficient complaints that:
              (1) Fall within the jurisdiction of the Act and these regulations, unless the age distinction complained of is clearly within an exception; and,
              (2) Contain all information necessary for further processing.
              (b) Both the complainant and the recipient shall participate in the mediation process to the extent necessary to reach an agreement or make an informed judgment that an agreement is not possible.
              (c) If the complainant and the recipient reach an agreement, the mediator shall prepare a written statement of the agreement and have the complainant and the recipient sign it. The mediator shall send a copy of the agreement to HHS. HHS will take no further action on the complaint unless the complainant or the recipient fails to comply with the agreement.
              (d) The mediator shall protect the confidentiality of all information obtained in the course of the mediation process. No mediator shall testify in any adjudicative proceeding, produce any document, or otherwise disclose any information obtained in the course of the mediation process without prior approval of the head of the mediation agency.
              (e) The mediation will proceed for a maximum of 60 days after a complaint is filed with HHS. Mediation ends if:

              (1) 60 days elapse from the time the complaint is filed; or
                
              

              (2) Prior to the end of that 60-day period, an agreement is reached; or
              
              (3) Prior to the end of that 60-day period, the mediator determines that an agreement cannot be reached.
              This 60-day period may be extended by the mediator, with the concurrence of HHS, for not more than 30 days if the mediator determines that agreement will likely be reached during such extended period.
              (f) The mediator shall return unresolved complaints to HHS.
            
            
              § 91.44
              Investigation.
              (a) Informal investigation. (1) HHS will investigate complaints that are unresolved after mediation or are reopened because of a violation of a mediation agreement.
              (2) As part of the initial investigation HHS will use informal fact finding methods, including joint or separate discussions with the complainant and recipient, to establish the fact and, if possible, settle the complaint on terms that are mutually agreeable to the parties. HHS may seek the assistance of any involved State agency.
              (3) HHS will put any agreement in writing and have it signed by the parties and an authorized official at HHS.
              (4) The settlement shall not affect the operation of any other enforcement effort of HHS, including compliance reviews and investigation of other complaints which may involve the recipient.
              (5) The settlement is not a finding of discrimination against a recipient.
              (b) Formal investigation. If HHS cannot resolve the complaint through informal investigation, it will begin to develop formal findings through further investigation of the complaint. If the investigation indicates a violation of these regulations HHS will attempt to obtain voluntary compliance. If HHS cannot obtain voluntary compliance it will begin enforcement as described in § 91.46.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.45
              Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
              A recipient may not engage in acts of intimidation or retaliation against any person who:
              (a) Attempts to assert a right protected by the Act or these regulations; or
              (b) Cooperates in any mediation, investigation, hearing, or other part of HHS' investigation, conciliation, and enforcement process.
            
            
              § 91.46
              Compliance procedure.
              (a) HHS may enforce the Act and these regulations through:
              (1) Termination of a recipient's Federal financial assistance from HHS under the program or activity involved where the recipient has violated the Act or these regulations. The determination of the recipient's violation may be made only after a recipient has had an opportunity for a hearing on the record before an administrative law judge.
              (2) Any other means authorized by law including but not limited to:
              (i) Referral to the Department of Justice for proceedings to enforce any rights of the United States or obligations of the recipient created by the Act or these regulations.
              (ii) Use of any requirement of or referral to any Federal, State, or local government agency that will have the effect of correcting a violation of the Act or these regulations.
              (b) HHS will limit any termination under § 91.46(a)(1) to the particular recipient and particular program or activity or part of such program or activity HHS finds in violation of these regulations. HHS will not base any part of a termination on a finding with respect to any program or activity of the recipient which does not receive Federal financial assistance from HHS.
              (c) HHS will take no action under paragraph (a) until:
              (1) The Secretary has advised the recipient of its failure to comply with the Act and these regulations and has determined that voluntary compliance cannot be obtained.

              (2) Thirty days have elapsed after the Secretary has sent a written report of the circumstances and grounds of the action to the committees of the Congress having legislative jurisdiction over the program or activity involved. The Secretary will file a report whenever any action is taken under paragraph (a).
              
              (d) HHS also may defer granting new Federal financial assistance from HHS to a recipient when a hearing under § 91.46(a)(1) is initiated.
              (1) New Federal financial assistance from HHS includes all assistance for which HHS requires an application or approval, including renewal or continuation of existing activities, or authorization of new activities, during the deferral period. New Federal financial assistance from HHS does not include increases in funding as a result of changed computation of formula awards or assistance approved prior to the beginning of a hearing under § 91.46(a)(1).
              (2) HHS will not begin a deferral until the recipient has received a notice of an opportunity for a hearing under § 91.46(a)(1). HHS will not continue a deferral for more than 60 days unless a hearing has begun within that time or the time for beginning the hearing has been extended by mutual consent of the recipient and the Secretary. HHS will not continue a deferral for more than 30 days after the close of the hearing, unless the hearing results in a finding against the recipient.
              (3) HHS will limit any deferral to the particular recipient and particular program or activity or part of such program or activity HHS finds in violation of these regulations. HHS will not base any part of a deferral on a finding with respect to any program or activity of the recipient which does not, and would not in connection with the new funds, receive Federal financial assistance from HHS.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.47
              Hearings, decisions, post-termination proceedings.
              Certain HHS procedural provisions applicable to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 apply to HHS enforcement of these regulations. They are found at 45 CFR 80.9 through 80.11 and 45 CFR part 81.
            
            
              § 91.48
              Remedial action by recipient.
              Where HHS finds a recipient has discriminated on the basis of age, the recipient shall take any remedial action that HHS may require to overcome the effects of the discrimination. If another recipient exercises control over the recipient that has discriminated, HHS may require both recipients to take remedial action.
            
            
              § 91.49
              Alternate funds disbursal procedure.
              (a) When HHS withholds funds from a recipient under these regulations, the Secretary may disburse the withheld funds directly to an alternate recipient: any public or non-profit private organization or agency, or State or political subdivision of the State.
              (b) The Secretary will require any alternate recipient to demonstrate:
              (1) The ability to comply with these regulations; and
              (2) The ability to achieve the goals of the Federal statute authorizing the Federal financial assistance.
              [47 FR 57858, Dec. 28, 1982, as amended at 70 FR 24322, May 9, 2005]
            
            
              § 91.50
              Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
              (a) A complainant may file a civil action following the exhaustion of administrative remedies under the Act. Administrative remedies are exhausted if:
              (1) 180 days have elapsed since the complainant filed the complaint and HHS has made no finding with regard to the complaint; or
              (2) HHS issues any finding in favor of the recipient.
              (b) If HHS fails to make a finding within 180 days or issues a finding in favor of the recipient, HHS shall:
              (1) Promptly advise the complainant of this fact; and
              (2) Advise the complainant of his or her right to bring a civil action for injunctive relief; and
              (3) Inform the complainant:
              (i) That the complainant may bring a civil action only in a United States district court for the district in which the recipient is found or transacts business;
              (ii) That a complainant prevailing in a civil action has the right to be awarded the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney's fees, but that the complainant must demand these costs in the complaint;

              (iii) That before commencing the action the complainant shall give 30 days notice by registered mail to the Secretary, the Attorney General of the United States, and the recipient;
              (iv) That the notice must state: the alleged violation of the Act; the relief requested; the court in which the complainant is bringing the action; and, whether or not attorney's fees are demanded in the event the complainant prevails; and
              (v) That the complainant may not bring an action if the same alleged violation of the Act by the same recipient is the subject of a pending action in any court of the United States.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 92
          PART 92—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF RACE, COLOR, NATIONAL ORIGIN, SEX, AGE, OR DISABILITY IN HEALTH PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND HEALTH PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES ADMINISTERED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES OR ENTITIES ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE I OF THE PATIENT PROTECTION AND AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
          
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              Sec.
              92.1
              Purpose and effective date.
              92.2
              Application.
              92.3
              Relationship to other laws.
              92.4
              Definitions.
              92.5
              Assurances required.
              92.6
              Remedial action and voluntary action.
              92.7
              Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              92.8
              Notice requirement.
            
            
              Subpart B—Nondiscrimination Provisions
              92.101
              Discrimination prohibited.
            
            
              Subpart C—Specific Applications to Health Programs and Activities
              92.201
              Meaningful access for individuals with limited English proficiency.
              92.202
              Effective communication for individuals with disabilities.
              92.203
              Accessibility standards for buildings and facilities.
              92.204
              Accessibility of electronic and information technology.
              92.205
              Requirement to make reasonable modifications.
              92.206
              Equal program access on the basis of sex.
              92.207
              Nondiscrimination in health-related insurance and other health-related coverage.
              92.208
              Employer liability for discrimination in employee health benefit programs.
              92.209
              Nondiscrimination on the basis of association.
            
            
              Subpart D—Procedures
              92.301
              Enforcement mechanisms.
              92.302
              Procedures for health programs and activities conducted by recipients and State-based Marketplaces.
              92.303
              Procedures for health programs and activities administered by the Department.
              Appendix A to Part 92—Sample Notice Informing Individuals About Nondiscrimination and Accessibility Requirements and Sample Nondiscrimination Statement: Discrimination is Against the Law
              Appendix B to Part 92—Sample Tagline Informing Individuals With Limited English Proficiency of Language Assistance Services
              Appendix C to Part 92—Sample Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act Grievance Procedure
            
          
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 18116, 5 U.S.C. 301.
          
          
            Source:
            81 FR 31465, May 18, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            
              § 92.1
              Purpose and effective date.

              The purpose of this part is to implement Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) (42 U.S.C. 18116), which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability in certain health programs and activities. Section 1557 provides that, except as provided in Title I of the ACA, an individual shall not, on the grounds prohibited under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, or Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, any health program or activity, any part of which is receiving Federal financial assistance or under any program or activity that is administered by an Executive Agency or any entity established under Title I of the ACA. This part applies to health programs or activities administered by recipients of Federal financial assistance from the Department, Title I entities that administer health programs or activities, and Department-administered health programs or activities. The effective date of this part shall be July 18, 2016, except to the extent that provisions of this part require changes to health insurance or group health plan benefit design (including covered benefits, benefits limitations or restrictions, and cost-sharing mechanisms, such as coinsurance, copayments, and deductibles), such provisions, as they apply to health insurance or group health plan benefit design, have an applicability date of the first day of the first plan year (in the individual market, policy year) beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
            
            
              § 92.2
              Application.
              (a) Except as provided otherwise in this part, this part applies to every health program or activity, any part of which receives Federal financial assistance provided or made available by the Department; every health program or activity administered by the Department; and every health program or activity administered by a Title I entity.
              (b)(1) Exclusions to the application of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as set forth at 45 CFR 91.3(b)(1), apply to claims of discrimination based on age under Section 1557 or this part.
              (2) Insofar as the application of any requirement under this part would violate applicable Federal statutory protections for religious freedom and conscience, such application shall not be required.
              (c) Any provision of this part held to be invalid or unenforceable by its terms, or as applied to any person or circumstance, shall be construed so as to continue to give maximum effect to the provision permitted by law, unless such holding shall be one of utter invalidity or unenforceability, in which event the provision shall be severable from this part and shall not affect the remainder thereof or the application of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other, dissimilar circumstances.
            
            
              § 92.3
              Relationship to other laws.
              (a) Rule of interpretation. Neither Section 1557 nor this part shall be construed to apply a lesser standard for the protection of individuals from discrimination than the standards applied under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, or the regulations issued pursuant to those laws.
              (b) Other laws. Nothing in this part shall be construed to invalidate or limit the rights, remedies, procedures, or legal standards available to individuals under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Sections 504 or 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended by the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, or other Federal laws or to supersede State or local laws that provide additional protections against discrimination on any basis described in § 92.1.
            
            
              § 92.4
              Definitions.
              As used in this part, the term—
              
                1991 Standards means the 1991 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, published at appendix A to 28 CFR part 36 on July 26, 1991, and republished as appendix D to 28 CFR part 36 on September 15, 2010.
              
                2010 Standards means the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, as defined at 28 CFR 35.104.
              
                ACA means the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Pub. L. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 (2010) as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, Pub. L. 111-152, 124 Stat. 1029 (codified in scattered sections of U.S.C.)).
              
                ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.), as amended.
              
                Age means how old an individual is, or the number of elapsed years from the date of an individual's birth.
              
                Age Act means the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.), as amended.
              
              
                Applicant means an individual who applies to participate in a health program or activity.
              
                Auxiliary aids and services include:
              (1) Qualified interpreters on-site or through video remote interpreting (VRI) services, as defined in 28 CFR 35.104 and 36.303(b); note takers; real-time computer-aided transcription services; written materials; exchange of written notes; telephone handset amplifiers; assistive listening devices; assistive listening systems; telephones compatible with hearing aids; closed caption decoders; open and closed captioning, including real-time captioning; voice, text, and video-based telecommunication products and systems, text telephones (TTYs), videophones, and captioned telephones, or equally effective telecommunications devices; videotext displays; accessible electronic and information technology; or other effective methods of making aurally delivered information available to individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing;
              (2) Qualified readers; taped texts; audio recordings; Braille materials and displays; screen reader software; magnification software; optical readers; secondary auditory programs; large print materials; accessible electronic and information technology; or other effective methods of making visually delivered materials available to individuals who are blind or have low vision;
              (3) Acquisition or modification of equipment and devices; and
              (4) Other similar services and actions.
              
                Covered entity means:
              (1) An entity that operates a health program or activity, any part of which receives Federal financial assistance;
              (2) An entity established under Title I of the ACA that administers a health program or activity; and
              (3) The Department.
              
                Department means the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
              
                Director means the Director of the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) of the Department.
              
                Disability means, with respect to an individual, a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment, as defined and construed in the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. 705(9)(B), which incorporates the definition of disability in the ADA, 42 U.S.C. 12102, as amended. Where this part cross-references regulatory provisions that use the term “handicap,” “handicap” means “disability” as defined in this section.
              
                Electronic and information technology means the same as “electronic and information technology,” or any term that replaces “electronic and information technology,” as it is defined in 36 CFR 1194.4.
              
                Employee health benefit program means:
              (1) Health benefits coverage or health insurance coverage provided to employees and/or their dependents established, operated, sponsored or administered by, for, or on behalf of one or more employers, whether provided or administered by entities including but not limited to an employer, group health plan (as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), 29 U.S.C. 1191b(a)(1)), third party administrator, or health insurance issuer.
              (2) An employer-provided or employer-sponsored wellness program;
              (3) An employer-provided health clinic; or
              (4) Long term care coverage or insurance provided or administered by an employer, group health plan, third party administrator, or health insurance issuer for the benefit of an employer's employees.
              
                Federal financial assistance. (1) Federal financial assistance means any grant, loan, credit, subsidy, contract (other than a procurement contract but including a contract of insurance), or any other arrangement by which the Federal government provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
              (i) Funds;
              (ii) Services of Federal personnel; or
              (iii) Real and personal property or any interest in or use of such property, including:

              (A) Transfers or leases of such property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
              
              (B) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of such property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal government.
              (2) Federal financial assistance the Department provides or otherwise makes available includes Federal financial assistance that the Department plays a role in providing or administering, including all tax credits under Title I of the ACA, as well as payments, subsidies, or other funds extended by the Department to any entity providing health-related insurance coverage for payment to or on behalf of an individual obtaining health-related insurance coverage from that entity or extended by the Department directly to such individual for payment to any entity providing health-related insurance coverage.
              
                Federally-facilitated MarketplaceSM
                 means the same as “Federally-facilitated Exchange” defined in 45 CFR 155.20.
              
                Gender identity means an individual's internal sense of gender, which may be male, female, neither, or a combination of male and female, and which may be different from an individual's sex assigned at birth. The way an individual expresses gender identity is frequently called “gender expression,” and may or may not conform to social stereotypes associated with a particular gender. A transgender individual is an individual whose gender identity is different from the sex assigned to that person at birth.
              
                Health Insurance MarketplaceSM
                 means the same as “Exchange” defined in 45 CFR 155.20.
              
                Health program or activity means the provision or administration of health-related services, health-related insurance coverage, or other health-related coverage, and the provision of assistance to individuals in obtaining health-related services or health-related insurance coverage. For an entity principally engaged in providing or administering health services or health insurance coverage or other health coverage, all of its operations are considered part of the health program or activity, except as specifically set forth otherwise in this part. Such entities include a hospital, health clinic, group health plan, health insurance issuer, physician's practice, community health center, nursing facility, residential or community-based treatment facility, or other similar entity. A health program or activity also includes all of the operations of a State Medicaid program, a Children's Health Insurance Program, and the Basic Health Program.
              
                HHS means the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
              
                Individual with a disability means any individual who has a disability as defined for the purpose of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 705(20)(B)-(F), as amended. Where this part cross-references regulatory provisions applicable to a “handicapped individual,” “handicapped individual” means “individual with a disability” as defined in this section.
              
                Individual with limited English proficiency means an individual whose primary language for communication is not English and who has a limited ability to read, write, speak, or understand English.
              
                Language assistance services may include, but are not limited to:
              (1) Oral language assistance, including interpretation in non-English languages provided in-person or remotely by a qualified interpreter for an individual with limited English proficiency, and the use of qualified bilingual or multilingual staff to communicate directly with individuals with limited English proficiency;
              (2) Written translation, performed by a qualified translator, of written content in paper or electronic form into languages other than English; and
              (3) Taglines.
              
                National origin includes, but is not limited to, an individual's, or his or her ancestor's, place of origin (such as country or world region) or an individual's manifestation of the physical, cultural, or linguistic characteristics of a national origin group.
              
                On the basis of sex includes, but is not limited to, discrimination on the basis of pregnancy, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom, childbirth or related medical conditions, sex stereotyping, and gender identity.
              
              
                Qualified bilingual/multilingual staff means a member of a covered entity's workforce who is designated by the covered entity to provide oral language assistance as part of the individual's current, assigned job responsibilities and who has demonstrated to the covered entity that he or she:
              (1) Is proficient in speaking and understanding both spoken English and at least one other spoken language, including any necessary specialized vocabulary, terminology and phraseology, and
              (2) is able to effectively, accurately, and impartially communicate directly with individuals with limited English proficiency in their primary languages.
              
                Qualified individual with a disability means, with respect to a health program or activity, an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable modifications to policies, practices, or procedures, the removal of architectural, communication, or transportation barriers, or the provision of auxiliary aids and services, meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of aids, benefits, or services offered or provided by the health program or activity.
              
                Qualified interpreter for an individual with a disability. (1) A qualified interpreter for an individual with a disability means an interpreter who via a remote interpreting service or an on-site appearance:
              (i) Adheres to generally accepted interpreter ethics principles, including client confidentiality; and
              (ii) is able to interpret effectively, accurately, and impartially, both receptively and expressively, using any necessary specialized vocabulary, terminology and phraseology.
              (2) For an individual with a disability, qualified interpreters can include, for example, sign language interpreters, oral transliterators (individuals who represent or spell in the characters of another alphabet), and cued language transliterators (individuals who represent or spell by using a small number of handshapes).
              
                Qualified interpreter for an individual with limited English proficiency means an interpreter who via a remote interpreting service or an on-site appearance:
              (1) Adheres to generally accepted interpreter ethics principles, including client confidentiality;
              (2) has demonstrated proficiency in speaking and understanding both spoken English and at least one other spoken language; and
              (3) is able to interpret effectively, accurately, and impartially, both receptively and expressly, to and from such language(s) and English, using any necessary specialized vocabulary, terminology and phraseology.
              
                Qualified translator means a translator who:
              (1) Adheres to generally accepted translator ethics principles, including client confidentiality;
              (2) has demonstrated proficiency in writing and understanding both written English and at least one other written non-English language; and
              (3) is able to translate effectively, accurately, and impartially to and from such language(s) and English, using any necessary specialized vocabulary, terminology and phraseology.
              
                Recipient means any State or its political subdivision, or any instrumentality of a State or its political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any individual, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and which operates a health program or activity, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee of a recipient.
              
                Section 504 means Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-112; 29 U.S.C. 794), as amended.
              
                Section 1557 means Section 1557 of the ACA (42 U.S.C. 18116).
              
                Sex stereotypes means stereotypical notions of masculinity or femininity, including expectations of how individuals represent or communicate their gender to others, such as behavior, clothing, hairstyles, activities, voice, mannerisms, or body characteristics. These stereotypes can include the expectation that individuals will consistently identify with only one gender and that they will act in conformity with the gender-related expressions stereotypically associated with that gender. Sex stereotypes also include gendered expectations related to the appropriate roles of a certain sex.
              
                State-based Marketplace SM
                 means a Health Insurance Marketplace SM established by a State pursuant to 45 CFR 155.100 and approved by the Department pursuant to 45 CFR 155.105.
              
                Taglines mean short statements written in non-English languages that indicate the availability of language assistance services free of charge.
              
                Title I entity means any entity established under Title I of the ACA, including State-based Marketplaces and Federally-facilitated Marketplaces.
              
                Title VI means Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Pub. L. 88-352; 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), as amended.
              
                Title IX means Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-318; 20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), as amended.
            
            
              § 92.5
              Assurances required.
              (a) Assurances. An entity applying for Federal financial assistance to which this part applies shall, as a condition of any application for Federal financial assistance, submit an assurance, on a form specified by the Director, that the entity's health programs and activities will be operated in compliance with Section 1557 and this part. A health insurance issuer seeking certification to participate in a Health Insurance Marketplace SM or a State seeking approval to operate a State-based Marketplace SM to which Section 1557 or this part applies shall, as a condition of certification or approval, submit an assurance, on a form specified by the Director, that the health program or activity will be operated in compliance with Section 1557 and this part. An applicant or entity may incorporate this assurance by reference in subsequent applications to the Department for Federal financial assistance or requests for certification to participate in a Health Insurance Marketplace SM or approval to operate a State-based Marketplace SM.
              (b) Duration of obligation. The duration of the assurances required by this subpart is the same as the duration of the assurances required in the Department's regulations implementing Section 504, 45 CFR 84.5(b).
              (c) Covenants. When Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of real property or interest, the same conditions apply as those contained in the Department's regulations implementing Section 504, at 45 CFR 84.5(c), except that the nondiscrimination obligation applies to discrimination on all bases covered under Section 1557 and this part.
            
            
              § 92.6
              Remedial action and voluntary action.
              (a) Remedial action. (1) If the Director finds that a recipient or State-based Marketplace SM has discriminated against an individual on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability, in violation of Section 1557 or this part, such recipient or State-based Marketplace SM shall take such remedial action as the Director may require to overcome the effects of the discrimination.
              (2) Where a recipient is found to have discriminated against an individual on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability, in violation of Section 1557 or this part, and where another recipient exercises control over the recipient that has discriminated, the Director, where appropriate, may require either or both entities to take remedial action.
              (3) The Director may, where necessary to overcome the effects of discrimination in violation of Section 1557 or this part, require a recipient or State-based Marketplace SM to take remedial action with respect to:
              (i) Individuals who are no longer participants in the recipient's or State-based Marketplace SM's health program or activity but who were participants in the health program or activity when such discrimination occurred; or
              (ii) Individuals who would have been participants in the health program or activity had the discrimination not occurred.
              (b) Voluntary action. A covered entity may take steps, in addition to any action that is required by Section 1557 or this part, to overcome the effects of conditions that result or resulted in limited participation in the covered entity's health programs or activities by individuals on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability.
            
            
              
              § 92.7
              Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
              (a) Designation of responsible employee. Each covered entity that employs 15 or more persons shall designate at least one employee to coordinate its efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under Section 1557 and this part, including the investigation of any grievance communicated to it alleging noncompliance with Section 1557 or this part or alleging any action that would be prohibited by Section 1557 or this part. For the Department, including the Federally-facilitated Marketplaces, the Director will be deemed the responsible employee under this section.
              (b) Adoption of grievance procedures. Each covered entity that employs 15 or more persons shall adopt grievance procedures that incorporate appropriate due process standards and that provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of grievances alleging any action that would be prohibited by Section 1557 or this part. For the Department, including the Federally-facilitated Marketplaces, the procedures for addressing complaints of discrimination on the grounds covered under Section 1557 or this part will be deemed grievance procedures under this section.
            
            
              § 92.8
              Notice requirement.
              (a) Each covered entity shall take appropriate initial and continuing steps to notify beneficiaries, enrollees, applicants, and members of the public of the following:
              (1) The covered entity does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability in its health programs and activities;
              (2) The covered entity provides appropriate auxiliary aids and services, including qualified interpreters for individuals with disabilities and information in alternate formats, free of charge and in a timely manner, when such aids and services are necessary to ensure an equal opportunity to participate to individuals with disabilities;
              (3) The covered entity provides language assistance services, including translated documents and oral interpretation, free of charge and in a timely manner, when such services are necessary to provide meaningful access to individuals with limited English proficiency;
              (4) How to obtain the aids and services in paragraphs (a)(2) and (3) of this section;
              (5) An identification of, and contact information for, the responsible employee designated pursuant to § 92.7(a), if applicable;
              (6) The availability of the grievance procedure and how to file a grievance, pursuant to § 92.7(b), if applicable; and
              (7) How to file a discrimination complaint with OCR in the Department.
              (b) Within 90 days of the effective date of this part, each covered entity shall:
              (1) As described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section, post a notice that conveys the information in paragraphs (a)(1) through (7) of this section; and
              (2) As described in paragraph (g)(1) of this section, if applicable, post a nondiscrimination statement that conveys the information in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
              (c) For use by covered entities, the Director shall make available, electronically and in any other manner that the Director determines appropriate, the content of a sample notice that conveys the information in paragraphs (a)(1) through (7) of this section, and the content of a sample nondiscrimination statement that conveys the information in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, in English and in the languages triggered by the obligation in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
              (d) Within 90 days of the effective date of this part, each covered entity shall:
              (1) As described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section, post taglines in at least the top 15 languages spoken by individuals with limited English proficiency of the relevant State or States; and
              (2) As described in paragraph (g)(2) of this section, if applicable, post taglines in at least the top two languages spoken by individuals with limited English proficiency of the relevant State or States.

              (e) For use by covered entities, the Director shall make available, electronically and in any other manner that the Director determines appropriate, taglines in the languages triggered by the obligation in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
              (f)(1) Each covered entity shall post the notice required by paragraph (a) of this section and the taglines required by paragraph (d)(1) of this section in a conspicuously-visible font size:
              (i) In significant publications and significant communications targeted to beneficiaries, enrollees, applicants, and members of the public, except for significant publications and significant communications that are small-sized, such as postcards and tri-fold brochures;
              (ii) In conspicuous physical locations where the entity interacts with the public; and
              (iii) In a conspicuous location on the covered entity's Web site accessible from the home page of the covered entity's Web site.
              (2) A covered entity may also post the notice and taglines in additional publications and communications.
              (g) Each covered entity shall post, in a conspicuously-visible font size, in significant publications and significant communications that are small-sized, such as postcards and tri-fold brochures:
              (1) The nondiscrimination statement required by paragraph (b)(2) of this section; and
              (2) The taglines required by paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
              (h) A covered entity may combine the content of the notice required in paragraph (a) of this section with the content of other notices if the combined notice clearly informs individuals of their civil rights under Section 1557 and this part.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Nondiscrimination Provisions
            
              § 92.101
              Discrimination prohibited.
              (a) General. (1) Except as provided in Title I of the ACA, an individual shall not, on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any health program or activity to which this part applies.
              (2) This part does not apply to employment, except as provided in § 92.208.
              (b) Specific discriminatory actions prohibited. Under any health program or activity to which this part applies:
              (1)(i) Each covered entity must comply with the regulation implementing Title VI, at § 80.3(b)(1) through (6) of this subchapter.
              (ii) No covered entity shall, on the basis of race, color, or national origin, aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any entity or person that discriminates on the basis of race, color, or national origin in providing any aid, benefit, or service to beneficiaries of the covered entity's health program or activity.
              (2)(i) Each recipient and State-based MarketplaceSM must comply with the regulation implementing Section 504, at §§ 84.4(b), 84.21 through 84.23(b), 84.31, 84.34, 84.37, 84.38, and 84.41 through 84.52(c) and 84.53 through 84.55 of this subchapter. Where this paragraph cross-references regulatory provisions that use the term “recipient,” the term “recipient or State-based MarketplaceSM” shall apply in its place.
              (ii) The Department, including the Federally-facilitated Marketplaces, must comply with the regulation implementing Section 504, at §§ 85.21(b), 85.41 through 85.42, and 85.44 through 85.51 of this subchapter.
              (3)(i) Each covered entity must comply with the regulation implementing Title IX, at § 86.31(b)(1) through (8) of this subchapter. Where this paragraph cross-references regulatory provisions that use the term “student,” “employee,” or “applicant,” these terms shall be replaced with “individual.”
              (ii) A covered entity may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration that have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of sex, or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program with respect to individuals on the basis of sex.

              (iii) In determining the site or location of a facility, a covered entity may not make selections that have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under any programs to which this regulation applies, on the basis of sex; or with the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity on the basis of sex.
              (iv) A covered entity may operate a sex-specific health program or activity (a health program or activity that is restricted to members of one sex) only if the covered entity can demonstrate an exceedingly persuasive justification, that is, that the sex-specific health program or activity is substantially related to the achievement of an important health-related or scientific objective.
              (4)(i) Each covered entity must comply with the regulation implementing the Age Act, at § 91.11(b) of this subchapter.
              (ii) No covered entity shall, on the basis of age, aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of age in providing any aid, benefit, or service to beneficiaries of the covered entity's health program or activity.
              (5) The enumeration of specific forms of discrimination in this paragraph does not limit the generality of the prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
              (c) The exceptions applicable to Title VI apply to discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin under this part. The exceptions applicable to Section 504 apply to discrimination on the basis of disability under this part. The exceptions applicable to the Age Act apply to discrimination on the basis of age under this part. These provisions are found at §§ 80.3(d), 84.4(c), 85.21(c), 91.12, 91.15, and 91.17-.18 of this subchapter.
              (d) Where the regulatory provisions referenced in paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4), and paragraph (c) of this section use the term “recipient,” the term “covered entity” shall apply in its place. Where the regulatory provisions referenced in paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4) and paragraph (c) of this section use the terms “program or activity” or “program” or “education program,” the term “health program or activity” shall apply in their place.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Specific Applications to Health Programs and Activities
            
              § 92.201
              Meaningful access for individuals with limited English proficiency.
              (a) General requirement. A covered entity shall take reasonable steps to provide meaningful access to each individual with limited English proficiency eligible to be served or likely to be encountered in its health programs and activities.
              (b) Evaluation of compliance. In evaluating whether a covered entity has met its obligation under paragraph (a) of this section, the Director shall:
              (1) Evaluate, and give substantial weight to, the nature and importance of the health program or activity and the particular communication at issue, to the individual with limited English proficiency; and
              (2) Take into account other relevant factors, including whether a covered entity has developed and implemented an effective written language access plan, that is appropriate to its particular circumstances, to be prepared to meet its obligations in § 92.201(a).
              (c) Language assistance services requirements. Language assistance services required under paragraph (a) of this section must be provided free of charge, be accurate and timely, and protect the privacy and independence of the individual with limited English proficiency.
              (d) Specific requirements for interpreter and translation services. Subject to paragraph (a) of this section:
              (1) A covered entity shall offer a qualified interpreter to an individual with limited English proficiency when oral interpretation is a reasonable step to provide meaningful access for that individual with limited English proficiency; and

              (2) A covered entity shall use a qualified translator when translating written content in paper or electronic form.
              
              (e) Restricted use of certain persons to interpret or facilitate communication. A covered entity shall not:
              (1) Require an individual with limited English proficiency to provide his or her own interpreter;
              (2) Rely on an adult accompanying an individual with limited English proficiency to interpret or facilitate communication, except:
              (i) In an emergency involving an imminent threat to the safety or welfare of an individual or the public where there is no qualified interpreter for the individual with limited English proficiency immediately available; or
              (ii) Where the individual with limited English proficiency specifically requests that the accompanying adult interpret or facilitate communication, the accompanying adult agrees to provide such assistance, and reliance on that adult for such assistance is appropriate under the circumstances;
              (3) Rely on a minor child to interpret or facilitate communication, except in an emergency involving an imminent threat to the safety or welfare of an individual or the public where there is no qualified interpreter for the individual with limited English proficiency immediately available; or
              (4) Rely on staff other than qualified bilingual/multilingual staff to communicate directly with individuals with limited English proficiency.
              (f) Video remote interpreting services. A covered entity that provides a qualified interpreter for an individual with limited English proficiency through video remote interpreting services in the covered entity's health programs and activities shall provide:
              (1) Real-time, full-motion video and audio over a dedicated high-speed, wide-bandwidth video connection or wireless connection that delivers high-quality video images that do not produce lags, choppy, blurry, or grainy images, or irregular pauses in communication;
              (2) A sharply delineated image that is large enough to display the interpreter's face and the participating individual's face regardless of the individual's body position;
              (3) A clear, audible transmission of voices; and
              (4) Adequate training to users of the technology and other involved individuals so that they may quickly and efficiently set up and operate the video remote interpreting.
              (g) Acceptance of language assistance services is not required. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require an individual with limited English proficiency to accept language assistance services.
            
            
              § 92.202
              Effective communication for individuals with disabilities.
              (a) A covered entity shall take appropriate steps to ensure that communications with individuals with disabilities are as effective as communications with others in health programs and activities, in accordance with the standards found at 28 CFR 35.160 through 35.164. Where the regulatory provisions referenced in this section use the term “public entity,” the term “covered entity” shall apply in its place.
              (b) A recipient or State-based MarketplaceSM shall provide appropriate auxiliary aids and services to persons with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills, where necessary to afford such persons an equal opportunity to benefit from the service in question.
            
            
              § 92.203
              Accessibility standards for buildings and facilities.

              (a) Each facility or part of a facility in which health programs or activities are conducted that is constructed or altered by or on behalf of, or for the use of, a recipient or State-based MarketplaceSM shall comply with the 2010 Standards as defined in § 92.4, if the construction or alteration was commenced on or after July 18, 2016, except that if a facility or part of a facility in which health programs or activities are conducted that is constructed or altered by or on behalf of, or for the use of, a recipient or State-based MarketplaceSM, was not covered by the 2010 Standards prior to July 18, 2016, such facility or part of a facility shall comply with the 2010 Standards, as defined in § 92.4, if the construction was commenced after January 18, 2018. Departures from particular technical and scoping requirements by the use of other methods are permitted where substantially equivalent or greater access to and usability of the facility is provided. All newly constructed or altered buildings or facilities subject to this section shall comply with the requirements for a “public building or facility” as defined in Section 106.5 of the 2010 Standards.
              (b) Each facility or part of a facility in which health programs or activities are conducted that is constructed or altered by or on behalf of, or for the use of, a recipient or State-based MarketplaceSM in conformance with the 1991 Standards or the 2010 Standards as defined in § 92.4 shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section and with 45 CFR 84.23(a) and (b), cross-referenced in § 92.101(b)(2)(i) with respect to those facilities, if the construction or alteration was commenced on or before July 18, 2016. Each facility or part of a facility in which health programs or activities are conducted that is constructed or altered by or on behalf of, or for the use of, a recipient or State-based MarketplaceSM in conformance with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards as defined in § 92.4, shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section and with 45 CFR 84.23(a) and (b), cross-referenced in § 92.101(b)(2)(i) with respect to those facilities, if the construction was commenced before July 18, 2016 and such facility was not covered by the 1991 Standards or 2010 Standards.
            
            
              § 92.204
              Accessibility of electronic and information technology.
              (a) Covered entities shall ensure that their health programs or activities provided through electronic and information technology are accessible to individuals with disabilities, unless doing so would result in undue financial and administrative burdens or a fundamental alteration in the nature of the health programs or activities. When undue financial and administrative burdens or a fundamental alteration exist, the covered entity shall provide information in a format other than an electronic format that would not result in such undue financial and administrative burdens or a fundamental alteration but would ensure, to the maximum extent possible, that individuals with disabilities receive the benefits or services of the health program or activity that are provided through electronic and information technology.
              (b) Recipients and State-based Marketplaces shall ensure that their health programs and activities provided through Web sites comply with the requirements of Title II of the ADA.
            
            
              § 92.205
              Requirement to make reasonable modifications.
              A covered entity shall make reasonable modifications to policies, practices, or procedures when such modifications are necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability, unless the covered entity can demonstrate that making the modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of the health program or activity. For the purposes of this section, the term “reasonable modifications” shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the term as set forth in the ADA Title II regulation at 28 CFR 35.130(b)(7).
            
            
              § 92.206
              Equal program access on the basis of sex.
              A covered entity shall provide individuals equal access to its health programs or activities without discrimination on the basis of sex; and a covered entity shall treat individuals consistent with their gender identity, except that a covered entity may not deny or limit health services that are ordinarily or exclusively available to individuals of one sex, to a transgender individual based on the fact that the individual's sex assigned at birth, gender identity, or gender otherwise recorded is different from the one to which such health services are ordinarily or exclusively available.
            
            
              § 92.207
              Nondiscrimination in health-related insurance and other health-related coverage.
              (a) General. A covered entity shall not, in providing or administering health-related insurance or other health-related coverage, discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability.
              (b) Discriminatory actions prohibited. A covered entity shall not, in providing or administering health-related insurance or other health-related coverage:
              (1) Deny, cancel, limit, or refuse to issue or renew a health-related insurance plan or policy or other health-related coverage, or deny or limit coverage of a claim, or impose additional cost sharing or other limitations or restrictions on coverage, on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability;
              (2) Have or implement marketing practices or benefit designs that discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability in a health-related insurance plan or policy, or other health-related coverage;
              (3) Deny or limit coverage, deny or limit coverage of a claim, or impose additional cost sharing or other limitations or restrictions on coverage, for any health services that are ordinarily or exclusively available to individuals of one sex, to a transgender individual based on the fact that an individual's sex assigned at birth, gender identity, or gender otherwise recorded is different from the one to which such health services are ordinarily or exclusively available;
              (4) Have or implement a categorical coverage exclusion or limitation for all health services related to gender transition; or
              (5) Otherwise deny or limit coverage, deny or limit coverage of a claim, or impose additional cost sharing or other limitations or restrictions on coverage, for specific health services related to gender transition if such denial, limitation, or restriction results in discrimination against a transgender individual.
              (c) The enumeration of specific forms of discrimination in paragraph (b) does not limit the general applicability of the prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
              (d) Nothing in this section is intended to determine, or restrict a covered entity from determining, whether a particular health service is medically necessary or otherwise meets applicable coverage requirements in any individual case.
            
            
              § 92.208
              Employer liability for discrimination in employee health benefit programs.
              A covered entity that provides an employee health benefit program to its employees and/or their dependents shall be liable for violations of this part in that employee health benefit program only when:
              (a) The entity is principally engaged in providing or administering health services, health insurance coverage, or other health coverage;
              (b) The entity receives Federal financial assistance a primary objective of which is to fund the entity's employee health benefit program; or
              (c) The entity is not principally engaged in providing or administering health services, health insurance coverage, or other health coverage, but operates a health program or activity, which is not an employee health benefit program, that receives Federal financial assistance; except that the entity is liable under this part with regard to the provision or administration of employee health benefits only with respect to the employees in that health program or activity.
            
            
              § 92.209
              Nondiscrimination on the basis of association.
              A covered entity shall not exclude from participation in, deny the benefits of, or otherwise discriminate against an individual or entity in its health programs or activities on the basis of the race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability of an individual with whom the individual or entity is known or believed to have a relationship or association.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Procedures
            
              § 92.301
              Enforcement mechanisms.
              (a) The enforcement mechanisms available for and provided under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 shall apply for purposes of Section 1557 as implemented by this part.

              (b) Compensatory damages for violations of Section 1557 are available in appropriate administrative and judicial actions brought under this rule.
            
            
              § 92.302
              Procedures for health programs and activities conducted by recipients and State-based Marketplaces.
              (a) The procedural provisions applicable to Title VI apply with respect to administrative enforcement actions concerning discrimination on the basis of race, color, national, origin, sex, and disability discrimination under Section 1557 or this part. These procedures are found at §§ 80.6 through 80.11 of this subchapter and part 81 of this subchapter.
              (b) The procedural provisions applicable to the Age Act apply with respect to enforcement actions concerning age discrimination under Section 1557 or this part. These procedures are found at §§ 91.41 through 91.50 of this subchapter.
              (c) When a recipient fails to provide OCR with requested information in a timely, complete, and accurate manner, OCR may find noncompliance with Section 1557 and initiate appropriate enforcement procedures, including beginning the process for fund suspension or termination and taking other action authorized by law.
              (d) An individual or entity may bring a civil action to challenge a violation of Section 1557 or this part in a United States District Court in which the recipient or State-based Marketplace SM is found or transacts business.
            
            
              § 92.303
              Procedures for health programs and activities administered by the Department.
              (a) This section applies to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability in health programs or activities administered by the Department, including the Federally-facilitated Marketplaces.
              (b) The procedural provisions applicable to Section 504 at §§ 85.61 through 85.62 of this subchapter shall apply with respect to enforcement actions against the Department concerning discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability under Section 1557 or this part. Where this section cross-references regulatory provisions that use the term “handicap,” the term “race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability” shall apply in its place.
              (c) The Department shall permit access by OCR to its books, records, accounts, other sources of information, and facilities as may be pertinent to ascertain compliance with Section 1557 or this part. Where any information required of the Department is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, institution or individual, and the other agency, institution or individual shall fail or refuse to furnish this information, the Department shall so certify and shall set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information. Asserted considerations of privacy or confidentiality may not operate to bar OCR from evaluating or seeking to enforce compliance with Section 1557 or this part. Information of a confidential nature obtained in connection with compliance evaluation or enforcement shall not be disclosed except where necessary under the law.
              (d) The Department shall not intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by Section 1557 or this part, or because such individual has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under Section 1557 or this part. The identity of complainants shall be kept confidential by OCR, except to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of Section 1557 or this part.
            
          
          
             
            
              Pt. 92, App. A
              Appendix A to Part 92—Sample Notice Informing Individuals About Nondiscrimination and Accessibility Requirements and Sample Nondiscrimination Statement: Discrimination is Against the Law
              [Name of covered entity] complies with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex. [Name of covered entity] does not exclude people or treat them differently because of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex.
              [Name of covered entity]:
              
              • Provides free aids and services to people with disabilities to communicate effectively with us, such as:
              ○ Qualified sign language interpreters
              ○ Written information in other formats (large print, audio, accessible electronic formats, other formats)
              • Provides free language services to people whose primary language is not English, such as:
              ○ Qualified interpreters
              ○ Information written in other languages
              If you need these services, contact [Name of Civil Rights Coordinator]

              If you believe that [Name of covered entity] has failed to provide these services or discriminated in another way on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex, you can file a grievance with: [Name and Title of Civil Rights Coordinator], [Mailing Address], [Telephone number ], [TTY number—if covered entity has one], [Fax], [Email]. You can file a grievance in person or by mail, fax, or email. If you need help filing a grievance, [Name and Title of Civil Rights Coordinator] is available to help you. You can also file a civil rights complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights electronically through the Office for Civil Rights Complaint Portal, available at https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf, or by mail or phone at: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 200 Independence Avenue SW., Room 509F, HHH Building, Washington, DC 20201, 1-800-368-1019, 800-537-7697 (TDD).
              Complaint forms are available at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/file/index.html.
              
              Nondiscrimination statement for significant publications and signification communications that are small-size:
              [Name of covered entity] complies with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex.
              [81 FR 31465, May 18, 2016; 81 FR 46613, July 18, 2016]
            
            
              Pt. 92, App. B
              Appendix B to Part 92—Sample Tagline Informing Individuals With Limited English Proficiency of Language Assistance Services
              ATTENTION: If you speak [insert language], language assistance services, free of charge, are available to you. Call 1-xxx-xxx-xxxx (TTY: 1-xxx-xxx-xxxx).
            
            
              Pt. 92, App. C
              Appendix C to Part 92—Sample Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act Grievance Procedure
              It is the policy of [Name of Covered Entity] not to discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age or disability. [Name of Covered Entity] has adopted an internal grievance procedure providing for prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18116) and its implementing regulations at 45 CFR part 92, issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Section 1557 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age or disability in certain health programs and activities. Section 1557 and its implementing regulations may be examined in the office of [Name and Title of Section 1557 Coordinator], [Mailing Address], [Telephone number], [TTY number—if covered entity has one], [Fax], [Email], who has been designated to coordinate the efforts of [Name of Covered Entity] to comply with Section 1557.
              Any person who believes someone has been subjected to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age or disability may file a grievance under this procedure. It is against the law for [Name of Covered Entity] to retaliate against anyone who opposes discrimination, files a grievance, or participates in the investigation of a grievance.
              Procedure:
              • Grievances must be submitted to the Section 1557 Coordinator within (60 days) of the date the person filing the grievance becomes aware of the alleged discriminatory action.
              • A complaint must be in writing, containing the name and address of the person filing it. The complaint must state the problem or action alleged to be discriminatory and the remedy or relief sought.
              • The Section 1557 Coordinator (or her/his designee) shall conduct an investigation of the complaint. This investigation may be informal, but it will be thorough, affording all interested persons an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to the complaint. The Section 1557 Coordinator will maintain the files and records of [Name of Covered Entity] relating to such grievances. To the extent possible, and in accordance with applicable law, the Section 1557 Coordinator will take appropriate steps to preserve the confidentiality of files and records relating to grievances and will share them only with those who have a need to know.
              • The Section 1557 Coordinator will issue a written decision on the grievance, based on a preponderance of the evidence, no later than 30 days after its filing, including a notice to the complainant of their right to pursue further administrative or legal remedies.

              • The person filing the grievance may appeal the decision of the Section 1557 Coordinator by writing to the (Administrator/Chief Executive Officer/Board of Directors/etc.) within 15 days of receiving the Section 1557 Coordinator's decision. The (Administrator/Chief Executive Officer/Board of Directors/etc.) shall issue a written decision in response to the appeal no later than 30 days after its filing.

              The availability and use of this grievance procedure does not prevent a person from pursuing other legal or administrative remedies, including filing a complaint of discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age or disability in court or with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights. A person can file a complaint of discrimination electronically through the Office for Civil Rights Complaint Portal, which is available at: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf, or by mail or phone at: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 200 Independence Avenue SW., Room 509F, HHH Building, Washington, DC 20201.
              Complaint forms are available at: http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/file/index.html. Such complaints must be filed within 180 days of the date of the alleged discrimination.
              [Name of covered entity] will make appropriate arrangements to ensure that individuals with disabilities and individuals with limited English proficiency are provided auxiliary aids and services or language assistance services, respectively, if needed to participate in this grievance process. Such arrangements may include, but are not limited to, providing qualified interpreters, providing taped cassettes of material for individuals with low vision, or assuring a barrier-free location for the proceedings. The Section 1557 Coordinator will be responsible for such arrangements.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 93
          PART 93—NEW RESTRICTIONS ON LOBBYING
          
            
              Subpart A—General
              Sec.
              93.100
              Conditions on use of funds.
              93.105
              Definitions.
              93.110
              Certification and disclosure.
            
            
              Subpart B—Activities by Own Employees
              93.200
              Agency and legislative liaison.
              93.205
              Professional and technical services.
              93.210
              Reporting.
            
            
              Subpart C—Activities by Other than Own Employees
              93.300
              Professional and technical services.
            
            
              Subpart D—Penalties and Enforcement
              93.400
              Penalties.
              93.405
              Penalty procedures.
              93.410
              Enforcement.
            
            
              Subpart E—Exemptions
              93.500
              Secretary of Defense.
            
            
              Subpart F—Agency Reports
              93.600
              Semi-annual compilation.
              93.605
              Inspector General report.
              Appendix A to Part 93—Certification Regarding Lobbying
              Appendix B to Part 93—Disclosure Form To Report Lobbying
            
          
          
            Authority:
            Section 319, Public Law 101-121 (31 U.S.C. 1352); (5 U.S.C. 301).
          
          
            Source:
            55 FR 6754, Feb. 26, 1990, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Cross Reference:
            See also Office of Management and Budget notice published at 54 FR 52306, December 20, 1989.
          
          
            Subpart A—General
            
              § 93.100
              Conditions on use of funds.
              (a) No appropriated funds may be expended by the recipient of a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative ageement to pay any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with any of the following covered Federal actions: the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
              (b) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement shall file with that agency a certification, set forth in appendix A to this part, that the person has not made, and will not make, any payment prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section.

              (c) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a Federal contract, grant, loan, or a cooperative agreement shall file with that agency a disclosure form, set forth in appendix B to this part, if such person has made or has agreed to make any payment using nonappropriated funds (to include profits from any covered Federal action), which would be prohibited under paragraph (a) of this section if paid for with appropriated funds.
              (d) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan shall file with that agency a statement, set forth in appendix A to this part, whether that person has made or has agreed to make any payment to influence or attempt to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with that loan insurance or guarantee.
              (e) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan shall file with that agency a disclosure form, set forth in appendix B to this part, if that person has made or has agreed to make any payment to influence or attempt to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with that loan insurance or guarantee.
            
            
              § 93.105
              Definitions.
              For purposes of this part:
              (a) Agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 552(f), includes Federal executive departments and agencies as well as independent regulatory commissions and Government corporations, as defined in 31 U.S.C. 9101(1).
              (b) Covered Federal action means any of the following Federal actions:
              (1) The awarding of any Federal contract;
              (2) The making of any Federal grant;
              (3) The making of any Federal loan;
              (4) The entering into of any cooperative agreement; and,
              (5) The extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
              Covered Federal action does not include receiving from an agency a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan. Loan guarantees and loan insurance are addressed independently within this part.
              (c) Federal contract means an acquisition contract awarded by an agency, including those subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), and any other acquisition contract for real or personal property or services not subject to the FAR.
              (d) Federal cooperative agreement means a cooperative agreement entered into by an agency.
              (e) Federal grant means an award of financial assistance in the form of money, or property in lieu of money, by the Federal Government or a direct appropriation made by law to any person. The term does not include technical assistance which provides services instead of money, or other assistance in the form of revenue sharing, loans, loan guarantees, loan insurance, interest subsidies, insurance, or direct United States cash assistance to an individual.
              (f) Federal loan means a loan made by an agency. The term does not include loan guarantee or loan insurance.
              (g) Indian tribe and tribal organization have the meaning provided in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450B). Alaskan Natives are included under the definitions of Indian tribes in that Act.
              (h) Influencing or attempting to influence means making, with the intent to influence, any communication to or appearance before an officer or employee or any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with any covered Federal action.
              (i) Loan guarantee and loan insurance means an agency's guarantee or insurance of a loan made by a person.
              (j) Local government means a unit of government in a State and, if chartered, established, or otherwise recognized by a State for the performance of a governmental duty, including a local public authority, a special district, an intrastate district, a council of governments, a sponsor group representative organization, and any other instrumentality of a local government.
              (k) Officer or employee of an agency includes the following individuals who are employed by an agency:
              
              (1) An individual who is appointed to a position in the Government under title 5, U.S. Code, including a position under a temporary appointment;
              (2) A member of the uniformed services as defined in section 101(3), title 37, U.S. Code;
              (3) A special Government employee as defined in section 202, title 18, U.S. Code; and,
              (4) An individual who is a member of a Federal advisory committee, as defined by the Federal Advisory Committee Act, title 5, U.S. Code appendix 2.
              (l) Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, authority, firm, partnership, society, State, and local government, regardless of whether such entity is operated for profit or not for profit. This term excludes an Indian tribe, tribal organization, or any other Indian organization with respect to expenditures specifically permitted by other Federal law.
              (m) Reasonable compensation means, with respect to a regularly employed officer or employee of any person, compensation that is consistent with the normal compensation for such officer or employee for work that is not furnished to, not funded by, or not furnished in cooperation with the Federal Government.
              (n) Reasonable payment means, with respect to professional and other technical services, a payment in an amount that is consistent with the amount normally paid for such services in the private sector.
              (o) Recipient includes all contractors, subcontractors at any tier, and subgrantees at any tier of the recipient of funds received in connection with a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement. The term excludes an Indian tribe, tribal organization, or any other Indian organization with respect to expenditures specifically permitted by other Federal law.
              (p) Regularly employed means, with respect to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan, an officer or employee who is employed by such person for at least 130 working days within one year immediately preceding the date of the submission that initiates agency consideration of such person for receipt of such contract, grant, loan, cooperative agreement, loan insurance commitment, or loan guarantee commitment. An officer or employee who is employed by such person for less than 130 working days within one year immediately preceding the date of the submission that initiates agency consideration of such person shall be considered to be regularly employed as soon as he or she is employed by such person for 130 working days.
              (q) State means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a territory or possession of the United States, an agency or instrumentality of a State, and a multi-State, regional, or interstate entity having governmental duties and powers.
            
            
              § 93.110
              Certification and disclosure.
              (a) Each person shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, with each submission that initiates agency consideration of such person for:
              (1) Award of a Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement exceeding $100,000; or
              (2) An award of a Federal loan or a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000.
              (b) Each person shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, upon receipt by such person of:
              (1) A Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement exceeding $100,000; or
              (2) A Federal loan or a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000,
              unless such person previously filed a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, under paragraph (a) of this section.

              (c) Each person shall file a disclosure form at the end of each calendar quarter in which there occurs any event that requires disclosure or that materially affects the accuracy of the information contained in any disclosure form previously filed by such person under paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section. An event that materially affects the accuracy of the information reported includes:
              (1) A cumulative increase of $25,000 or more in the amount paid or expected to be paid for influencing or attempting to influence a covered Federal action; or
              (2) A change in the person(s) or individual(s) influencing or attempting to influence a covered Federal action; or,
              (3) A change in the officer(s), employee(s), or Member(s) contacted to influence or attempt to influence a covered Federal action.
              (d) Any person who requests or receives from a person referred to in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section:
              (1) A subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal contract;
              (2) A subgrant, contract, or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal grant;
              (3) A contract or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal loan exceeding $150,000; or,
              (4) A contract or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal cooperative agreement,
              shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, to the next tier above.
              (e) All disclosure forms, but not certifications, shall be forwarded from tier to tier until received by the person referred to in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section. That person shall forward all disclosure forms to the agency.
              (f) Any certification or disclosure form filed under paragraph (e) of this section shall be treated as a material representation of fact upon which all receiving tiers shall rely. All liability arising from an erroneous representation shall be borne solely by the tier filing that representation and shall not be shared by any tier to which the erroneous representation is forwarded. Submitting an erroneous certification or disclosure constitutes a failure to file the required certification or disclosure, respectively. If a person fails to file a required certification or disclosure, the United States may pursue all available remedies, including those authorized by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code.
              (g) For awards and commitments in process prior to December 23, 1989, but not made before that date, certifications shall be required at award or commitment, covering activities occurring between December 23, 1989, and the date of award or commitment. However, for awards and commitments in process prior to the December 23, 1989 effective date of these provisions, but not made before December 23, 1989, disclosure forms shall not be required at time of award or commitment but shall be filed within 30 days.
              (h) No reporting is required for an activity paid for with appropriated funds if that activity is allowable under either subpart B or C.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Activities by Own Employees
            
              § 93.200
              Agency and legislative liaison.
              (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in § 93.100 (a), does not apply in the case of a payment of reasonable compensation made to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement if the payment is for agency and legislative liaison activities not directly related to a covered Federal action.
              (b) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, providing any information specifically requested by an agency or Congress is allowable at any time.
              (c) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the following agency and legislative liaison activities are allowable at any time only where they are not related to a specific solicitation for any covered Federal action:
              (1) Discussing with an agency (including individual demonstrations) the qualities and characteristics of the person's products or services, conditions or terms of sale, and service capabilities; and,
              (2) Technical discussions and other activities regarding the application or adaptation of the person's products or services for an agency's use.

              (d) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the following agencies and legislative liaison activities are allowable only where they are prior to formal solicitation of any covered Federal action:
              
              (1) Providing any information not specifically requested but necessary for an agency to make an informed decision about initiation of a covered Federal action;
              (2) Technical discussions regarding the preparation of an unsolicited proposal prior to its official submission; and,
              (3) Capability presentations by persons seeking awards from an agency pursuant to the provisions of the Small Business Act, as amended by Public Law 95-507 and other subsequent amendments.
              (e) Only those activities expressly authorized by this section are allowable under this section.
            
            
              § 93.205
              Professional and technical services.
              (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in § 93.100 (a), does not apply in the case of a payment of reasonable compensation made to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or an extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement if payment is for professional or technical services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or negotiation of any bid, proposal, or application for that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or for meeting requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
              (b) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, professional and technical services shall be limited to advice and analysis directly applying any professional or technical discipline. For example, drafting of a legal document accompanying a bid or proposal by a lawyer is allowable. Similarly, technical advice provided by an engineer on the performance or operational capability of a piece of equipment rendered directly in the negotiation of a contract is allowable. However, communications with the intent to influence made by a professional (such as a licensed lawyer) or a technical person (such as a licensed accountant) are not allowable under this section unless they provide advice and analysis directly applying their professional or technical expertise and unless the advice or analysis is rendered directly and solely in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action. Thus, for example, communications with the intent to influence made by a lawyer that do not provide legal advice or analysis directly and solely related to the legal aspects of his or her client's proposal, but generally advocate one proposal over another are not allowable under this section because the lawyer is not providing professional legal services. Similarly, communications with the intent to influence made by an engineer providing an engineering analysis prior to the preparation or submission of a bid or proposal are not allowable under this section since the engineer is providing technical services but not directly in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action.
              (c) Requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving a covered Federal award include those required by law or regulation, or reasonably expected to be required by law or regulation, and any other requirements in the actual award documents.
              (d) Only those services expressly authorized by this section are allowable under this section.
            
            
              § 93.210
              Reporting.
              No reporting is required with respect to payments of reasonable compensation made to regularly employed officers or employees of a person.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Activities by Other than Own Employees
            
              § 93.300
              Professional and technical services.

              (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in § 93.100 (a), does not apply in the case of any reasonable payment to a person, other than an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a covered Federal action, if the payment is for professional or technical services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or negotiation of any bid, proposal, or application for that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or for meeting requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
              (b) The reporting requirements in § 93.110 (a) and (b) regarding filing a disclosure form by each person, if required, shall not apply with respect to professional or technical services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or negotiation of any commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan.
              (c) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, professional and technical services shall be limited to advice and analysis directly applying any professional or technical discipline. For example, drafting or a legal document accompanying a bid or proposal by a lawyer is allowable. Similarly, technical advice provided by an engineer on the performance or operational capability of a piece of equipment rendered directly in the negotiation of a contract is allowable. However, communications with the intent to influence made by a professional (such as a licensed lawyer) or a technical person (such as a licensed accountant) are not allowable under this section unless they provide advice and analysis directly applying their professional or technical expertise and unless the advice or analysis is rendered directly and solely in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action. Thus, for example, communications with the intent to influence made by a lawyer that do not provide legal advice or analysis directly and solely related to the legal aspects of his or her client's proposal, but generally advocate one proposal over another are not allowable under this section because the lawyer is not providing professional legal services. Similarly, communications with the intent to influence made by an engineer providing an engineering analysis prior to the preparation or submission of a bid or proposal are not allowable under this section since the engineer is providing technical services but not directly in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action.
              (d) Requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving a covered Federal award include those required by law or regulation, or reasonably expected to be required by law or regulation, and any other requirements in the actual award documents.
              (e) Persons other than officers or employees of a person requesting or receiving a covered Federal action include consultants and trade associations.
              (f) Only those services expressly authorized by this section are allowable under this section.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Penalties and Enforcement
            
              § 93.400
              Penalties.
              (a) Any person who makes an expenditure prohibited herein shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 1
                 for each such expenditure.
              
                
                  1 The amounts specified in this section are updated annually, as adjusted in accordance with the Federal Civil Monetary Penalty Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-140), as amended by the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015 (section 701 of Pub. L. 114-74). Annually adjusted amounts are published at 45 CFR part 102.
              
              (b) Any person who fails to file or amend the disclosure form (see appendix B to this part) to be filed or amended if required herein, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.
              (c) A filing or amended filing on or after the date on which an administrative action for the imposition of a civil penalty is commenced does not prevent the imposition of such civil penalty for a failure occurring before that date. An administrative action is commenced with respect to a failure when an investigating official determines in writing to commence an investigation of an allegation of such failure.

              (d) In determining whether to impose a civil penalty, and the amount of any such penalty, by reason of a violation by any person, the agency shall consider the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation, the effect on the ability of such person to continue in business, any prior violations by such person, the degree of culpability of such person, the ability of the person to pay the penalty, and such other matters as may be appropriate.
              (e) First offenders under paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $10,000, absent aggravating circumstances. Second and subsequent offenses by persons shall be subject to an appropriate civil penalty between $10,000 and $100,000, as determined by the agency head or his or her designee.
              (f) An imposition of a civil penalty under this section does not prevent the United States from seeking any other remedy that may apply to the same conduct that is the basis for the imposition of such civil penalty.
              [55 FR 6754, Feb. 26, 1990, as amended at 81 FR 61565, Sept. 6, 2016]
            
            
              § 93.405
              Penalty procedures.
              Agencies shall impose and collect civil penalties pursuant to the provisions of the Program Fraud and Civil Remedies Act, 31 U.S.C. sections 3803 (except subsection (c)), 3804, 3805, 3806, 3807, 3808, and 3812, insofar as these provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements herein.
            
            
              § 93.410
              Enforcement.
              The head of each agency shall take such actions as are necessary to ensure that the provisions herein are vigorously implemented and enforced in that agency.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Exemptions
            
              § 93.500
              Secretary of Defense.
              (a) The Secretary of Defense may exempt, on a case-by-case basis, a covered Federal action from the prohibition whenever the Secretary determines, in writing, that such an exemption is in the national interest. The Secretary shall transmit a copy of each such written exemption to Congress immediately after making such a determination.
              (b) The Department of Defense may issue supplemental regulations to implement paragraph (a) of this section.
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Agency Reports
            
              § 93.600
              Semi-annual compilation.
              (a) The head of each agency shall collect and compile the disclosure reports (see appendix B to this part) and, on May 31 and November 30 of each year, submit to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives a report containing a compilation of the information contained in the disclosure reports received during the six-month period ending on March 31 or September 30, respectively, of that year.
              (b) The report, including the compilation, shall be available for public inspection 30 days after receipt of the report by the Secretary and the Clerk.
              (c) Information that involves intelligence matters shall be reported only to the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives, and the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and the House of Representatives in accordance with procedures agreed to by such committees. Such information shall not be available for public inspection.
              (d) Information that is classified under Executive Order 12356 or any successor order shall be reported only to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives or the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives (whichever such committees have jurisdiction of matters involving such information) and to the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and the House of Representatives in accordance with procedures agreed to by such committees. Such information shall not be available for public inspection.
              (e) The first semi-annual compilation shall be submitted on May 31, 1990, and shall contain a compilation of the disclosure reports received from December 23, 1989 to March 31, 1990.

              (f) Major agencies, designated by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), are required to provide machine-readable compilations to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives no later than with the compilations due on May 31, 1991. OMB shall provide detailed specifications in a memorandum to these agencies.
              (g) Non-major agencies are requested to provide machine-readable compilations to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives.
              (h) Agencies shall keep the originals of all disclosure reports in the official files of the agency.
            
            
              § 93.605
              Inspector General report.
              (a) The Inspector General, or other official as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, of each agency shall prepare and submit to Congress each year, commencing with submission of the President's Budget in 1991, an evaluation of the compliance of that agency with, and the effectiveness of, the requirements herein. The evaluation may include any recommended changes that may be necessary to strengthen or improve the requirements.
              (b) In the case of an agency that does not have an Inspector General, the agency official comparable to an Inspector General shall prepare and submit the annual report, or, if there is no such comparable official, the head of the agency shall prepare and submit the annual report.
              (c) The annual report shall be submitted at the same time the agency submits its annual budget justifications to Congress.
              (d) The annual report shall include the following: All alleged violations relating to the agency's covered Federal actions during the year covered by the report, the actions taken by the head of the agency in the year covered by the report with respect to those alleged violations and alleged violations in previous years, and the amounts of civil penalties imposed by the agency in the year covered by the report.
            
          
          
             
            
              Pt. 93, App. A
              Appendix A to Part 93—Certification Regarding Lobbying
              Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements
              The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:
              (1) No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of an agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
              (2) If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with its instructions.
              (3) The undersigned shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly.
              This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 1
                 for each such failure.
              
                
                  1 The amounts specified in Appendix A to Part 93 are updated annually, as adjusted in accordance with the Federal Civil Monetary Penalty Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-140), as amended by the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015 (section 701 of Pub. L. 114-74). Annually adjusted amounts are published at 45 CFR part 102.
              
              Statement for Loan Guarantees and Loan Insurance

              The undersigned states, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:
              
              If any funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan, the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with its instructions.
              Submission of this statement is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required statement shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.
              [55 FR 6754, Feb. 26, 1990, as amended at 81 FR 61565, Sept. 6, 2016]
            
            
              
              Pt. 93, App. B
              Appendix B to Part 93—Disclosure Form To Report Lobbying
              
                EC01JA91.003
              
              
                
                EC01JA91.004
              
              
                
                EC01JA91.005
              
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 94
          PART 94—RESPONSIBLE PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS
          
            Sec.
            94.1
            Purpose.
            94.2
            Applicability.
            94.3
            Definitions.
            94.4

            Responsibilities of Institutions regarding Investigator financial conflicts of interest.
            
            94.5
            Management and reporting of financial conflicts of interest.
            94.6
            Remedies.
          
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 216, 289b-1, 299c-4.
          
          
            Source:
            76 FR 53288, Aug. 25, 2011, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 94.1
            Purpose.
            This part promotes objectivity in research by establishing standards that provide a reasonable expectation that the design, conduct, and reporting of research performed under PHS contracts will be free from bias resulting from Investigator financial conflicts of interest.
          
          
            § 94.2
            Applicability.
            This part is applicable to each Institution that submits a proposal, or that receives, Public Health Service (PHS) research funding by means of a contract and, through the implementation of this part by the Institution, to each Investigator who is planning to participate in, or is participating in such research; provided, however, that this part does not apply to SBIR Program Phase I applications.
          
          
            § 94.3
            Definitions.
            As used in this part:
            
              Contractor means an entity that provides property or services under contract for the direct benefit or use of the Federal Government.
            
              Disclosure of significant financial interests means an Investigator's disclosure of significant financial interests to an Institution.
            
              Financial conflict of interest (FCOI) means a significant financial interest that could directly and significantly affect the design, conduct, or reporting of PHS-funded research.
            
              FCOI report means an Institution's report of a financial conflict of interest to a PHS Awarding Component.
            
              Financial interest means anything of monetary value, whether or not the value is readily ascertainable.
            
              HHS means the United States Department of Health and Human Services, and any components of the Department to which the authority involved may be delegated.
            
              Institution means any domestic or foreign, public or private, entity or organization (excluding a Federal agency) that submits a proposal, or that receives, PHS research funding.
            
              Institutional responsibilities means an Investigator's professional responsibilities on behalf of the Institution, and as defined by the Institution in its policy on financial conflicts of interest, which may include for example: activities such as research, research consultation, teaching, professional practice, institutional committee memberships, and service on panels such as Institutional Review Boards or Data and Safety Monitoring Boards.
            
              Investigator means the project director or principal Investigator and any other person, regardless of title or position, who is responsible for the design, conduct, or reporting of research funded by the PHS, or proposed for such funding, which may include, for example, collaborators or consultants.
            
              Key personnel includes the PD/PI and any other personnel considered to be essential to work performance in accordance with HHSAR subpart 352.242-70 and identified as key personnel in the contract proposal and contract.
            
              Manage means taking action to address a financial conflict of interest, which can include reducing or eliminating the financial conflict of interest, to ensure, to the extent possible, that the design, conduct, and reporting of research will be free from bias.
            
              PD/PI means a project director or principal Investigator of a PHS-funded research project; the PD/PI is included in the definitions of key personnel and Investigator under this part.
            
              PHS means the Public Health Service of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and any components of the PHS to which the authority involved may be delegated, including the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
            
              PHS Awarding Component means the organizational unit of the PHS that funds the research that is subject to this part.
            
              Public Health Service Act or PHS Act means the statute codified at 42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.
            
            
              Research means a systematic investigation, study or experiment designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge relating broadly to public health, including behavioral and social-sciences research. The term encompasses basic and applied research (e.g., a published article, book or book chapter) and product development (e.g., a diagnostic test or drug). As used in this part, the term includes any such activity for which research funding is available from a PHS Awarding Component through a contract, whether authorized under the PHS Act or other statutory authority.
            
              Significant financial interest means:
            (1) A financial interest consisting of one or more of the following interests of the Investigator (and those of the Investigator's spouse and dependent children) that reasonably appears to be related to the Investigator's institutional responsibilities:
            (i) With regard to any publicly traded entity, a significant financial interest exists if the value of any remuneration received from the entity in the twelve months preceding the disclosure and the value of any equity interest in the entity as of the date of disclosure, when aggregated, exceeds $5,000. For purposes of this definition, remuneration includes salary and any payment for services not otherwise identified as salary (e.g., consulting fees, honoraria, paid authorship); equity interest includes any stock, stock option, or other ownership interest, as determined through reference to public prices or other reasonable measures of fair market value;
            (ii) With regard to any non-publicly traded entity, a significant financial interest exists if the value of any remuneration received from the entity in the twelve months preceding the disclosure, when aggregated, exceeds $5,000, or when the Investigator (or the Investigator's spouse or dependent children) holds any equity interest (e.g., stock, stock option, or other ownership interest); or
            (iii) Intellectual property rights and interests (e.g., patents, copyrights), upon receipt of income related to such rights and interests.

            (2) Investigators also must disclose the occurrence of any reimbursed or sponsored travel (i.e., that which is paid on behalf of the Investigator and not reimbursed to the Investigator so that the exact monetary value may not be readily available), related to their Institutional responsibilities; provided, however, that this disclosure requirement does not apply to travel that is reimbursed or sponsored by a Federal, state, or local government agency, an Institution of higher education as defined at 20 U.S.C. 1001(a), an academic teaching hospital, a medical center, or a research institute that is affiliated with an Institution of higher education. The Institution's FCOI policy will specify the details of this disclosure, which will include, at a minimum, the purpose of the trip, the identity of the sponsor/organizer, the destination, and the duration. In accordance with the Institution's FCOI policy, the Institutional official(s) will determine if further information is needed, including a determination or disclosure of monetary value, in order to determine whether the travel constitutes an FCOI with the PHS-funded research.
            (3) The term significant financial interest does not include the following types of financial interests: salary, royalties, or other remuneration paid by the Institution to the Investigator if the Investigator is currently employed or otherwise appointed by the Institution, including intellectual property rights assigned to the Institution and agreements to share in royalties related to such rights; any ownership interest in the Institution held by the Investigator, if the Institution is a commercial or for-profit organization; income from investment vehicles, such as mutual funds and retirement accounts, as long as the Investigator does not directly control the investment decisions made in these vehicles; income from seminars, lectures, or teaching engagements sponsored by a Federal, state, or local government agency, an Institution of higher education as defined at 20 U.S.C. 1001(a), an academic teaching hospital, a medical center, or a research institute that is affiliated with an Institution of higher education; or income from service on advisory committees or review panels for a Federal, state, or local government agency, an Institution of higher education as defined at 20 U.S.C. 1001(a), an academic teaching hospital, a medical center, or a research institute that is affiliated with an Institution of higher education.
            
            
              Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program means the extramural research program for small businesses that is established by the Awarding Components of the Public Health Service and certain other Federal agencies under Public Law 97-219, the Small Business Innovation Development Act, as amended. For purposes of this part, the term SBIR Program also includes the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Program, which was established by Public Law 102-564.
          
          
            § 94.4
            Responsibilities of Institutions regarding Investigator financial conflicts of interest.
            Each Institution shall:
            (a) Maintain an up-to-date, written, enforced policy on financial conflicts of interest that complies with this part, and make such policy available via a publicly accessible Web site. If the Institution does not have any current presence on a publicly accessible Web site (and only in those cases), the Institution shall make its written policy available to any requestor within five business days of a request. If, however, the Institution acquires a presence on a publicly accessible Web site during the time of the PHS award, the requirement to post the information on that Web site will apply within 30 calendar days. If an Institution maintains a policy on financial conflicts of interest that includes standards that are more stringent than this part (e.g., that require a more extensive disclosure of financial interests), the Institution shall adhere to its policy and shall provide FCOI reports regarding identified financial conflicts of interest to the PHS Awarding Component in accordance with the Institution's own standards and within the timeframe prescribed by this part.
            (b) Inform each Investigator of the Institution's policy on financial conflicts of interest, the Investigator's responsibilities regarding disclosure of significant financial interests, and of these regulations, and require each Investigator to complete training regarding the same prior to engaging in research related to any PHS-funded contract and at least every four years, and immediately when any of the following circumstances apply:
            (1) The Institution revises its financial conflict of interest policies or procedures in any manner that affects the requirements of Investigators;
            (2) An Investigator is new to an Institution; or
            (3) An Institution finds that an Investigator is not in compliance with the Institution's financial conflict of interest policy or management plan.
            (c) If the Institution carries out the PHS-funded research through a subrecipient (e.g., subcontractors, or consortium members), the Institution (awardee Institution) must take reasonable steps to ensure that any subrecipient Investigator complies with this part by
            (1) Incorporating as part of a written agreement with the subrecipient terms that establish whether the financial conflicts of interest policy of the awardee Institution or that of the subrecipient will apply to the subrecipient's Investigators.
            (i) If the subrecipient's Investigators must comply with the subrecipient's financial conflicts of interest policy, the subrecipient shall certify as part of the agreement referenced above that its policy complies with this part. If the subrecipient cannot provide such certification, the agreement shall state that subrecipient Investigators are subject to the financial conflicts of interest policy of the awardee Institution for disclosing significant financial interests that are directly related to the subrecipient's work for the awardee Institution;
            (ii) Additionally, if the subrecipient's Investigators must comply with the subrecipient's financial conflicts of interest policy, the agreement referenced above shall specify time period(s) for the subrecipient to report all identified financial conflicts of interest to the awardee Institution. Such time period(s) shall be sufficient to enable the awardee Institution to provide timely FCOI reports, as necessary, to the PHS as required by this part;

            (iii) Alternatively, if the subrecipient's Investigators must comply with the awardee Institution's financial conflicts of interest policy, the agreement referenced above shall specify time period(s) for the subrecipient to submit all Investigator disclosures of significant financial interests to the awardee Institution. Such time period(s) shall be sufficient to enable the awardee Institution to comply timely with its review, management, and reporting obligations under this part.

            (2) Providing FCOI reports to the PHS Awarding Component regarding all financial conflicts of interest of all subrecipient Investigators consistent with this part, i.e., prior to the expenditure of funds and within 60 days of any subsequently identified FCOI.
            (d) Designate an institutional official(s) to solicit and review disclosures of significant financial interests from each Investigator who is planning to participate in, or is participating in, the PHS-funded research.
            (e)(1) Require that each Investigator who is planning to participate in the PHS-funded research disclose to the Institution's designated official(s) the Investigator's significant financial interests (and those of the Investigator's spouse and dependent children) no later than date of submission of the Institution's proposal for PHS-funded research.
            (2) Require each Investigator who is participating in the PHS-funded research to submit an updated disclosure of significant financial interests at least annually, in accordance with the specific time period prescribed by the Institution, during the period of the award. Such disclosure shall include any information that was not disclosed initially to the Institution pursuant to paragraph (e)(1) of this section, or in a subsequent disclosure of significant financial interests (e.g., any financial conflict of interest identified on a PHS-funded project that was transferred from another Institution), and shall include updated information regarding any previously disclosed significant financial interest (e.g., the updated value of a previously disclosed equity interest).
            (3) Require each Investigator who is participating in the PHS-funded research to submit an updated disclosure of significant financial interests within thirty days of discovering or acquiring (e.g., through purchase, marriage, or inheritance) a new significant financial interest.
            (f) Provide guidelines consistent with this part for the designated institutional official(s) to determine whether an Investigator's significant financial interest is related to PHS-funded research and, if so related, whether the significant financial interest is a financial conflict of interest. An Investigator's significant financial interest is related to PHS-funded research when the Institution, through its designated official(s), reasonably determines that the significant financial interest: Could be affected by the PHS-funded research; or is in an entity whose financial interest could be affected by the research. The Institution may involve the Investigator in the designated official(s)'s determination of whether a significant financial interest is related to the PHS-funded research. A financial conflict of interest exists when the Institution, through its designated official(s), reasonably determines that the significant financial interest could directly and significantly affect the design, conduct, or reporting of the PHS-funded research.
            (g) Take such actions as necessary to manage financial conflicts of interest, including any financial conflicts of a subrecipient Investigator pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section. Management of an identified financial conflict of interest requires development and implementation of a management plan and, if necessary, a retrospective review and mitigation report pursuant to § 94.5(a).
            (h) Provide initial and ongoing FCOI reports to the PHS as required pursuant to § 94.5(b).
            (i) Maintain records relating to all Investigator disclosures of financial interests and the Institution's review of, and response to, such disclosures (whether or not a disclosure resulted in the Institution's determination of a financial conflict of interest), and all actions under the Institution's policy or retrospective review, if applicable, for at least three years from the date of final payment or, where applicable, for the time periods specified in 48 CFR part 4, subpart 4.7.

            (j) Establish adequate enforcement mechanisms and provide for employee sanctions or other administrative actions to ensure Investigator compliance as appropriate.
            (k) Certify, in each contract proposal to which this part applies, that the Institution:
            (1) Has in effect at that Institution an up-to-date, written, and enforced administrative process to identify and manage financial conflicts of interest with respect to all research projects for which funding is sought or received from the PHS;
            (2) Shall promote and enforce Investigator compliance with this part's requirements including those pertaining to disclosure of significant financial interests;
            (3) Shall manage financial conflicts of interest and provide initial and ongoing FCOI reports to the PHS Awarding Component consistent with this part;
            (4) Agrees to make information available, promptly upon request, to the HHS relating to any Investigator disclosure of financial interests and the Institution's review of, and response to, such disclosure, whether or not the disclosure resulted in the Institution's determination of a financial conflict of interest; and
            (5) Shall fully comply with the requirements of this part.
          
          
            § 94.5
            Management and reporting of financial conflicts of interest.
            (a) Management of financial conflicts of interest.
            (1) Prior to the Institution's expenditure of any funds under a PHS-funded research project, the designated official(s) of an Institution shall, consistent with § 94.4(f): review all Investigator disclosures of significant financial interests; determine whether any significant financial interests relate to PHS-funded research; determine whether a financial conflict of interest exists; and, if so, develop and implement a management plan that shall specify the actions that have been, and shall be, taken to manage such financial conflict of interest. Examples of conditions or restrictions that might be imposed to manage a financial conflict of interest include, but are not limited to:
            (i) Public disclosure of financial conflicts of interest (e.g., when presenting or publishing the research);
            (ii) For research projects involving human subjects research, disclosure of financial conflicts of interest directly to participants;
            (iii) Appointment of an independent monitor capable of taking measures to protect the design, conduct, and reporting of the research against bias, resulting from the financial conflict of interest;
            (iv) Modification of the research plan;
            (v) Change of personnel or personnel responsibilities, or disqualification of personnel from participation in all or a portion of the research;
            (vi) Reduction or elimination of the financial interest (e.g., sale of an equity interest); or
            (vii) Severance of relationships that create financial conflicts.
            (2) Whenever, in the course of an ongoing PHS-funded research project, an Investigator who is new to participating in the research project discloses a significant financial interest or an existing Investigator discloses a new significant financial interest to the Institution, the designated official(s) of the Institution shall, within sixty days: review the disclosure of the significant financial interest; determine whether it is related to PHS-funded research; determine whether a financial conflict of interest exists; and, if so, implement, on at least an interim basis, a management plan that shall specify the actions that have been, and will be, taken to manage such financial conflict of interest. Depending on the nature of the significant financial interest, an Institution may determine that additional interim measures are necessary with regard to the Investigator's participation in the PHS-funded research project between the date of disclosure and the completion of the Institution's review.

            (3) Whenever an Institution identifies a significant financial interest that was not disclosed timely by an Investigator or, for whatever reason, was not previously reviewed by the Institution during an ongoing PHS-funded research project (e.g., was not timely reviewed or reported by a subrecipient), the designated official(s) shall, within sixty days: review the significant financial interest; determine whether it is related to PHS-funded research; determine whether a financial conflict of interest exists; and, if so:
            (i) Implement, on at least an interim basis, a management plan that shall specify the actions that have been, and will be, taken to manage such financial conflict of interest going forward;
            (ii) (A) In addition, whenever a financial conflict of interest is not identified or managed in a timely manner including failure by the Investigator to disclose a significant financial interest that is determined by the Institution to constitute a financial conflict of interest; failure by the Institution to review or manage such a financial conflict of interest; or failure by the Investigator to comply with a financial conflict of interest management plan, the Institution shall, within 120 days of the Institution's determination of noncompliance, complete a retrospective review of the Investigator's activities and the PHS-funded research project to determine whether any PHS-funded research, or portion thereof, conducted during the time period of the noncompliance, was biased in the design, conduct, or reporting of such research.
            (B) The Institution is required to document the retrospective review; such documentation shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, all of the following key elements:
            (1) Project number;
            (2) Project title;
            (3) PD/PI or contact PD/PI if a multiple PD/PI model is used;
            (4) Name of the Investigator with the FCOI;
            (5) Name of the entity with which the Investigator has a financial conflict of interest;
            (6) Reason(s) for the retrospective review;
            (7) Detailed methodology used for the retrospective review (e.g., methodology of the review process, composition of the review panel, documents reviewed);
            (8) Findings of the review; and
            (9) Conclusions of the review.
            (iii) Based on the results of the retrospective review, if appropriate, the Institution shall update the previously submitted FCOI report, specifying the actions that will be taken to manage the financial conflict of interest going forward. If bias is found, the Institution is required to notify the PHS Awarding Component promptly and submit a mitigation report to the PHS Awarding Component. The mitigation report must include, at a minimum, the key elements documented in the retrospective review above and a description of the impact of the bias on the research project and the Institution's plan of action or actions taken to eliminate or mitigate the effect of the bias (e.g., impact on the research project; extent of harm done, including any qualitative and quantitative data to support any actual or future harm; analysis of whether the research project is salvageable). Thereafter, the Institution will submit FCOI reports annually, as specified elsewhere in this part. Depending on the nature of the financial conflict of interest, an Institution may determine that additional interim measures are necessary with regard to the Investigator's participation in the PHS-funded research project between the date that the financial conflict of interest or the Investigator's noncompliance is determined and the completion of the Institution's retrospective review.
            (4) Whenever an Institution implements a management plan pursuant to this part, the Institution shall monitor Investigator compliance with the management plan on an ongoing basis until the completion of the PHS-funded research project.
            (5)(i) Prior to the Institution's expenditure of any funds under a PHS-funded research project, the Institution shall ensure public accessibility, via a publicly accessible Web site or written response to any requestor within five business days of a request, of information concerning any significant financial interest disclosed to the Institution that meets the following three criteria:
            (A) The significant financial interest was disclosed and is still held by key personnel as defined in this part;

            (B) The Institution determines that the significant financial interest is related to the PHS-funded research; and
            
            (C) The Institution determines that the significant financial interest is a financial conflict of interest.
            (ii) The information that the Institution makes available via a publicly accessible Web site or written response to any requestor within five business days of a request, shall include, at a minimum, the following: The Investigator's name; the Investigator's title and role with respect to the research project; the name of the entity in which the significant financial interest is held; the nature of the significant financial interest; and the approximate dollar value of the significant financial interest (dollar ranges are permissible: $0-$4,999; $5,000-$9,999; $10,000-$19,999; amounts between $20,000-$100,000 by increments of $20,000; amounts above $100,000 by increments of $50,000), or a statement that the interest is one whose value cannot be readily determined through reference to public prices or other reasonable measures of fair market value.
            (iii) If the Institution uses a publicly accessible Web site for the purposes of this subsection, the information that the Institution posts shall be updated at least annually. In addition, the Institution shall update the Web site within sixty days of the Institution's receipt or identification of information concerning any additional significant financial interest of the senior/key personnel for the PHS-funded research project that was not previously disclosed, or upon the disclosure of a significant financial interest of senior/key personnel new to the PHS-funded research project, if the Institution determines that the significant financial interest is related to the PHS-funded research and is a financial conflict of interest. The Web site shall note that the information provided is current as of the date listed and is subject to updates, on at least an annual basis and within 60 days of the Institution's identification of a new financial conflict of interest. If the Institution responds to written requests for the purposes of this subsection, the Institution will note in its written response that the information provided is current as of the date of the correspondence and is subject to updates, on at least an annual basis and within 60 days of the Institution's identification of a new financial conflict of interest, which should be requested subsequently by the requestor.
            (iv) Information concerning the significant financial interests of an individual subject to paragraph (a)(5) of this section shall remain available, for responses to written requests or for posting via the Institution's publicly accessible Web site for at least three years from the date that the information was most recently updated.
            (6) In addition to the types of financial conflicts of interest as defined in this part that must be managed pursuant to this section, an Institution may require the management of other financial conflicts of interest in its policy on financial conflicts of interest, as the Institution deems appropriate.
            (b) Reporting of financial conflicts of interest.
            (1) Prior to the Institution's expenditure of any funds under a PHS-funded research project, the Institution shall provide to the PHS Awarding Component an FCOI report regarding any Investigator's significant financial interest found by the Institution to be conflicting and ensure that the Institution has implemented a management plan in accordance with this part. In cases in which the Institution identifies a financial conflict of interest and eliminates it prior to the expenditure of PHS-awarded funds, the Institution shall not submit an FCOI report to the PHS Awarding Component.

            (2) For any significant financial interest that the Institution identifies as conflicting subsequent to the Institution's initial FCOI report during an ongoing PHS-funded research project (e.g., upon the participation of an Investigator who is new to the research project), the Institution shall provide to the PHS Awarding Component, within sixty days, an FCOI report regarding the financial conflict of interest and ensure that the Institution has implemented a management plan in accordance with this part. Pursuant to paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section, where such FCOI report involves a significant financial interest that was not disclosed timely by an Investigator or, for whatever reason, was not previously reviewed or managed by the Institution (e.g., was not timely reviewed or reported by a subrecipient), the Institution also is required to complete a retrospective review to determine whether any PHS-funded research, or portion thereof, conducted prior to the identification and management of the financial conflict of interest was biased in the design, conduct, or reporting of such research. Additionally, pursuant to paragraph (a)(3)(iii) of this section, if bias is found, the Institution is required to notify the PHS Awarding Component promptly and submit a mitigation report to the PHS Awarding Component.
            (3) Any FCOI report required under paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section shall include sufficient information to enable the PHS Awarding Component to understand the nature and extent of the financial conflict, and to assess the appropriateness of the Institution's management plan. Elements of the FCOI report shall include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
            (i) Project/Contract number;
            (ii) PD/PI or Contact PD/PI if a multiple PD/PI model is used;
            (iii) Name of the Investigator with the financial conflict of interest;
            (iv) Name of the entity with which the Investigator has a financial conflict of interest;
            (v) Nature of the financial interest (e.g., equity, consulting fee, travel reimbursement, honorarium);
            (vi) Value of the financial interest (dollar ranges are permissible: $0-$4,999; $5,000-$9,999; $10,000-$19,999; amounts between $20,000-$100,000 by increments of $20,000; amounts above $100,000 by increments of $50,000), or a statement that the interest is one whose value cannot be readily determined through reference to public prices or other reasonable measures of fair market value;
            (vii) A description of how the financial interest relates to the PHS-funded research and the basis for the Institution's determination that the financial interest conflicts with such research; and
            (viii) A description of the key elements of the Institution's management plan, including:
            (A) Role and principal duties of the conflicted Investigator in the research project;
            (B) Conditions of the management plan;
            (C) How the management plan is designed to safeguard objectivity in the research project;
            (D) Confirmation of the Investigator's agreement to the management plan;
            (E) How the management plan will be monitored to ensure Investigator compliance; and
            (F) Other information as needed.
            (4) For any financial conflict of interest previously reported by the Institution with regard to an ongoing PHS-funded research project, the Institution shall provide to the PHS Awarding Component an annual FCOI report that addresses the status of the financial conflict of interest and any changes to the management plan for the duration of the PHS-funded research project. The annual FCOI report shall specify whether the financial conflict is still being managed or explain why the financial conflict of interest no longer exists. The Institution shall provide annual FCOI reports to the PHS Awarding Component for the duration of the project period (including extensions with or without funds) in the time and manner specified by the PHS Awarding Component.
            (5) In addition to the types of financial conflicts of interest as defined in this part that must be reported pursuant to this section, an Institution may require the reporting of other financial conflicts of interest in its policy on financial conflicts of interest, as the Institution deems appropriate.
          
          
            § 94.6
            Remedies.

            (a) If the failure of an Investigator to comply with an Institution's financial conflicts of interest policy or a financial conflict of interest management plan appears to have biased the design, conduct, or reporting of the PHS-funded research, the Institution shall promptly notify the PHS Awarding Component of the corrective action taken or to be taken. The PHS Awarding Component will consider the situation and, as necessary, take appropriate action, or refer the matter to the Institution for further action, which may include directions to the Institution on how to maintain appropriate objectivity in the PHS-funded research project.
            (b) The PHS Awarding Component and/or HHS may inquire at any time (before, during, or after award) into any Investigator disclosure of financial interests and the Institution's review of, and response to, such disclosure, regardless of whether or not the disclosure resulted in the Institution's determination of a financial conflict of interest. An Institution is required to submit, or permit on site review of, all records pertinent to compliance with this part. To the extent permitted by law, HHS will maintain the confidentiality of all records of financial interests. On the basis of its review of records or other information that may be available, the PHS Awarding Component may decide that a particular financial conflict of interest will bias the objectivity of the PHS-funded research to such an extent that further corrective action is needed or that the Institution has not managed the financial conflict of interest in accordance with this part. The PHS Awarding Component may determine that issuance of a Stop Work Order by the Contracting Officer or other enforcement action is necessary until the matter is resolved.
            (c) In any case in which the HHS determines that a PHS-funded project of clinical research whose purpose is to evaluate the safety or effectiveness of a drug, medical device, or treatment has been designed, conducted, or reported by an Investigator with a financial conflict of interest that was not managed or reported by the Institution as required by this part, the Institution shall require the Investigator involved to disclose the financial conflict of interest in each public presentation of the results of the research and to request an addendum to previously published presentations.
          
        
        
          Pt. 95
          PART 95—GENERAL ADMINISTRATION—GRANT PROGRAMS (PUBLIC ASSISTANCE, MEDICAL ASSISTANCE AND STATE CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS)
          
            
              Subpart A—Time Limits for States To File Claims
              Sec.
              95.1
              Scope.
              95.4
              Definitions.
              95.7
              Time limit for claiming payment for expenditures made after September 30, 1979.
              95.10
              Time limit for claiming payment for expenditures made before October 1, 1979.
              95.11
              Payment of claims subject to appropriations restrictions.
              95.13
              In which quarter we consider an expenditure made.
              95.19
              Exceptions to time limits.
              95.22
              Meaning of good cause.
              95.25
              When to request a waiver for good cause.
              95.28
              What a waiver request for good cause must include.
              95.31
              Where to send a waiver request for good cause.
              95.34
              The decision to waive the time limit for good cause.
            
            
              Subparts B-D [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart E—Cost Allocation Plans
              95.501
              Purpose.
              95.503
              Scope.
              95.505
              Definitions.
              95.507
              Plan requirements.
              95.509
              Cost allocation plan amendments and certifications.
              95.511
              Approval of the cost allocation plan or plan amendment.
              95.515
              Effective date of a cost allocation plan or plan amendment.
              95.517
              Claims for Federal financial participation.
              95.519
              Cost disallowance.
            
            
              Subpart F—Automatic Data Processing Equipment and Services—Conditions for Federal Financial Participation (FFP)
              
                General
                95.601
                Scope and applicability.
                95.605
                Definitions.
              
              
                Specific Conditions for FFP
                95.610
                Submission of advance planning documents.
                95.611
                Prior approval conditions.
                95.612

                Disallowance of Federal Financial Participation (FFP).
                
                95.613
                Procurement standards.
                95.615
                Access to systems and records.
                95.617
                Software and ownership rights.
                95.619
                Use of ADP systems.
                95.621
                ADP reviews.
                95.623
                Reconsideration of denied FFP for failure to obtain prior approval.
                95.624
                Consideration for FFP in emergency situations.
                95.625
                Increased FFP for certain ADP systems.
                95.626
                Independent Verification and Validation.
                95.627
                Waivers.
              
              
                Federal Financial Participation in Costs of ADP Acquisitions
                95.631
                Cost identification for purpose of FFP claims.
                95.633
                Nondiscrimination requirements.
                95.635
                Disallowance of Federal financial participation for automated systems that fail to comply substantially with requirements.
              
              
                Exemptions
                95.641
                Applicability of rules for charging equipment in subpart G of this part.
              
            
            
              Subpart G—Equipment Acquired Under Public Assistance Programs
              95.701
              Purpose and scope of subpart.
              95.703
              Definitions.
              95.705
              Equipment costs—Federal financial participation.
              95.707
              Equipment management and disposition.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 301, 42 U.S.C. 622(b), 629b(a), 652(a), 652(d), 654A, 671(a), 1302, and 1396a(a).
          
          
            Subpart A—Time Limits for States To File Claims
            
              Source:
              46 FR 3529, Jan. 15, 1981, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 95.1
              Scope.

              (a) This subpart establishes a two year time limit (15 months in some cases) for a State to claim Federal financial participation in expenditures under State plans approved under the following titles of the Social Security Act:
              
              
                Title I—Grants to States for Old-Age Assistance and Medical Assistance for the Aged.
                Title IV-A—Grants to States for Aid and Services to Needy Families with Dependent Children (except for Section 402(a)(19)(G) of the Act).
                Title IV-B—Child Welfare Services.
                Title IV-D—Child Support and Establishment of Paternity.
                Title IV-E—Foster Care and Adoption Assistance.
                Title X—Grants to States for Aid to the Blind.
                Title XIV—Grants to States for Aid to the Permanently and Totally Disabled.
                Title XVI—Grants to States for Aid to the Aged, Blind, or Disabled (AABD), or for Such Aid and Medical Assistance for the Aged.
                Title XIX—Grants to States for Medical Assistance Programs.
                Title XX—Grants to States for Services.
                Title XXI—Grants to States for State Children's Health Insurance Programs.
              
              
              (b) This subpart also applies to claims for Federal financial participation by any State which are based on any provision of the Act that is enacted after issuance of these regulations and that provides, on an entitlement basis, for Federal financial participation in expenditures made under State plans or programs.
              (c) This subpart explains under what conditions the Secretary may decide to extend the time limit for filing claims when a State believes it has good cause for not meeting the time limit.
              [46 FR 3529, Jan. 15, 1981, as amended at 65 FR 33632, May 24, 2000]
            
            
              § 95.4
              Definitions.
              In this subpart—
              
                Adjustment to prior year costs means an adjustment in the amount of a particular cost item that was previously claimed under an interim rate concept and for which it is later determined that the cost is greater or less than that originally claimed.
              
                Audit exception means a proposed adjustment by the responsible Federal agency to any expenditure claimed by a State by virtue of an audit.
              
                Claim means a request for Federal financial participation in the manner and format required by our program regulations, and instructions or directives issued thereunder.
              
                Court-ordered retroactive payment means either a retroactive payment the State makes to an assistance recipient or an individual, under a Federal or State court order or a retroactive payment we make to a State under a Federal court order. Although we may accept these claims as timely, this provision does not mean that we necessarily agree to be bound by a State or Federal decision when we were not a party to the action.
              
                Federal financial participation means the Federal government's share of an expenditure made by a State agency under any of the programs listed in § 95.1.
              
                State means the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa and the Trust Territories of the Pacific.
              
                State agency for the purposes of expenditures for financial assistance under title IV-A and for support enforcement services under title IV-D means any agency or organization of the State or local government which is authorized to incur matchable expenses; for purposes of expenditures under titles XIX and XXI, means any agency of the State, including the State Medicaid agency or State Child Health Agency, its fiscal agents, a State health agency, or any other State or local organization which incurs matchable expenses; for purposes of expenditures under all other titles, see the definitions in the appropriate program's regulations.
              
                The Act means the Social Security Act, as amended.
              
                We, our, and us refer to the HHS Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and Administration for Children and Families (ACF), depending on the program involved.
              [46 FR 3529, Jan. 15, 1981, as amended at 65 FR 33632, May 24, 2000; 75 FR 66336, Oct. 28, 2010]
            
            
              § 95.7
              Time limit for claiming payment for expenditures made after September 30, 1979.
              Under the programs listed in § 95.1, we will pay a State for a State agency expenditure made after September 30, 1979, only if the State files a claim with us for that expenditure within 2 years after the calendar quarter in which the State agency made the expenditure. Section 95.19 lists the exceptions to this rule.
            
            
              § 95.10
              Time limit for claiming payment for expenditures made before October 1, 1979.
              Under the programs listed in § 95.1, we will pay a State for a State agency expenditure made before October 1, 1979, only if the State filed or files a claim with us for that expenditure before January 1, 1981. Section 95.19 lists the exceptions to this rule.
            
            
              § 95.11
              Payment of claims subject to appropriations restrictions.
              Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subpart, we will pay States' otherwise allowable claims for Federal financial participation under the programs covered by this subpart, subject to the availability of funds (as provided in Acts appropriating funds to the Department in effect at the time in which such claims are being considered for payment), and subject to conditions or restrictions applicable to payments out of such funds, including provisions of the first and second continuing resolutions for FY 1981 (Pub. L. 96-369 and Pub. L. 96-536) and the Supplemental Appropriations and Rescission Act, 1981 (Pub. L. 97-12) that make funds under those Acts available to pay for a State agency expenditure made before September 30, 1978, only if the State had filed a claim for that expenditure with us within one year of the expenditure.
              (Pub. L. 96-369, 94 Stat. 1351; Pub. L. 96-536, 94 Stat. 3166; and Pub. L. 97-12, 95 Stat. 14)
              [46 FR 46136, Sept. 17, 1981]
            
            
              § 95.13
              In which quarter we consider an expenditure made.
              In this subpart—
              (a) We consider a State agency's expenditure for assistance payments under title I, IV-A, IV-E, X, XIV, or XVI (AABD) to have been made in the quarter in which a payment was made to the assistance recipient, his or her protective payee, or a vendor payee, even if the payment was for a month in a previous quarter.

              (b) We consider a State agency's expenditure for services under title I, IV-A, IV-B, IV-D, IV-E, X, XIV, XVI (AABD) , XIX, or XXI to have been made in the quarter in which any State agency made a payment to the service provider.
              
              (c) For purposes of title XX, the date of expenditure is governed by 45 CFR 1396.52(d).
              (d) We consider a State agency's expenditure for administration or training under titles I, IV-A, IV-B, IV-D, IV-E, X, XIV, XVI (AABD), XIX, or XXI to have been made in the quarter payment was made by a State agency to a private agency or individual; or in the quarter to which the costs were allocated in accordance with the regulations for each program. We consider a State agency's expenditure under these titles for non-cash expenditures such as depreciation to have been made in the quarter the expenditure was recorded in the accounting records of any State agency in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
              [46 FR 3529, Jan. 15, 1981, as amended at 65 FR 33632, May 24, 2000]
            
            
              § 95.19
              Exceptions to time limits.
              The time limits in §§ 95.7 and 95.10 do not apply to any of the following—
              (a) Any claim for an adjustment to prior year costs.
              (b) Any claim resulting from an audit exception.
              (c) Any claim resulting from a court-ordered retroactive payment.
              (d) Any claim for which the Secretary decides there was good cause for the State's not filing it within the time limit.
            
            
              § 95.22
              Meaning of good cause.
              (a) Good cause for the late filing of a claim is lateness due to circumstances beyond the State's control.
              (b) Examples of circumstances beyond the State's control include:
              (1) Acts of God;
              (2) Documented action or inaction of the Federal government.
              (c) Circumstances beyond the State's control do not include neglect or administrative inadequacy on the part of the State, State agencies, the State legislature or any of their offices, officers, or employees.
            
            
              § 95.25
              When to request a waiver for good cause.
              The State should request a waiver in writing as soon as the State recognizes that it will be unable to submit a claim within the appropriate time limit.
            
            
              § 95.28
              What a waiver request for good cause must include.
              The State's request for waiver must include a specific explanation, justification or documentation of why the claim is or will be late. This request must establish that the lateness in filing the claim is for good cause as defined in § 95.22 and not due to neglect or administrative inadequacy. If the claim has not been filed, the State must also tell us when the claim will be filed.
            
            
              § 95.31
              Where to send a waiver request for good cause.
              (a) A request which affects the program(s) of only one HHS agency, CMS or ACF and does not affect the programs of any other agency or Federal Department should be sent to the appropriate HHS agency.
              (b) A request which affects programs of more than one HHS agency or Federal Department should be sent to the Director, Division of Cost Allocation in the appropriate HHS Regional Office.
              [46 FR 3529, Jan. 15, 1981, as amended at 75 FR 66336, Oct. 28, 2010]
            
            
              § 95.34
              The decision to waive the time limit for good cause.
              The Secretary will make a decision after reviewing the State's request for waiver. If the Secretary decides that good cause exists, the State will be notified of the extended due date. If the Secretary decides that good cause does not exist or that the request for waiver does not provide enough information to make a decision, the State will be so advised.
            
          
          
            Subparts B-D [Reserved]
          
          
            Subpart E—Cost Allocation Plans
            
              Source:
              47 FR 17509, Apr. 23, 1982, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 95.501
              Purpose.
              This subpart establishes requirements for:

              (a) Preparation, submission, and approval of State agency cost allocation plans for public assistance programs; and
              
              (b) Adherence to approved cost allocation plans in computing claims for Federal financial participation.
            
            
              § 95.503
              Scope.

              This subpart applies to all State agency costs applicable to awards made under titles I, IV-A, IV-B, IV-C, IV-D, IV-E, X, XIV, XVI (AABD), XIX, and XXI, of the Social Security Act, and under the Refugee Act of 1980, title IV, Chapter 2 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1521 et seq.), and under title V of Pub. L. 96-422, the Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980.
              [65 FR 33633, May 24, 2000]
            
            
              § 95.505
              Definitions.
              As used in this subpart:
              
                State agency costs include all costs incurred by or allocable to the State agency except expenditures for financial assistance, medical vendor payments, and payments for services and goods provided directly to program recipients such as day care services, family planning services or household items as provided for under the approved State program plan.
              
                Cost allocation plan means a narrative description of the procedures that the State agency will use in identifying, measuring, and allocating all State agency costs incurred in support of all programs administered or supervised by the State agency.
              
                FFP or Federal financial participation means the Federal Government's share of expenditures made by a State agency under any of the programs cited in § 95.503.
              
                Operating Divisions means the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) organizational components responsible for administering public assistance programs. These components are the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).
              
                Public assistance programs means the programs cited in § 95.503.
              
                State means the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Guam.
              
                State agency means the State agency administering or supervising the administration of the State plan for any program cited in § 95.503. A State agency may be an organizational part of a larger State department that also contains other components and agencies. Where that occurs, the expression State agency refers to the specific component or agency within the State department that is directly responsible for the administration of, or supervising the administration of, one or more programs identified in § 95.503.
              
                State Plan means a comprehensive written commitment by the State agency to administer or supervise the administration of any of the public assistance programs cited in § 95.503 in accordance with all Federal requirements.
              [47 FR 17509, Apr. 23, 1982, as amended at 75 FR 66336, Oct. 28, 2010]
            
            
              § 95.507
              Plan requirements.
              (a) The State shall submit a cost allocation plan for the State agency as required below to the Director, Division of Cost Allocation (DCA), in the approporiate HHS Regional Office. The plan shall:
              (1) Describe the procedures used to identify, measure, and allocate all costs to each of the programs operated by the State agency;
              (2) Conform to the accounting principles and standards prescribed in Office of Management and Budget Circular A-87, and other pertinent Department regulations and instructions;
              (3) Be compatible with the State plan for public assistance programs described in 45 CFR Chapter II, III and XIII, and 42 CFR Chapter IV Subchapters C and D; and
              (4) Contain sufficient information in such detail to permit the Director, Division of Cost Allocation, after consulting with the Operating Divisions, to make an informed judgment on the correctness and fairness of the State's procedures for identifying, measuring, and allocating all costs to each of the programs operated by the State agency.
              (b) The cost allocation plan shall contain the following information:

              (1) An organizational chart showing the placement of each unit whose costs are charged to the programs operated by the State agency.
              
              (2) A listing of all Federal and all non-Federal programs performed, administered, or serviced by these organizational units.
              (3) A description of the activities performed by each organizational unit and, where not self-explanatory an explanation of the benefits provided to Federal programs.
              (4) The procedures used to identify, measure, and allocate all costs to each benefiting program and activity (including activities subject to different rates of FFP).
              (5) The estimated cost impact resulting from the proposed changes to a previously approved plan. These estimated costs are required solely to permit an evaluation of the procedures used for identifying, measuring, and allocating costs. Therefore, approval of the cost allocation plan shall not constitute approval of these estimated costs for use in calculating claims for FFP. Where it is impractical to obtain this data, an alternative approach should then be negotiated with the Director, DCA, prior to submission of the cost allocation plan.
              (6) A statement stipulating that wherever costs are claimed for services provided by a governmental agency outside the State agency, that they will be supported by a written agreement that includes, at a minimum (i) the specific service(s) being purchased, (ii) the basis upon which the billing will be made by the provider agency (e.g. time reports, number of homes inspected, etc.) and (iii) a stipulation that the billing will be based on the actual cost incurred. This statement would not be required if the costs involved are specifically addressed in a State-wide cost allocation plan, local-wide cost allocation plan, or an umbrella/department cost allocation plan.
              (7) If the public assistance programs are administered by local government agencies under a State supervised system, the overall State agency cost allocation plan shall also include a cost allocation plan for the local agencies. It shall be developed in accordance with the requirements set forth above. More than one local agency plan shall be submitted if the accounting systems or other conditions at the local agencies preclude an equitable allocation of costs by the submission of a single plan for all local agencies. Prior to submitting multiple plans for local agencies, the State should consult with the Director, DCA. Where more than one local agency plan is submitted, the State shall identify the specific local agencies covered by each plan.
              (8) A certification by a duly authorized official of the State stating:
              (i) That the information contained in the proposed cost allocation plan was prepared in conformance with Office of Management and Budget Circular A-87.
              (ii) That the costs are accorded consistent treatment through the application of generally accepted accounting principles appropriate to the circumstances.
              (iii) That an adequate accounting and statistical system exists to support claims that will be made under the cost allocation plan; and
              (iv) That the information provided in support of the proposed cost allocation plan is accurate.
              (9) Other information as is necessary to establish the validity of the procedures used to identify, measure, and allocate costs to all programs being operated by the State agency.
              [47 FR 17509, Apr. 23, 1982, as amended at 65 FR 33633, May 24, 2000]
            
            
              § 95.509
              Cost allocation plan amendments and certifications.
              (a) The State shall promptly amend the cost allocation plan and submit the amended plan to the Director, DCA if any of the following events occur:
              (1) The procedures shown in the existing cost allocation plan become outdated because of organizational changes, changes in Federal law or regulations, or significant changes in program levels, affecting the validity of the approved cost allocation procedures.
              (2) A material defect is discovered in the cost allocation plan by the Director, DCA or the State.
              (3) The State plan for public assistance programs is amended so as to affect the allocation of costs.

              (4) Other changes occur which make the allocation basis or procedures in the approval cost allocation plan invalid.
              
              (b) If a State has not submitted a plan or plan amendment during a given State fiscal year, an annual statement shall be submitted to the Director, DCA certifying that its approved cost allocation plan is not outdated. This statement shall be submitted within 60 days after the end of that fiscal year.
            
            
              § 95.511
              Approval of the cost allocation plan or plan amendment.
              (a) The Director, DCA, after consulting with the affected Operating Divisions, shall notify the State in writing of his/her findings. This notification will be made within 60 days after receipt of the proposed plan or amendment and shall either: (1) Advise the State that the plan or plan amendment is approved or disapproved, (2) advise the State of the changes required to make the plan or amendment acceptable, or (3) request the State to provide additional information needed to evaluate the proposed plan or amendment. If the DCA cannot make a determination within the 60-day period, it shall so advise the State.
              (b) For purpose of this subpart, State agency cost allocation plans which have been approved by an authorized official of the Department of HHS prior to the effective date of this regulation are considered approved until such time as a new plan or plan amendment is required by § 95.509(a).
            
            
              § 95.515
              Effective date of a cost allocation plan amendment.
              As a general rule, the effective date of a cost allocation plan amendment shall be the first day of the calendar quarter following the date of the event that required the amendment (See § 95.509). However, the effective date of the amendment may be earlier or later under the following conditions:
              (a) An earlier date is needed to avoid a significant inequity to either the State or the Federal Government.
              (b) The information provided by the State which was used to approve a previous plan or plan amendment is later found to be materially incomplete or inaccurate, or the previously approved plan is later found to violate a Federal statute or regulation. In either situation, the effective date of any required modification to the plan will be the same as the effective date of the plan or plan amendment that contained the defect.
              (c) It is impractical for the State to implement the amendment on the first day of the next calendar quarter. In these instances, a later date may be established by agreement between the State and the DCA.
            
            
              § 95.517
              Claims for Federal financial participation.
              (a) A State must claim FFP for costs associated with a program only in accordance with its approved cost allocation plan. However, if a State has submitted a plan or plan amendment for a State agency, it may, at its option claim FFP based on the proposed plan or plan amendment, unless otherwise advised by the DCA. However, where a State has claimed costs based on a proposed plan or plan amendment the State, if necessary, shall retroactively adjust its claims in accordance with the plan or amendment as subsequently approved by the Director, DCA. The State may also continue to claim FFP under its existing approved cost allocation plan for all costs not affected by the proposed amendment.
            
            
              § 95.519
              Cost disallowance.
              If costs under a Public Assistance program are not claimed in accordance with the approved cost allocation plan (except as otherwise provided in § 95.517), or if the State failed to submit an amended cost allocation plan as required by § 95.509, the costs improperly claimed will be disallowed.

              (a)(1) If the issue affects the program(s) of only one Operating Division and does not affect the programs of other Operating Divisions or Federal departments, that Operating Division will determine the amount of the disallowance and will also inform the State of its opportunity for reconsideration of the determination in accordance with the Operating Division's procedures. Prior to issuing the notification, however, the Operating Division shall consult with the DCA to ensure that the issue does not affect the programs of other Operating Divisions or Federal departments.
              
              (2) If the State wishes to request a reconsideration of the Operating Division's determination, it must submit the request in accordance with the Operating Division's procedures.
              (b) If the issue affects the programs of more than one Operating Division, or Federal department or the State, the Director, DCA, after consulting with the Operating Divisions, shall determine the amount inappropriately claimed under each program. The Director, DCA will notify the State of this determination, of the dollar affect of the determination on the claims made under each program, and will inform the State of its opportunity for appeal of the determination under 45 CFR part 16. The State will subsequently be notified by the appropriate Operating Division as to the disposition of the funds in question.
              [47 FR 17509, Apr. 23, 1982, as amended at 62 FR 38218, July 17, 1997]
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Automatic Data Processing Equipment and Services—Conditions for Federal Financial Participation (FFP)
            
              Source:
              51 FR 45326, Dec. 18, 1986, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              General
              
                § 95.601
                Scope and applicability.
                This subpart prescribes part of the conditions under which the Department of Health and Human Services will approve the Federal Financial Participation (FFP) at the applicable rates for the costs of automated data processing incurred under an approved State plan for titles IV-B, IV-D, IV-E, XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act. The conditions of approval of this subpart add to the statutory and regulatory requirements for acquisition of Automated Data Processing (ADP) equipment and services under the specified titles of the Social Security Act.
                [75 FR 66336, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
              
                § 95.605
                Definitions.
                As used in this part, the term:
                
                  Acceptance documents means a record of satisfactory completion of an approved phase of work or contract, and acceptance thereof by the State agency.
                
                  Acquisition means acquiring ADP equipment or services from commercial sources or from State or local government resources.
                
                  Acquisition Checklist means the standard Department checklist that States can submit to meet prior written approval requirements instead of submitting the actual Request for Proposal (RFP), contracts or contract amendments. The Acquisition Checklist allows States to self-certify that their acquisition documents, which include RFPs, contracts, contract amendments or similar documents, meet State and Federal procurement requirements, contain appropriate language about software ownership and licensing rights in compliance with § 95.617, and provide access to documentation in compliance with § 95.615.
                
                  Advance Planning Document (APD), Initial advance automated data processing planning or Initial APD means a recorded plan of action to request funding approval for a project which will require the use of ADP service or equipment. The term APD refers to a Planning APD, or to a planning and/or development and implementation action document, i.e., Implementation APD, or to an Advance Planning Document Update. Requirements are detailed in § 95.610, paragraphs (a), (b), and (c).
                
                  Advance Planning Document Update (APDU) is a document or record submitted annually (Annual APDU) to report project status and/or post implementation cost-savings, or, on an as-needed (As-Needed APDU) basis, to request funding approval for project continuation when significant project changes are anticipated; for incremental funding authority and project continuation when approval is being granted by phase; or to provide detailed information on project and/or budget activities as specified in § 95.610(c).
                
                  Alternative approach to APD requirements means that the State has developed an APD that does not meet all conditions for APD approval in § 95.610, resulting in the need for a waiver under § 95.627(a).
                
                
                  Automated data processing or ADP means data processing performed by a system of electronic or electrical machines so interconnected and interacting as to minimize the need for human assistance or intervention.
                
                  Automated data processing equipment or ADP equipment or Hardware means automatic equipment that accepts and stores data, performs calculations and other processing steps, and produces information. This includes:
                (a) Electronic digital computers;
                (b) Peripheral or auxiliary equipment used in support of electronic computers;
                (c) Data transmission or communications equipment, and
                (d) Data input equipment.
                Automatic Data Processing Services or ADP Services means:
                (a) Services to operate ADP equipment, either by agency, or by State or local organizations other than the State agency; and/or
                (b) Services provided by private sources or by employees of the State agency or by State and local organizations other than the State agency to perform such tasks as feasibility studies, system studies, system design efforts, development of system specifications, system analysis, programming, system conversion and system implementation and include, for example, the following:
                (1) Systems Training,
                (2) Systems Development,
                (3) Site Preparation,
                (4) Data Entry, and

                (5) Personal services related to automated systems development and operations that are specifically identified as part of a Planning ADP or Implementation ADP. As an example, a personal service would be the service of an expert individual to provide advice on the use of ADP software or hardware in developing a State automated management information system.
                
                  Base contract means the initial contractual activity, including all option years, allowed during a defined unit of time, for example, 2 years. The base contract includes option years but does not include amendments.
                
                  Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) software means proprietary software products that are ready-made and available for sale to the general public at established catalog or market prices.
                
                  Data processing means the preparation of source media containing data or basic elements of information and the use of such source media according to precise rules or procedures to accomplish such operations as classifying, sorting, calculating, summarizing, recording and transmitting.
                
                  Department means the Department of Health and Human Service.
                
                  Design or system design means a combination of narrative and diagrams describing the structure of a new or more efficient automatic data processing system. This includes the use of hardware to the extent necessary for the design phase.
                
                  Development means the definition of system requirements, detailing of system and program specifications, programming and testing. This includes the use of hardware to the extent necessary for the development phase.
                
                  Emergency situation is defined as a situation where:
                (a) A State can demonstrate to the Department an immediate need to acquire ADP equipment or services in order to continue the operation of one or more of the Social Security Act programs covered by Subpart F, and
                (b) The State can clearly document that the need could not have been anticipated or planned for and the State was prevented from following the prior approval requirements of § 95.611.
                
                  Enhanced matching rate means the higher than regular rate of FFP authorized by Title IV-D, IV-E, and XIX of the Social Security Act for acquisition of services and equipment that conform to specific requirements designed to improve administration of the Child Support Enforcement, Foster Care and Adoption Assistance, and Medicaid programs.
                
                  Enhancement means modifications which change the functions of software and hardware beyond their original purposes, not just to correct errors or deficiencies which may have been present in the software or hardware, or to improve the operational performance of the software or hardware.
                
                
                  Feasibility study means a preliminary study to determine whether it is sufficiently probable that effective and efficient use of ADP equipment or systems can be made to warrant a substantial investment of staff, time, and money being requested and whether the plan is capable of being accomplished successfully.
                
                  Federal program office means the Federal program office within the Department that is authorized to approve requests for the acquisition of ADP equipment or ADP services. The Federal program offices within the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) are the Children's Bureau for titles IV-B (child welfare services) and IV-E (foster care and adoption assistance), the Office of Child Support Enforcement for title IV-D (child support enforcement), and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) for titles XIX (Medicaid) and XXI (the Children's Health Insurance Program) of the Social Security Act.
                
                  FFP means Federal financial participation.
                
                  Functional Requirements Specification is defined as an initial definition of the proposed system, which documents the goals, objectives, user or programmatic requirements, management requirements, the operating environment, and the proposed design methodology, e.g., centralized or distributed. This document details what the new system and or hardware should do, not how it is to do it. The Specifications document shall be based upon a clear and accurate description of the functional requirements for the project, and shall not, in competitive procurements, lead to requirements which unduly restrict competition. The Specification document is the user's definition of the requirements the system must meet.
                
                  General Systems Design means a combination of narrative and graphic description of the generic architecture of a system as opposed to the detailed architecture of the system. A general systems design would include a systems diagram and narrative identifying overall logic flow and systems functions; a description of equipment needed (including processing data transmission and storage requirements); a description of other resource requirements which will be necessary to operate the system; a description of system performance requirements; and a description of the physical and organizational environment in which the system will operate including how the system will function within that environment (e.g. how workers will interface with the system).
                
                  Grantee means an organization receiving financial assistance directly from an HHS awarding agency to carry out a project or program.
                
                  Independent Verification and Validation—(IV&V) means a well-defined standard process for examining the organizational, management, and technical aspects of a project to determine the effort's adherence to industry standards and best practices, to identify risks, and make recommendations for remediation, where appropriate.
                
                  Implementation APD means a recorded plan of action to request Federal Financial Participation (FFP) in the costs of designing, developing, and implementing the system.
                
                  Independent Verification and Validation—(IV&V) means a well-defined standard process for examining the organizational, management, and technical aspects of a project to determine the effort's adherence to industry standards and best practices, to identify risks, and make recommendations for remediation, where appropriate.
                
                  Installation means the integrated testing of programs and subsystems, system conversion, and turnover to operation status. This includes the use of hardware to the extent necessary for the installation phase.
                
                  Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) is a commonly accepted term for Mechanized Claim Processing and Information Retrieval System as provided by Section 1903(a)(3) and 1903(r) of the Social Security Act and at 42 CFR 433.110 et seq.
                
                
                  Noncompetitive means solicitation of a proposal from only one source, or after solicitation of a number of sources, negotiation with selected sources based on a finding that competition is inadequate.
                
                  Operational APD—An operational APD is a record of no more than two pages to be submitted annually by State programs whose system is not in development. The Operational APD provides a short summary of the activities, method of acquisition, and annual budget for operations and software maintenance.
                
                  Operation means the automated processing of data used in the administration of State plans for titles I, IV-A, IV-B, IV-D, IV-E, X, XIV, XVI(AABD), XIX, and XXI of the Social Security Act. Operation includes the use of supplies, software, hardware, and personnel directly associated with the functioning of the mechanized system. See 45 CFR 205.38 and 307.10 for specific requirements for titles IV-A and IV-D, and 42 CFR 433.112 and 42 CFR 433.113 for specific requirements for title XIX.
                
                  Project means a defined set of information technology related tasks, undertaken by the State to improve the efficiency, economy and effectiveness of administration and/or operation of one or more of its human services programs. For example, a State may undertake a comprehensive, integrated initiative in support of its Child Support, Child Welfare and Medicaid program's intake, eligibility and case management functions. A project may also be a less comprehensive activity such as office automation, enhancements to an existing system or an upgrade of computer hardware.
                
                  Regular matching rate means the normal rate of FFP authorized by titles IV-A, IV-B, IV-D, IV-E, X, XIV, XVI(AABD), XIX, and XXI of the Social Security Act for State and local agency administration of programs authorized by those titles.
                
                  Requirements Analysis means determining and documenting the information needs and the functional and technical requirements the proposed computerized system must meet.
                
                  Service agreement means the document signed by the State or local agency and the State or local Central Data Processing facility whenever the latter provides data processing services to the former and:
                (a) Identifies those ADP services the Central Data Processing facility will provide;
                (b) Includes, preferably as an amendable attachment, a schedule of charges for each identified ADP service, and a certification that these charges apply equally to all users;
                (c) Includes a description of the method(s) of accounting for the services rendered under the agreement and computing services charges;
                (d) Includes assurances that services provided will be timely and satisfactory; preferably through a service level agreement;
                (e) Includes assurances that information in the computer system as well as access, use and disposal of ADP data will be safeguarded in accordance with provisions of all applicable federal statutes and regulations, including §§ 205.50 and 307.13;
                (f) Requires the provider to obtain prior approval pursuant to § 95.611(a) from the Department for ADP equipment and ADP services that are acquired from commercial sources primarily to support the titles covered by this subpart and requires the provider to comply with § 95.613 for procurements related to the service agreement. ADP equipment and services are considered to be primarily acquired to support the titles covered by this subpart when the human service programs may reasonably be expected to either: be billed for more than 50 percent of the total charges made to all users of the ADP equipment and services during the time period covered by the service agreement, or directly charged for the total cost of the purchase or lease of ADP equipment or services;
                (g) Includes the beginning and ending dates of the period of time covered by the service agreement; and
                (h) Includes a schedule of expected total charges to the title covered by this subpart for the period of the service agreement.
                
                  Service Oriented Architecture (SOA), also referred to as Service Component Based Architecture, describes a means of organizing and developing Information Technology capabilities as collaborating services that interact with each other based on open standards. Agency SOA artifacts may include models, approach documents, inventories of services or other descriptive documents.
                
                  Software means a set of computer programs, procedures, and associated documentation used to operate the hardware.
                
                
                  Software maintenance means routine support activities that normally include corrective, adaptive, and perfective changes, without introducing additional functional capabilities. Corrective changes are tasks to correct minor errors or deficiencies in software. Adaptive changes are minor revisions to existing software to meet changing requirements. Perfective changes are minor improvements to application software so it will perform in a more efficient, economical, and/or effective manner. Software maintenance can include activities such as revising/creating new reports, making limited data element/data base changes, and making minor alterations to data input and display screen designs.
                
                  State agency means the State agency administering or supervising the administration of the State plan under titles I, IV, X, XIV, XVI(AABD), XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act.
                
                  System specifications means information about the new ADP system—such as workload descriptions, input data, information to be maintained and processed, data processing techniques, and output data—which is required to determine the ADP equipment and software necessary to implement the system design.
                
                  System study means the examination of existing information flow and operational procedures within an organization. The study essentially consists of three basic phases: Data gathering investigation of the present system and new information requirements; analysis of the data gathered in the investigation; and synthesis, or refitting of the parts and relationships uncovered through the analysis into an efficient system.
                
                  Total Acquisition Cost means all anticipated expenditures (including State staff costs) for planning and implementation for the project. For purposes of this regulation total acquisition cost and project cost are synonymous.
                [51 FR 45326, Dec. 18, 1986, as amended at 55 FR 4375, Feb. 7, 1990, 59 FR 30708, June 15, 1994; 65 FR 33633, May 24, 2000; 75 FR 66336, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
            
            
              Specific Conditions for FFP
              
                § 95.610
                Submission of advance planning documents.
                Advance Planning Document (APD) refers to an Initial advance automated data processing planning document or Initial APD, providing a recorded plan of action to request funding approval for a project which will require the use of ADP services or equipment, including the use of shared or purchased services in lieu of State acquired stand-alone resources. Requirements are detailed in paragraph (a), (b) and (c) of this section.
                (a) Planning APD. (1) A separate planning effort and Planning APD is optional, but highly recommended, and generally applies to large statewide system developments and/or major hardware acquisitions. States with large, independent counties requesting funding at the regular match rate for county systems are strongly encouraged to engage in planning activities commensurate with the complexity of the projected ADP project and to submit a Planning APD to allow for time and to provide funding for its planning activities. Therefore, States must consider the scope and complexity of a project to determine whether to submit a Planning APD as a separate document to HHS or whether to combine the two phases of planning and implementation into one APD covering both the Planning APD and the Implementation APD requirements.
                (2) The Planning APD is a relatively brief document, usually not more than 6-10 pages, which must contain:
                (i) A statement of the problem/need that the existing capabilities can not resolve, new or changed program requirements or opportunities for improved economies and efficiencies and effectiveness of program and administration and operations;
                (ii) A project management plan that addresses the planning project organization, planning activities/deliverables, State and contractor resource needs, planning project procurement activities and schedule;
                (iii) A specific budget for the planning phase of the project;

                (iv) An estimated total project cost and a prospective State and Federal cost allocation/distribution, including planning and implementation;
                (v) A commitment to conduct/prepare the problem(s) needs assessment, feasibility study, alternatives analysis, cost benefit analysis, and to develop a Functional Requirements Specification and/or a General Systems Design (GSD);
                (vi) A commitment to define the State's functional requirements, based on the State's business needs which may be used for the purpose of evaluating the transfer of an existing system, including the transfer of another State's General System Design that the State may adapt to meet State specific requirements;
                (vii) Additional Planning APD content requirements, for enhanced funding projects as contained in § 307.15 and §§ 1355.50 through 1355.57; and
                (viii) An acquisition summary for the upcoming year or development phase that provides the following information on proposed acquisitions:
                (A) Type and scope of contract
                (B) Procurement strategy
                (C) Estimated cost or not to exceed amount
                (D) Timeframe of contract
                (E) A statement or certification that the proposed acquisition will comply with all State and Federal requirements including the retention of software ownership rights specified in § 95.617.
                (b) Implementation APD. The Implementation APD shall include:
                (1) The results of the activities conducted under a Planning APD, if any;
                (2) A statement of problems/needs and outcomes/objectives;
                (3) A requirements analysis, feasibility study and a statement of alternative considerations including, where appropriate, the use of service-orientated architecture and a transfer of an existing system and an explanation of why such a transfer is not feasible if another alternative is identified;
                (4) A cost benefit analysis;
                (5) A personnel resource statement indicating availability of qualified and adequate numbers of staff, including a project director to accomplish the project objectives;
                (6) A detailed description of the nature and scope of the activities to be undertaken and the methods to be used to accomplish the project;
                (7) The proposed activity schedule for the project;
                (8) A proposed budget (including an accounting of all possible Implementation APD activity costs, e.g., system conversion, vendor and state personnel, computer capacity planning, supplies, training, hardware, software and miscellaneous ADP expenses) for the project;
                (9) A statement indicating the duration the State expects to use the equipment and/or system;
                (10) An estimate of the prospective cost allocation/distribution to the various State and Federal funding sources and the proposed procedures for distributing costs;
                (11) A statement setting forth the security and interface requirements to be employed and the system failure and disaster recovery/business continuity procedures available or to be implemented; and
                (12) Additional requirements, for acquisitions for which the State is requesting enhanced funding, as contained at § 307.15 and 42 CFR subchapter C, part 433 or funding for title IV-E agencies as contained at § 1355.52(i) of this title.
                (c) Advance Planning Document Update (APDU). (1) The Annual APDU, which is due 60 days prior to the expiration of the FFP approval, includes:
                (i) A reference to the approved APD and all approved changes;
                (ii) A project activity report which includes the status of the past year's major project tasks and milestones, addressing the degree of completion and tasks/milestones remaining to be completed, and discusses past and anticipated problems or delays in meeting target dates in the approved APD and approved changes to it and provides a risk management plan that assesses project risk and identifies risk mitigation strategies;
                (iii) A report of all project deliverables completed in the past year and degree of completion for unfinished products and tasks;

                (iv) An updated project activity schedule for the remainder of the project;
                
                (v) A revised budget for the entirety of the project's life-cycle, including operational and development cost categories;
                (vi) A project expenditures report that consists of a detailed accounting of all expenditures for project development over the past year and an explanation of the differences between projected expenses in the approved APD and actual expenditures for the past year;
                (vii) A report of any approved or anticipated changes to the allocation basis in the APD's approved cost allocation methodology; and
                (viii) An acquisition summary for the upcoming year or development phase that provides the following information on proposed acquisitions:
                (A) Type and scope of contract
                (B) Procurement strategy
                (C) Estimated cost or not to exceed amount
                (D) Timeframe of contract
                (E) A statement or certification that the proposed acquisition will comply with all State and Federal requirements including the retention of software ownership rights specified in § 95.617.
                (2) The As-Needed APDU is a document that requests approval for additional funding and/or authority for project continuation when significant changes are anticipated, when the project is being funded on a phased implementation basis, or to clarify project information requested as an approval condition of the Planning APD, Annual APDU, or Implementation APD. The As-Needed APDU may be submitted any time as a stand-alone funding or project continuation request, or may be submitted as part of the Annual APDU. The As-Needed APDU is submitted:
                (i) When the State anticipates incremental project expenditures (exceeding specified thresholds);
                (ii) When the State anticipates a schedule extension of more than 60 days for major milestones;
                (iii) When the State anticipates major changes in the scope of its project, e.g., a change in its procurement plan, procurement activities, system concept or development approach;
                (iv) When the State anticipates significant changes to its cost distribution methodology or distribution of costs among Federal programs; and/or,
                (v) When the State anticipates significant changes to its cost benefit projections. The As-Needed APDU shall provide supporting documentation to justify the need for a change to the approved budget.
                (vi) Changes to the acquisition summary in the following areas:
                (A) Type and scope of contract
                (B) Procurement strategy
                (C) Estimated cost or not to exceed amount
                (D) Timeframe of contract
                (E) A statement or certification that the proposed acquisition will comply with all State and Federal requirements including the retention of software ownership rights specified in § 95.617.
                (F) New acquisitions not summarized in the Annual APDU.

                (3) The Operational Advance Planning Document Update (OAPDU) is an annual submission of no more than two pages, including:
                (i) Summary of activities;
                (ii) Acquisitions; and,
                (iii) Annual budget by project/system receiving funding through the programs covered under this part.
                [75 FR 66337, Oct. 28, 2010, as amended at 81 FR 35479, June 2, 2016]
              
              
                § 95.611
                Prior approval conditions.
                (a) General acquisition requirements. (1) A State shall obtain prior approval from the Department which is reflected in a record, as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, when the State plans to acquire ADP equipment or services with proposed FFP at the regular matching rate that it anticipates will have total acquisition costs of $5,000,000 or more in Federal and State funds. States will be required to submit an Operational APDU only if they exceed the threshold requiring Federal approval, and only upon the receipt of a submission request, which is reflected in a record, from the Department. See definition of software maintenance under § 95.605.

                (2) A State must obtain prior approval from the Department which is reflected in a record, as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, when the State plans to acquire ADP equipment or services with proposed FFP at the enhanced matching rate subject to one of the following:
                (i) If authorized by § 205.35 of this title and part 307 of this title, regardless of the acquisition cost.
                (ii) If authorized by 42 CFR part 433, subpart C, if the contract is anticipated to or will exceed $500,000.
                (3) A State shall obtain prior approval from the Department, which is reflected in a record, for a sole source/non-competitive acquisition, of ADP equipment or services with a total State and Federal acquisition cost of $1,000,000 or more.
                (4) Except as provided for in paragraph (a)(5) of this section, the State shall submit multi-program requests for Department approval, signed by the appropriate State official, to the Department's Secretary or his/her designee. For each HHS agency that has federal funding participation in the project, an additional copy must be provided to the applicable Federal program office and respective Regional Offices.
                (5) States shall submit requests for approval which affect only one approving component of HHS (CMS, OCSE, or Children's Bureau), to the applicable Federal program office and Regional Administrator.
                (6) The Department will not approve any Planning or Implementation APD that does not include all information required in § 95.610.
                (b) Specific prior approval requirements. The State agency shall obtain written approval of the Department prior to the initiation of project activity.
                (1) For regular FFP requests.
                (i) For the Planning APD subject to the dollar thresholds specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
                (ii) For the Implementation APD subject to the dollar thresholds specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
                (iii) For acquisition documents, an exemption from prior Federal prior approval shall be assumed in the approval of the Planning, Annual or As-Needed APDU provided that:
                (A) The acquisition summary provides sufficient detail to base an exemption request;
                (B) The acquisition does not deviate from the terms of the exemption; and
                (C) The acquisition is not the initial acquisition for a high risk activity, such as software application development. Acquisitions, whether exempted from prior Federal approval or not, must comply with the Federal provisions contained in § 95.610(c)(1)(viii) or (c)(2)(vi) or submit an Acquisition Checklist.
                (iv) For noncompetitive acquisitions, including contract amendments, when the resulting contract is anticipated to exceed $1,000,000, States will be required to submit a sole source justification in addition to the acquisition document. The sole source justification can be provided as part of the Planning, Annual or As-Needed APDU.
                (v) If the State does not opt for an exemption or submittal of an Acquisition Checklist for the contract, prior to the execution, the State will be required to submit the contract when it is anticipated to exceed the following thresholds, unless specifically exempted by the Department:
                (A) Software application development—$6,000,000 or more (competitive) and $1,000,000 or more (noncompetitive);
                (B) Hardware and Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) software—$20,000,000 or more (competitive) and $1,000,000 or more (noncompetitive);
                (C) Operations and Software Maintenance acquisitions combined with hardware, COTS or software application development—the thresholds stated in § 95.611(b)(1)(v)(A) and (B) apply.
                (vi) For contract amendments within the scope of the base contract, unless specifically exempted by the Department, prior to execution of the contract amendment involving contract cost increases which cumulatively exceed 20 percent of the base contract cost.
                (2) For enhanced FFP requests.
                (i) For the Planning APD.
                (ii) For the Implementation APD.

                (iii) For the acquisition solicitation documents and contract, unless specifically exempted by the Department, prior to release of the acquisition solicitation documents or prior to execution of the contract when the contract is anticipated to or will exceed $500,000.
                
                (iv) For contract amendments, unless specifically exempted by the Department, prior to execution of the contract amendment, involving contract cost increases exceeding $500,000 or contract time extensions of more than 60 days.
                (3) Failure to submit any of the above to the satisfaction of the Department may result in disapproval or suspension of project funding.
                (c) Specific approval requirements. The State agency shall obtain written approval from the Department:
                (1) For regular FFP requests.
                (i) For an annual APDU for projects with a total cost of more than $5,000,000, and projects with a total estimated cost of less than $5,000,000 only if requested by the Department.
                (ii) For an “As Needed APDU” when changes cause any of the following:
                (A) A projected cost increase of $1,000,000 or more.
                (B) A schedule extension of more than 60 days for major milestones;
                (C) A significant change in procurement approach, and/or scope of procurement activities beyond that approved in the APD;
                (D) A change in system concept, or a change to the scope of the project;
                (E) A change to the approved cost allocation methodology.
                The State shall submit the “As Needed APDU” to the Department, no later than 60 days after the occurrence of the project changes to be reported in the “As Needed APDU”.
                (2) For enhanced FFP requests.
                (i) For an Annual APDU.
                (ii) For an “As needed” APDU when changes cause any of the following:
                (A) A projected cost increase of $300,000 or 10 percent of the project cost, whichever is less;
                (B) A schedule extension of more than 60 days for major milestones. For Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) Family Assistance Management Information System (FAMIS)-type projects, in accordance with section 402(e)(2)(C) of the Social Security Act, any schedule change which affects the State's implementation date as specified in the approved APD requires that the Department recover 40 percent of the amount expended. The Secretary may extend the implementation date, if the implementation date is not met because of circumstances beyond the State's control. Examples of circumstances beyond the State's control are:
                (1) Equipment failure due to physical damage or destruction; or,
                (2) Change imposed by Federal judicial decisions, or by Federal legislation or regulations;
                (C) A significant change in procurement approach, and/or a scope of procurement activities beyond that approved in the APD;
                (D) A change in system concept or scope of the project;
                (E) A change to the approved cost methodology;

                (F) A change of more than 10% of estimated cost benefits.
                
                
                  The State shall submit the “As Needed APDU” to the Department, no later than 60 days after the occurrence of the project changes to be reported in the “As Needed APDU”.
                
                
                (3) Failure to submit any of the above to the satisfaction of the Department may result in disapproval or suspension of project funding.
                (d) Prompt action on requests for prior approval. The Department will promptly send to the approving Federal program offices the items specified in paragraph (b) of this section. If the Department has not provided approval, disapproval, or a request for information which is reflected in a record, within 60 days of the date of the Departmental letter acknowledging receipt of a State's request, the Department will consider the request to have provisionally met the prior approval conditions of paragraph (b) of this section.
                (e) Acquisitions not subject to prior approval. If the Department has not specifically requested in a record, the submittal of additional acquisition documentation for those acquisitions summarized in the APD, the approval of the Planning, Annual or As-Needed APDU will constitute an exemption of the acquisition documents from prior Federal approval. States will be required to submit acquisition documents, contracts and contract amendments under the threshold amounts on an exception basis if requested to do so in a record by the Department.
                [51 FR 45326, Dec. 18, 1986, as amended at 55 FR 4377, Feb. 7, 1990; 56 FR 12356, Mar. 25, 1991; 59 FR 30708, June 15, 1994; 61 FR 39897, July 31, 1996; 75 FR 66338, Oct. 28, 2010; 80 FR 75843, Dec. 4, 2015]
              
              
                § 95.612
                Disallowance of Federal Financial Participation (FFP).

                If the Department finds that any ADP acquisition approved or modified under the provisions of § 95.611 fails to comply with the criteria, requirements, and other activities described in the approved APD to the detriment of the proper, efficient, economical and effective operation of the affected program, payment of FFP may be disallowed. In the case of a suspension of the approval of a Child Support APD for enhanced funding, see § 307.40(a). In the case of a suspension of the approval of an APD for a Comprehensive Child Welfare Information System (CCWIS) project and, if applicable the transitional project that preceded it, see § 1355.58 of this title.
                [75 FR 66339, Oct. 28, 2010, as amended at 81 FR 35479, June 2, 2016]
              
              
                § 95.613
                Procurement standards.
                (a) General. Procurements of ADP equipment and services are subject to the procurement standards prescribed by part 75 regardless of any conditions for prior approval. The Department retains the authority to provide greater oversight including requiring a State to comply with § 75.328 if the Department determines that the State procurement process is an impediment to competition that could substantially impact project cost or risk of failure.
                (b) Those standards, as well as the requirement for prior approval, apply to ADP services and equipment acquired by a State or local agency, and the ADP services and equipment acquired by a State or local Central Data Processing facility primarily to support the Social Security Act programs covered by this subpart. Service agreements are exempt from these procurement standards.
                [51 FR 45326, Dec. 18, 1986, as amended at 75 FR 66339, Oct. 28, 2010; 81 FR 3020, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 95.615
                Access to systems and records.
                The State agency must allow the Department access to the system in all of its aspects, including pertinent state staff, design developments, operation, and cost records of contractors and subcontractors at such intervals as are deemed necessary by the Department to determine whether the conditions for approval are being met and to determine the efficiency, economy and effectiveness of the system.
                [75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
              
                § 95.617
                Software and ownership rights.
                (a) General. The State or local government must include a clause in all procurement instruments that provides that the State or local government will have all ownership rights in software or modifications thereof and associated documentation designed, developed or installed with Federal financial participation under this subpart.
                (b) Federal license. The Department reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive, and irrevocable license to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use and to authorize others to use for Federal Government purposes, such software, modifications, and documentation.
                (c) Proprietary software. Proprietary operating/vendor software packages which are provided at established catalog or market prices and sold or leased to the general public shall not be subject to the ownership provisions in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. FFP is not available for proprietary applications software developed specifically for the public assistance programs covered under this subpart.
                [51 FR 45326, Dec. 18, 1986, as amended at 75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
              
                § 95.619
                Use of ADP systems.
                ADP systems designed, developed, or installed with FFP shall be used for a period of time specified in the advance planning document, unless the Department determines that a shorter period is justified.
              
              
                § 95.621
                ADP reviews.

                The Department will conduct periodic onsite surveys and reviews of State and local agency ADP methods and practices to determine the adequacy of such methods and practices and to assure that ADP equipment and services are utilized for the purposes consistent with proper and efficient administration under the Act. Where practical, the Department will develop a mutually acceptable schedule between the Department and State or local agencies prior to conducting such surveys or reviews, which may include but are not limited to:
                (a) Pre-installation readiness. A pre-installation survey including an onsite evaluation of the physical site and the agency's readiness to productively use the proposed ADP services, equipment or system when installed and operational.
                (b) Post-installation. A review conducted after installation of ADP equipment or systems to assure that the objectives for which FFP was approved are being accomplished.
                (c) Utilization. A continuing review of ADP facilities to determine whether or not the ADP equipment or services are being efficiently utilized in support of approved programs or projects.
                (d) Acquisitions not subject to prior approval. Reviews will be conducted on an audit basis to assure that system and equipment acquisitions costing less than $200,000 or acquisitions exempted from prior approval were made in accordance with part 75 and the conditions of this subpart and to determine the efficiency, economy and effectiveness of the equipment or service.
                (e) State Agency Maintenance of Service Agreements. The State agency will maintain a copy of each service agreement in its files for Federal review.
                (f) ADP System Security Requirements and Review Process—(1) ADP System Security Requirement. State agencies are responsible for the security of all ADP projects under development, and operational systems involved in the administration of HHS programs. State agencies shall determine the appropriate ADP security requirements based on recognized industry standards or standards governing security of Federal ADP systems and information processing.
                (2) ADP Security Program. State ADP Security requirements shall include the following components:
                (i) Determination and implementation of appropriate security requirements as specified in paragraph (f)(1) of this section.
                (ii) Establishment of a security plan and, as appropriate, policies and procedures to address the following area of ADP security:
                (A) Physical security of ADP resources;
                (B) Equipment security to protect equipment from theft and unauthorized use;
                (C) Software and data security;
                (D) Telecommunications security;
                (E) Personnel security;
                (F) Contingency plans to meet critical processing needs in the event of short or long-term interruption of service;
                (G) Emergency preparedness; and,
                (H) Designation of an Agency ADP Security Manager.
                (iii) Periodic risk analyses. State agencies must establish and maintain a program for conducting periodic risk analyses to ensure that appropriate, cost effective safeguards are incorporated into new and existing systems. State agencies must perform risk analyses whenever significant system changes occur.
                (3) ADP System Security Reviews. State agencies shall review the ADP system security of installations involved in the administration of HHS programs on a biennial basis. At a minimum, the reviews shall include an evaluation of physical and data security operating procedures, and personnel practices.
                (4) Costs incurred in complying with provisions of paragraphs (f)(1)-(3) of this section are considered regular administrative costs which are funded at the regular match rate.
                (5) The security requirements of this section apply to all ADP systems used by State and local governments to administer programs covered under 45 CFR part 95, subpart F.

                (6) The State agency shall maintain reports of their biennial ADP system security reviews, together with pertinent supporting documentation, for HHS on-site review.
                [43 FR 44853, Sept. 29, 1978, as amended at 51 FR 45329, Dec. 18, 1986; 53 FR 27, Jan. 4, 1988; 55 FR 4378, Feb. 7, 1990; 61 FR 39898, July 31, 1996; 75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010; 81 FR 3020, Jan. 20, 2016]
              
              
                § 95.623
                Reconsideration of denied FFP for failure to obtain prior approval.
                For ADP equipment and services acquired by a State without prior approval, which is reflected in a record, the State may request reconsideration of the disallowance of FFP by written request to the head of the Federal program office within 30 days of the initial written disallowance determination. In such a reconsideration, the agency may take into account overall federal interests. The Department may grant a request for reconsideration if:
                (a) The State submitted to the Department all information required under § 95.611, satisfactorily responded to all concerns raised by the Department and received a final letter of approval from the Department; or,
                (b) The State requests reconsideration of a denial by submitting in a record information that addresses the following requirements:
                (1) The acquisition must be reasonable, useful and necessary;
                (2) The State's failure to obtain prior approval, which is reflected in a record, must have been inadvertent (i.e., the State did not knowingly avoid the prior approval requirements);
                (3) The request was not previously denied by HHS;
                (4) The acquisition must otherwise meet all other applicable Federal and State requirements, and would have been approved under part 95, subpart F had the State requested in a record, prior approval;
                (5) The State must not have a record of recurrent failures, under any of the programs covered by the prior approval regulations, to comply with the requirement to obtain prior approval in a record, of its automatic data processing acquisitions (i.e., submissions under these procedures, from States that have failed in the past to acquire prior approval which is reflected in a record, in accordance with part 95, subpart F, may be denied);
                [51 FR 3339, Jan. 27, 1986, as amended at 55 FR 4378, Feb. 7, 1990; 75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
              
                § 95.624
                Consideration for FFP in emergency situations.
                For ADP equipment and services acquired by a State after December 1, 1985 to meet emergency situations, which preclude the State from following the requirements of § 95.611, the Department will consider providing FFP upon receipt of a request from the State which is reflected in a record. In order for the Department to consider providing FFP in emergency situations, the following conditions must be met:
                (a) The State must submit a request to the Department, prior to the acquisition of any ADP equipment or services. The request must be reflected in a record, and include:
                (1) A brief description of the ADP equipment and/or services to be acquired and an estimate of their costs;
                (2) A brief description of the circumstances which result in the State's need to proceed prior to obtaining approval from the Department; and
                (3) A description of the harm which will be caused if the State does not acquire immediately the ADP equipment and services.
                (b) Upon receipt of the information, the Department will within 14 days take one of the following actions:
                (1) Inform the State in writing that the request has been disapproved and the reason for disapproval; or
                (2) Inform the State in a communication reflected in a record, that the Department recognizes that an emergency exists and that within 90 days from the date of the State's initial request, the State must submit a formal request for approval which includes the information specified at § 95.611 in order for the ADP equipment or services acquisition to be considered for the Department's approval.

                (c) If the Department approves the request submitted under paragraph (b) of this section, FFP will be available from the date the State acquires the ADP equipment and services.
                [51 FR 3339, Jan. 27, 1986, as amended at 55 FR 4378, Feb. 7, 1990; 75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
              
                § 95.625
                Increased FFP for certain ADP systems.
                (a) General. FFP is available at enhanced matching rates for the development of individual or integrated systems and the associated computer equipment that support the administration of state plans for titles IV-D and/or XIX provided the systems meet the specifically applicable provisions referenced in paragraph (b) of the section.
                (b) Specific reference to other regulations. The applicable regulations for the Title IV-D program are contained in 45 CFR part 307. The applicable regulations for the Title IV-E program are contained in 45 CFR 1355.55. The applicable regulations for the title IV-D program are contained in 45 CFR part 307. The applicable regulations for the title XIX program are contained in 42 CFR part 433, subpart C.
                [59 FR 30708, June 15, 1994, as amended at 81 FR 35479, June 2, 2016]
              
              
                § 95.626
                Independent Verification and Validation.
                (a) An assessment for independent verification and validation (IV&V) analysis of a State's system development effort may be required in the case of APD projects that meet any of the following criteria:
                (1) Are at risk of missing statutory or regulatory deadlines for automation that is intended to meet program requirements;
                (2) Are at risk of failing to meet a critical milestone;
                (3) Indicate the need for a new project or total system redesign;
                (4) Are developing systems under waivers pursuant to sections 452(d)(3) or 627 of the Social Security Act;
                (5) Are at risk of failure, major delay, or cost overrun in their systems development efforts;
                (6) Fail to timely and completely submit APD updates or other required systems documentation.
                (7) State's procurement policies put the project at risk, including a pattern of failing to pursue competition to the maximum extent feasible.
                (8) State's failure to adequately involve the State program offices in the development and implementation of the project.
                (b) Independent Verification and Validation efforts must be conducted by an entity that is independent from the State (unless the State receives an exception from the Department) and the entity selected must:
                (1) Develop a project workplan. The plan must be provided directly to the Department at the same time it is given to the State.
                (2) Review and make recommendations on both the management of the project, both State and vendor, and the technical aspects of the project. The IV&V provider must give the results of its analysis directly to the federal agencies that required the IV&V at the same time it reports to the State.
                (3) Consult with all stakeholders and assess the user involvement and buy-in regarding system functionality and the system's ability to support program business needs.
                (4) Conduct an analysis of past project performance sufficient to identify and make recommendations for improvement.
                (5) Provide risk management assessment and capacity planning services.
                (6) Develop performance metrics which allow tracking project completion against milestones set by the State.
                (c) The acquisition document and contract for selecting the IV&V provider (or similar documents if IV&V services are provided by other State agencies) must include requirements regarding the experience and skills of the key personnel proposed for the IV&V analysis. The contract (or similar document if the IV&V services are provided by other State agencies) must specify by name the key personnel who actually will work on the project. The acquisition documents and contract for required IV&V services must be submitted to the Department for prior written approval.
                [75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
              
                
                § 95.627
                Waivers.
                (a) Application for a waiver. A State may apply for a waiver of any requirement in subpart F by presenting an alternative approach. Waiver requests must be submitted and approved as part of the State's APD or APD Update.
                (b) Waiver approvals. The Secretary, or his or her designee, may grant a State a waiver if the State demonstrates that it has an alternative approach to a requirement in this chapter that will safeguard the State and Federal Governments' interest and that enables the State to be in substantial compliance with the other requirements of this chapter.
                (c) Contents of waiver request. The State's request for approval of an alternative approach or waiver of a requirement in this chapter must demonstrate why meeting the condition is unnecessary, diminishes the State's ability to meet program requirements, or that the alternative approach leads to a more efficient, economical, and effective administration of the programs for which federal financial participation is provided, benefiting both the State and Federal Governments.
                (d) Review of waiver requests. The Secretary, or his or her designee, will review waiver requests to assure that all necessary information is provided, that all processes provide for effective economical and effective program operation, and that the conditions for waiver in this section are met.
                (e) Agency's response to a waiver request. When a waiver is approved by an agency, it becomes part of the State's approved APD and is applicable to the approving agency. A waiver is subject to the APD suspension provisions in § 95.611(c)(3). When a waiver is disapproved, the entire APD will be disapproved. The APD disapproval is a final administrative decision and is not subject to administrative appeal.
                [75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
            
            
              Federal Financial Participation in Costs of ADP Acquisitions
              
                § 95.631
                Cost identification for purpose of FFP claims.
                The conditions of this subpart apply notwithstanding the existence of an approved cost allocation plan. State agencies shall assign and claim the costs incurred under an approved APD in accordance with the following criteria:
                (a) Development costs. (1) Using its normal departmental accounting system, the State agency shall specifically identify what items of costs constitute development costs, assign these costs to specific project cost centers, and distribute these costs to funding sources based on the specific identification, assignment and distribution outlined in the approved APD; (2) the methods for distributing costs set forth in the APD should provide for assigning identifiable costs, to the extent practicable, directly to program/functions. The State agency shall amend the cost allocation plan required by subpart E of this part to include the approved APD methodology for the identification, assignment and distribution of the development costs.
                (b) Operational costs. Costs incurred for the operation of an ADP system shall be identified and assigned by the State agency to funding sources in accordance with the approved cost allocation plan required by Subpart E of this part.
                (c) Service agreement costs. States that operate a central data processing facility shall use their approved central service cost allocation plan required by OMB Circular A-87 to identify and assign costs incurred under service agreements with the State agency. The State agency will then distribute these costs to funding sources in accordance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
              
              
                § 95.633
                Nondiscrimination requirements.
                State agencies that acquire ADP equipment and services are subject to the nondiscrimination requirements in parts 80, 84, and 90.
                [45 FR 10794, Feb. 19, 1980]
              
              
                
                § 95.635
                Disallowance of Federal financial participation for automated systems that fail to comply substantially with requirements.
                (a) Federal financial participation at the applicable matching rate is available for automated data processing system expenditures that meet the requirements specified under the approved APD including the approved cost allocation plan.
                (b) All or part of any costs for system projects that have a major failure to comply with an APD approved under applicable regulation at § 95.611, or for the Title IV-D program contained in part 307, the applicable regulations for the Title IV-E and Title IV-B programs contained in Chapter 13, subchapter G, § 1355.55, or the applicable regulations for the Title XIX program contained in 42 CFR chapter 4 subchapter C, part 433, are subject to disallowance by the Department.
                [75 FR 66340, Oct. 28, 2010]
              
            
            
              Exemptions
              
                § 95.641
                Applicability of rules for charging equipment in subpart G of this part.
                ADP equipment, as well as other equipment acquired under public assistance programs, is subject to subpart G of this part. Among other things, subpart G provides that a State may charge only depreciation or use allowances for equipment with unit acquisition cost of over $25,000. However, for ADP equipment HHS will consider requests for waivers of that restriction. If the acquisition of the equipment is part of an APD that is subject to the prior approval requirements of subpart F, the State may submit the request for a waiver as part of the APD.
              
            
          
          
            Subpart G—Equipment Acquired Under Public Assistance Programs
            
              Source:
              47 FR 41576, Sept. 21, 1982, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 95.701
              Purpose and scope of subpart.
              (a) This subpart prescribes requirements concerning the computation of claims for Federal financial participation in the cost of equipment under public assistance programs. This subpart also prescribes requirements for the management and disposition of equipment whose costs are claimed for Federal financial participation under these programs.
              (b) This subpart applies to equipment purchased by State agencies (as defined in § 95.703) and to equipment purchased under service agreements with other State agencies and under cost-type contracts.
            
            
              § 95.703
              Definitions.
              As used in this subpart:
              
                Acquisition cost of an item of purchased equipment means the net invoice price of the equipment, including the cost of modifications, attachments, accessories, or auxiliary apparatus necessary to make the equipment usable for the purpose for which it was acquired. Other charges such as the cost of installation, transportation, taxes, duty or protective intransit insurance shall be included in or excluded from the unit acquisition cost in accordance with the regular accounting practices of the organization purchasing the equipment. If the item is acquired by trading in another item and paying an additional amount, acquisition cost means the amount received for trade-in plus the additional outlay.
              
                Equipment means an article of tangible personal property that has a useful life of more than two years and an acquisition cost of $500 or more. Any recipient may use its own definition of equipment, if its definition would at least include all items of equipment as defined here.
              
                Public Assistance Programs means programs authorized by titles I, IV-A, IV-B, IV-C, IV-D, IV-E, X, XIV, XVI (AABD), XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act, and programs authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act as amended by the Refugee Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-212).
              
                State means the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands and Guam.
              
                State Agency means the State agency administering a public assistance program(s). This term includes local government public assistance agencies which administer public assistance programs under a State supervised system and the State agencies which supervise the local agencies.
              [47 FR 41576, Sept. 21, 1982, as amended at 65 FR 33633, May 24, 2000]
            
            
              § 95.705
              Equipment costs—Federal financial participation.
              (a) General rule. In computing claims for Federal financial participation, equipment having a unit acquisition cost of $25,000 or less may be claimed in the period acquired or depreciated, at the option of the State agency. Equipment having a unit acquisition cost of more than $25,000 shall be depreciated. For purposes of this section, the term depreciate also includes use allowances computed in accordance with the cost principles prescribed in part 75.
              (b) Exceptions. (1) Equipment purchased under service agreements with other State agencies and under cost-type contracts shall be depreciated. However, equipment having a unit acquisition cost of $25,000 or less may be claimed in the period acquired if (a) the State agency approved the specific purchase and the claiming of the cost of the item, and (b) the contract or service agreement requires that the equipment or its residual value be transferred to the State agency when the equipment is no longer needed to carry out the work under the contract or service agreement.
              (2) Reimbursement for ADP equipment having an acquisition cost in excess of $25,000 and subject to subpart F of this part must be depreciated over its useful life unless otherwise specifically provided for by the Department. ADP equipment not subject to subpart F is subject to the requirements of this subpart.
              [47 FR 41576, Sept. 21, 1982, as amended at 75 FR 66341, Oct. 28, 2010; 81 FR 3020, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
            
              § 95.707
              Equipment management and disposition.
              (a) Once equipment, whose costs are claimed for Federal financial participation (i.e., equipment that is capitalized and depreciated or is claimed in the period acquired), has reached the end of its useful life (as defined in an approved APD), the equipment shall be subject to the property disposal rules in § 75.320.
              (b) The State agency is responsible for adequately managing the equipment, maintaining records on the equipment, and taking periodic physical inventories. Physical inventories may be made on the basis of statistical sampling. The following requirements apply to the disposition of this equipment:
              (1) If the cost of the equipment was claimed in the period acquired and the equipment is later sold, the proceeds of the sale shall be credited to current expenditures in approximate proportion to the distribution of the equipment's cost.
              (2) If the cost of the equipment was claimed in the period acquired and the equipment is later transferred to an activity which is not involved in the performance of programs currently or previously funded by the Federal Government, an amount equal to the fair market value of the equipment on the date of the transfer shall be credited to current expenditures in approximate proportion to the distribution of the equipment's costs.
              (3) If the cost of the equipment was claimed in the period acquired and the equipment is later traded in on other equipment claims for Federal financial participation in the costs of replacement equipment shall be limited to the additional outlay.
              (4) If the equipment was depreciated, any gain or loss on the disposition of the equipment shall be treated as a decrease or an increase to the depreciation expense of the period in which the disposition takes place. This provision does not apply to equipment whose costs were claimed for Federal financial participation through use allowances.
              [47 FR 41576, Sept. 21, 1982, as amended at 75 FR 66341, Oct. 28, 2010; 81 FR 3020, Jan. 20, 2016]
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 96
          PART 96—BLOCK GRANTS
          
            
              Subpart A—Introduction
              Sec.
              96.1
              Scope.
              96.2
              Definitions.
              96.3
              Information collection approval numbers.
            
            
              
              Subpart B—General Procedures
              96.10
              Prerequisites to obtain block grant funds.
              96.11
              Basis of award to the States.
              96.12
              Grant payment.
              96.13
              Reallotments.
              96.14
              Time period for obligation and expenditure of grant funds.
              96.15
              Waivers.
              96.16
              Applicability of title XVII of the Reconciliation Act (31 U.S.C. 7301-7305).
              96.17
              Annual reporting requirements.
              96.18
              Participation by faith-based organizations.
            
            
              Subpart C—Financial Management
              96.30
              Fiscal and administrative requirements.
              96.31
              Audits.
              96.32
              Financial settlement.
              96.33
              Referral of cases to the Inspector General.
            
            
              Subpart D—Direct Funding of Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations
              96.40
              Scope.
              96.41
              General determination.
              96.42
              General procedures and requirements.
              96.43
              Procedures during FY 1982.
              96.44
              Community services.
              96.45
              Preventive health and health services.
              96.46
              Substance abuse prevention and treatment services.
              96.47
              Primary care.
              96.48
              Low-income home energy assistance.
              96.49
              Due date for receipt of all information required for completion of trival applications for the low-income home energy assistance block grants.
            
            
              Subpart E—Enforcement
              96.50
              Complaints.
              96.51
              Hearings.
              96.52
              Appeals.
              96.53
              Length of withholding.
            
            
              Subpart F—Hearing Procedure
              96.60
              Scope.
              96.61
              Initiation of hearing.
              96.62
              Presiding officer.
              96.63
              Communications to presiding officer.
              96.64
              Intervention.
              96.65
              Discovery.
              96.66
              Hearing procedure.
              96.67
              Right to counsel.
              96.68
              Administrative record of a hearing.
            
            
              Subpart G—Social Services Block Grants
              96.70
              Scope.
              96.71
              Definitions.
              96.72
              Transferability of funds.
              96.73
              Sterilization.
              96.74
              Annual reporting requirements.
            
            
              Subpart H—Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
              96.80
              Scope.
              96.81
              Carryover and reallotment.
              96.82
              Required report on households assisted.
              96.83
              Increase in maximum amount that may be used for weatherization and other energy-related home repair.
              96.84
              Miscellaneous.
              96.85
              Income eligibility.
              96.86
              Exemption from requirement for additional outreach and intake services.
              96.87
              Leveraging incentive program.
              96.88
              Administrative costs.
              96.89
              Exemptions from standards for providing energy crisis intervention assistance.
            
            
              Subpart I—Community Services Block Grants
              96.90
              Scope.
              96.91
              Audit requirement.
              96.92
              Termination of funding.
            
            
              Subpart J—Primary Care Block Grants
              96.100
              Scope.
              96.101
              Review of a State decision to discontinue funding of a community health center.
              96.102
              Carryover of unobligated funds.
            
            
              Subpart K—Transition Provisions
              96.110
              Scope.
              96.111
              Continuation of pre-existing regulations.
              96.112
              Community services block grant.
            
            
              Subpart L—Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
              96.120
              Scope.
              96.121
              Definitions.
              96.122
              Application content and procedures.
              96.123
              Assurances.
              96.124
              Certain allocations.
              96.125
              Primary prevention.
              96.126
              Capacity of treatment for intravenous substance abusers.
              96.127
              Requirements regarding tuberculosis.
              96.128
              Requirements regarding human immunodeficiency virus.
              96.129
              Revolving funds for establishment of homes in which recovering substance abusers may reside.
              96.130
              State law regarding sale of tobacco products to individuals under age of 18.
              96.131
              Treatment services for pregnant women.
              96.132
              Additional agreements.
              96.133

              Submission to Secretary of Statewide assessment of needs.
              
              96.134
              Maintenance of effort regarding State expenditures.
              96.135
              Restrictions on expenditure of grant.
              96.136
              Independent peer review.
              96.137
              Payment schedule.
              Appendix A to Part 96—Uniform Definitions of Services
              Appendix B to Part 96—SSBG Reporting Form and Instructions
            
          
          
            Authority:
            31 U.S.C. 1243 note, 7501-7507; 42 U.S.C. 300w et seq., § 300x et seq., § 300y et seq., § 701 et seq., § 8621 et seq., § 9901 et seq., § 1397 et seq., 5 U.S.C. § 301.
          
          
            Source:
            47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—Introduction
            
              § 96.1
              Scope.
              This part applies to the following block grant programs:
              (a) Community services (Pub. L. 97-35, sections 671-683) (42 U.S.C. 9901-9912).
              (b) Preventive health and health services (Pub. L. 97-35, section 901) (42 U.S.C. 300w-300w-8).
              (c) Community mental health services (Public Health Service Act, sections 1911-1920 and sections 1941-1954) (42 U.S.C. 300x-1-300x-9 and 300x-51-300x-64).
              (d) Substance abuse prevention and treatment (Public Health Service Act, sections 1921-1935 and sections 1941-1954) (42 U.S.C. 300x-21-300x-35 and 300x-51-300x-64).
              (e) Maternal and child health services (Social Security Act, Title V) (42 U.S.C. 701-709).
              (f) Social services, empowerment zones and enterprise communities (Pub. L. 97-35, sections 2351-55; Pub. L. 103-66, section 1371) (42 U.S.C. 1397-1397f).
              (g) Low-income home energy assistance (Pub. L. 97-35, sections 2601-11) (42 U.S.C. 8621-8629).
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 58 FR 60128, Nov. 15, 1993; 64 FR 55856, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.2
              Definitions.
              (a) Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services or his designee.
              (b) Department means the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (c) Reconciliation Act means the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (Pub. L. 97-35).
              (d) State includes the fifty States, the District of Columbia, and as appropriate with respect to each block grant, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and for purposes of the block grants administered by agencies of the Public Health Service, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 37965, Oct. 13, 1987; 64 FR 55856, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.3
              Information collection approval numbers.

              Information collection requirements pertaining to the block grant programs have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under the provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act, Pub. L. 96-511 (44 U.S.C. Chapter 35) and have been assigned OMB numbers:
              
              
                0930-0080 Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental Health Services Block Grant Reporting Requirements
                0920-0106 Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant Reporting Requirements
                0915-0023 Primary Care Block Grant Reporting Requirements
                0915-0024 Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant Reporting Requirements
                0980-0125 Social Services Block Grant Reporting Requirements
                0980-0126 Community Services Block Grant Reporting Requirements
                0960-0261 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Block Grant Reporting Requirements.
              
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982; 47 FR 43062, Sept. 30, 1982]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—General Procedures
            
              § 96.10
              Prerequisites to obtain block grant funds.

              (a) Except where prescribed elsewhere in this rule or in authorizing legislation, no particular form is required for a State's application or the related submission required by the statute. For the maternal and child health block grant, the application shall be in the form specified by the Secretary, as provided by section 505(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 705(a)).
              (b) The certifications required by the community services, primary care, preventive health and health services, alcohol and drug abuse and mental health services, and low-income home energy assistance block grant statutes to be made by the State's chief executive officer must be made by that individual personally, or by an individual authorized to make such certifications on behalf of the chief executive officer.
              (c) Effective beginning in fiscal year 2001, submission dates for applications under the social service and low-income home energy assistance block grant programs are:
              (1) for the social services block grant, States and territories which operate on a Federal fiscal year basis, and make requests for funding from the Department, must insure that their applications (pre-expenditure reports) for funding are submitted by September 1 of the preceding fiscal year unless the Department agrees to a later date. States and territories which operate their social services block grant on a July 1-June 30 basis, must insure that their applications are submitted by June 1 of the preceding funding period unless the Department agrees to a later date.
              (2) for the low-income home energy assistance program, States and territories which make requests for funding from the Department must insure that their applications for a fiscal year are submitted by September 1 of the preceding fiscal year unless the Department agrees to a later date.
              (d) Effective beginning in fiscal year 2001, for the low-income home energy assistance program, States and territories which make requests for funding from the Department must insure that all information necessary to complete their applications is received by December 15 of the fiscal year for which they are requesting funds unless the Department agrees to a later date.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 64 FR 55856, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.11
              Basis of award to the States.
              The Secretary will award the block grant funds allotted to the State in accordance with the apportionment of funds from the Office of Management and Budget. Such awards will reflect amounts reserved for Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations and, in FY 1982, any amounts awarded by the Department under transition authorities. The grant award constitutes the authority to carry out the program and to draw and expend funds.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982; 47 FR 43062, Sept. 30, 1982]
            
            
              § 96.12
              Grant payment.
              The Secretary will make payments at such times and in such amounts to each State from its awards in advance or by way of reimbursement in accordance with section 203 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (42 U.S.C. 4213) and Treasury Circular No. 1075 (31 CFR part 205). When matching funds are involved, the Secretary shall take into account the ratio that such payment bears to such State's total expenditures under its awards.
            
            
              § 96.13
              Reallotments.
              The Secretary will re-allot to eligible States those funds available as of September 1 of each fiscal year under the reallotment provisions pertaining to the alcohol and drug abuse and mental health services, maternal and child health services, and preventive health and health services block grants. The reallotment procedure for the low-income home energy assistance block grant is specified in section 2607 of the Reconciliation Act (42 U.S.C. 8626) and § 96.81 of this part.
            
            
              § 96.14
              Time period for obligation and expenditure of grant funds.
              (a) Obligations. Amounts unobligated by the State at the end of the fiscal year in which they were first allotted shall remain available for obligation during the succeeding fiscal year for all block grants except:
              (1) Primary care. Amounts are available only if the Secretary determines that the State acted in accordance with section 1926(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300y-5(a)(1)) and there is good cause for funds remaining unobligated.
              
              (2) Low-income home energy assistance. Regular LIHEAP block grant funds authorized under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) are available only in accordance with section 2607(b)(2)(B) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626(b)(2)(B)), as follows. From allotments for fiscal year 1982 through fiscal year 1984, a maximum of 25 percent may be held available for the next fiscal year. From allotments for fiscal year 1985 through fiscal year 1990, a maximum of 15 percent of the amount payable to a grantee and not transferred to another block grant according to section 2604(f) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8623(f)) may be held available for the next fiscal year. From allotments for fiscal year 1991 through fiscal year 1993, a maximum of 10 percent of the amount payable to a grantee and not transferred to another block grant according to section 2604(f) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8623(f)) may be held available for the next fiscal year. Beginning with allotments for fiscal year 1994, a maximum of 10 percent of the amount payable to a grantee may be held available for the next fiscal year. No funds may be obligated after the end of the fiscal year following the fiscal year for which they were allotted.
              (b) Expenditure. No limitations exist on the time for expenditure of block grant funds, except those imposed by statute with respect to the community services, maternal and child health services, and social services block grants.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982; 47 FR 43062, Sept. 30, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 37965, Oct. 13, 1987; 60 FR 21357, May 1, 1995]
            
            
              § 96.15
              Waivers.
              Applications for waivers that are permitted by statute for the block grants should be submitted to the Director, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the case of the preventive health and health services block grant; to the Administrator, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration in the case of the community mental health services block grant and the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant; to the Director, Maternal and Child Health Bureau in the case of the maternal and child health services block grant; and to the Director, Office of Community Services in the case of the community services block grant, the low-income home energy assistance program and the social services block grant. Beginning with fiscal year 1986, the Secretary's authority to waive the provisions of section 2605(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)) under the low-income home energy assistance program is repealed.
              [64 FR 55856, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.16
              Applicability of title XVII of the Reconciliation Act (31 U.S.C. 7301-7305).
              This section interprets the applicability of the general provisions governing block grants set forth in title XVII of the Reconciliation Act (31 U.S.C. 7301-7305):
              (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section or unless inconsistent with provisions in the individual block grant statutes, 31 U.S.C. 7301-7305 apply to the community services, preventive health and health services, and alcohol and drug abuse and mental health services block grants.
              (b) The requirement in 31 U.S.C. 7303(b) relating to public hearings does not apply to any of the block grants governed by this part. Instead, the provisions in the individual block grant statutes apply.
              (c) The maternal and child health services block grant is not subject to any requirements of 31 U.S.C. 7301-7305.
              (d) The social services and low-income home energy assistance programs are subject only to 31 U.S.C. 7304.

              (e) The audit provisions of 31 U.S.C. 7305 have, in most cases, been overridden by the Single Audit Act. Pub. L. 98-502, 31 U.S.C. 75, et seq., and do not apply to the block grants. Pursuant to § 96.31(b)(2), certain entities may, however, elect to conduct audits under the block grant audit provisions. For entities making this election, the provisions of 31 U.S.C. 7305 apply to the community services block grant.
              (f) The applicability of 31 U.S.C. 7303(a) relating to the contents of a report on proposed uses of funds is specified in § 96.10.
              [52 FR 37966, Oct. 13, 1987]
            
            
              
              § 96.17
              Annual reporting requirements.
              (a) Except for the low-income home energy assistance program activity reports, a state must make public and submit to the Department each annual report required by statute:
              (1) Within six months of the end of the period covered by the report; or
              (2) At the time the state submits its application for funding for the federal or state fiscal year, as appropriate, which begins subsequent to the expiration of that six-month period.

              (b) These reports are required annually for preventive health and health services (42 U.S.C. 300w-5(a)(1)), community mental health services (42 U.S.C. 300x et. seq.), the prevention and treatment of substance abuse block grant (42 U.S.C. 300x-21 et. seq.), maternal and child health services (42 U.S.C. 706(a)(1)), and the social services block grant (42 U.S.C. 1397e(a)). See § 96.82 for requirements governing the submission of activity reports for the low-income home energy assistance program.
              [58 FR 60128, Nov. 15, 1993]
            
            
              § 96.18
              Participation by faith-based organizations.
              The funds provided under this part shall be administered in compliance with the standards set forth in part 87 (Equal Treatment for Faith-based Organizations) of this chapter.
              [69 FR 42592, July 16, 2004]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Financial Management
            
              § 96.30
              Fiscal and administrative requirements.
              (a) Fiscal control and accounting procedures. Except where otherwise required by Federal law or regulation, a State shall obligate and expend block grant funds in accordance with the laws and procedures applicable to the obligation and expenditure of its own funds. Fiscal control and accounting procedures must be sufficient to (a) permit preparation of reports required by the statute authorizing the block grant and (b) permit the tracing of funds to a level of expenditure adequate to establish that such funds have not been used in violation of the restrictions and prohibitions of the statute authorizing the block grant.
              (b) Financial summary of obligation and expenditure of block grant funds—(1) Block grants containing time limits on both the obligation and the expenditure of funds. After the close of each statutory period for the obligation of block grant funds and after the close of each statutory period for the expenditure of block grant funds, each grantee shall report to the Department:
              (i) Total funds obligated and total funds expended by the grantee during the applicable statutory periods; and
              (ii) The date of the last obligation and the date of the last expenditure.
              (2) Block grants containing time limits only on obligation of funds. After the close of each statutory period for the obligation of block grant funds, each grantee shall report to the Department:
              (i) Total funds obligated by the grantee during the applicable statutory period; and
              (ii) The date of the last obligation.
              (3) Block grants containing time limits only on expenditure of funds. After the close of each statutory period for the expenditure of block grant funds, each grantee shall report to the Department:
              (i) Total funds expended by the grantee during the statutory period; and
              (ii) The date of the last expenditure.
              (4) Submission of information. Grantees shall submit the information required by paragraph (b)(1), (2), and (3) of this section on OMB Standard Form 269A, Financial Status Report (short form). Grantees are to provide the requested information within 90 days of the close of the applicable statutory grant periods.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 37966, Oct. 13, 1987; 53 FR 11656, Apr. 8, 1988; 64 FR 55857, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.31
              Audits.
              (a) Basic rule. Grantees and subgrantees are responsible for obtaining audits in accordance with the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507) and revised OMB Circular A-133, “Audits of State, Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.” The audits shall be made by an independent auditor in accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards covering financial audits.
              (b) Subgrantees. State or local governments, as those terms are defined for purposes of the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996, that provide Federal awards to a subgrantee, expending $300,000 or more (or other amount as specified by OMB) in Federal awards in a fiscal year, shall:
              (1) Determine whether subgrantees have met the audit requirements of the Act. Commercial contractors (private for-profit and private and governmental organizations) providing goods and services to State and local governments are not required to have a single audit performed. State and local governments should use their own procedures to ensure that the contractor has complied with laws and regulations affecting the expenditure of Federal funds;
              (2) Determine whether the subgrantee spent Federal assistance funds provided in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. This may be accomplished by reviewing an audit of the subgrantee made in accordance with the Act or through other means (e.g., program reviews) if the subgrantee has not had such an audit;
              (3) Ensure that appropriate corrective action is taken within six months after receipt of the audit report in instances of noncompliance with Federal laws and regulations;
              (4) Consider whether subgrantee audits necessitate adjustment of the grantee's own records; and
              (5) Require each subgrantee to permit independent auditors to have access to the records and financial statements.
              [62 FR 45963, Aug. 29, 1997]
            
            
              § 96.32
              Financial settlement.
              The State must repay to the Department amounts found after audit resolution to have been expended improperly. In the event that repayment is not made voluntarily, the Department will undertake recovery.
              [52 FR 37966, Oct. 13, 1987]
            
            
              § 96.33
              Referral of cases to the Inspector General.
              State or tribal officials who have information indicating the commission or potential commission of fraud or other offenses against the United States involving block grant funds should promptly provide the information to the appropriate Regional Office of Investigations of the Department's Office of the Inspector General.
              [52 FR 37966, Oct. 13, 1987]
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Direct Funding of Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations
            
              § 96.40
              Scope.
              This subpart applies to the community services, alcohol and drug abuse and mental health services, preventive health and health services, primary care, and low-income home energy assistance block grants.
            
            
              § 96.41
              General determination.
              (a) The Department has determined that, with the exception of the circumstances addressed in paragraph (c) of this section, Indian tribes and tribal organizations would be better served by means of grants provided directly by the Department to such tribes and organizations out of their State's allotment of block grant funds than if the State were awarded its entire allotment. Accordingly, with the exception of situations described in paragraph (c) of this section, the Department will, upon request of an eligible Indian tribe or tribal organization and where provided for by statute, reserve a portion of the allotment of the State(s) in which the tribe is located, and, upon receipt of a complete application and related submission meeting statutory and regulatory requirements, grant it directly to the tribe or organization.
              (b) An Indian tribe or tribal organization may request direct funding under a block grant program included in this subpart regardless of whether the State in which it is located is receiving funds under the block grant program.

              (c) The Department has determined that Indian tribal members eligible for the funds or services provided through the block grants would be better served by the State(s) in which the tribe is located rather than by the tribe, where:
              (1) The tribe has not used its block grant allotment substantially in accordance with the provisions of the relevant statute(s); and
              (2) Following the procedures of 45 CFR 96.51, the Department has withheld tribal funds because of those deficiencies; and
              (3) The tribe has not provided sufficient evidence that it has removed or corrected the reason(s) for withholding. In these cases, block grant funds reserved or set aside for a direct grant to the Indian tribe will be awarded to the State(s), and the State(s) will provide block grant services to the service population of the tribe. Before awarding these funds to the State(s), the Department will allow as much time as it determines to be reasonable for the tribe to correct the conditions that led to withholding, consistent with provision of timely and meaningful services to the tribe's service population during the fiscal year. If a State(s) is awarded funds under this paragraph, the State(s) will receive all remaining funds set aside for the tribe for the Federal fiscal year for which the award is made. Where the Department has withheld funds from a tribe and the tribe has not taken satisfactory corrective action by the first day of the following fiscal year, all of the funds to serve the tribe's service population for the following fiscal year will be awarded to the State(s). The State(s) is responsible for providing services to the service population of the tribe in these cases. This paragraph also applies when funds are withheld from a tribal organization.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 64 FR 55857, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.42
              General procedures and requirements.
              (a) An Indian tribe or tribal organization applying for or receiving direct funding from the Secretary under a block grant program shall be subject to all statutory and regulatory requirements applicable to a State applying for or receiving block grant funds to the extent that such requirements are relevant to an Indian tribe or tribal organization except where otherwise provided by statute or in this part.
              (b) A tribal organization representing more than one Indian tribe will be eligible to receive block grant funds on behalf of a particular tribe only if the tribe has by resolution authorized the organization's action.
              (c) If an Indian tribe or tribal organization whose service population resides in more than one State applies for block grant funds that, by statute, are apportioned on the basis of population, the allotment awarded to the tribe or organization shall be taken from the allotments of the various States in which the service population resides in proportion to the number of eligible members or households to be served in each State. If block grant funds are required to be apportioned on the basis of grants during a base year, the allotment to the Indian tribe or tribal organization shall be taken from the allotment of the State whose base year grants included the relevant grants to the tribe or organization.
              (d) The audit required under the block grant programs shall be conducted by an entity that is independent of the Indian tribe or tribal organization receiving grant funds from the Secretary.
              (e) Beginning with fiscal year 1983, any request by an Indian tribe or tribal organization for direct funding by the Secretary must be submitted to the Secretary, together with the required application and related materials, by September 1 preceding the Federal fiscal year for which funds are sought. A separate application is required for each block grant. After the September 1 deadline, tribal applications will be accepted only with the concurrence of the State (or States) in which the tribe or tribal organization is located.

              (f) A State receiving block grant funds is not required to use those funds to provide tangible benefits (e.g., cash or goods) to Indians who are within the service population of an Indian tribe or tribal organization that received direct funding from the Department under the same block grant program for the same fiscal year. A State, however, may not deny Indians access to intangible services funded by block grant programs (e.g., treatment at a community health center) even if the Indians are members of a tribe receiving direct funding for a similar service. A tribe receiving direct block grant funding is not required to use those funds to provide tangible benefits to non-Indians living within the tribe's service area unless the tribe and the State(s) in which the tribe is located agree in writing that the tribe will do so.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 37966, Oct. 13, 1987; 64 FR 55857, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.43
              Procedures during FY 1982.
              (a) This section applies to the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1981.
              (b) A request for direct funding must be received by the Secretary before the Secretary has awarded all of the allotment to the State involved. The application and related submission may be submitted later but must be submitted within 75 days after the beginning of the quarter in which the State qualified for block grant funds, (or by August 20, 1982 in the case of an Indian tribe located in a State that has not qualified for block grant funds in FY 1982) except that the application and related submission for the low-income home energy assistance program must be submitted by December 15, 1981. A separate request and application are required for each block grant.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982; 47 FR 43062, Sept. 30, 1982]
            
            
              § 96.44
              Community services.
              (a) This section applies to direct funding of Indian tribes and tribal organizations under the community services block grant.
              (b) The terms Indian tribe and tribal organization as used in the Reconciliation Act have the same meaning given such terms in section 4(b) and 4(c) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b). The terms also include organized groups of Indians that the State in which they reside has determined are Indian tribes. An organized group of Indians is eligible for direct funding based on State recognition if the State has expressly determined that the group is an Indian tribe. In addition, the statement of the State's chief executive officer verifying that a tribe is recognized by that State will also be sufficient to verify State recognition for the purpose of direct funding.

              (c) For purposes of section 674(c)(2) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 9903(c)(2)) an eligible Indian means a member of an Indian tribe whose income is at or below the poverty line defined in section 673(2) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)). An eligible individual under section 674(c)(2) of the Reconciliation Act (42 U.S.C. 9903(c)(2)) means a resident of the State whose income is at or below the poverty line.
              (d) An Indian tribe or tribal organization will meet the requirements of section 675(c)(1) (42 U.S.C. 9904(c)(1)) if it certifies that it agrees to use the funds to provide at least one of the services or activities listed in that section.
              (e) An Indian tribe or tribal organization is not required to comply with section 675(b) (42 U.S.C. 9904(b)) or to provide the certifications required by the following other provisions of the Reconciliation Act.
              (1) Section 675(c)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 9904(c)(2)(A));
              (2) Section 675(c)(3) (42 U.S.C. 9904(c)(3)); and
              (3) Section 675(c)(4) (42 U.S.C. 9904(c)(4)).
              (4) Section 675(c)(11) (42 U.S.C. 9904(c)(11)).
              (f) In each fiscal year, Indian tribes and tribal organizations may expend for administrative expenses—comparable to the administrative expenses incurred by State at the State level—an amount not to exceed the greater of the amounts determined by:
              (1) Multiplying their allotment under section 674 of the Reconciliation Act (42 U.S.C. 9903) by five percent; or
              (2) Multiplying the allotment by the percentage represented by the ratio of $55,000 to the smallest State allotment (excluding territorial allotments) for that fiscal year.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 37967, Oct. 13, 1987]
            
            
              § 96.45
              Preventive health and health services.

              (a) This section applies to direct funding of Indian tribes and tribal organizations under the preventive health and health services block grant.
              
              (b) For the purposes of determining eligible applicants under section 1902(d) of the Public Health Service Act, a grantee that received a grant directly from the Secretary in FY 1981 under any of the programs replaced by the preventive health and health services block grant that was specifically targeted toward serving a particular Indian tribe or tribal organization will be considered eligible if the grantee is an Indian tribe or tribal organization at the time it requests funds under this part. Grantees that received funds under formula or Statewide grants, and subgrantees that received funds from any program replaced by the preventive health and health services block grant, are not eligible.
            
            
              § 96.46
              Substance abuse prevention and treatment services.
              (a) This section applies to direct funding of Indian tribes and tribal organizations under the substance abuse prevention and treatment Block Grant.
              (b) For the purpose of determining eligible applicants under section 1933(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x-33(d)) an Indian tribe or tribal organization (as defined in subsections (b) and (c) of section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act) that received a direct grant under subpart I of part B of title XIX of the PHS Act (as such existed prior to October 1, 1992) in fiscal year 1991 will be considered eligible for a grant under subpart 2 of part B of title XIX of the PHS Act.
              (c) For purposes of the substance abuse prevention and treatment Block Grant, an Indian tribe or tribal organization is not required to comply with the following statutory provisions of the Public Health Service Act: 1923 (42 U.S.C. 300x-23), 1925 (42 U.S.C. 300x-25), 1926 (42 U.S.C. 300x-26), 1928 (42 U.S.C. 300x-28), 1929 (42 U.S.C. 300x-29), and 1943(a)(1) (42 U.S.C. 300x-53(a)(1)). An Indian tribe or tribal organization is to comply with all other statutes and regulations applicable to the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant. In each case in which an Indian Tribe receives a direct grant, the State is also responsible for providing services to Native Americans under the State's Block Grant program.
              [58 FR 17070, Mar. 31, 1993]
            
            
              § 96.47
              Primary care.
              Applications for direct funding of Indian tribes and tribal organizations under the primary care block grant must comply with 42 CFR part 51c (Grants for Community Health Services).
            
            
              § 96.48
              Low-income home energy assistance.
              (a) This section applies to direct funding of Indian tribes under the low-income home energy assistance program.
              (b) The terms Indian tribe and tribal organization as used in the Reconciliation Act have the same meaning given such terms in section 4(b) and 4(c) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b) except that the terms shall also include organized groups of Indians that the State in which they reside has expressly determined are Indian tribes or tribal organizations in accordance with State procedures for making such determinations.
              (c) For purposes of section 2604(d) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 8623(d)), an organized group of Indians is eligible for direct funding based on State recognition if the State has expressly determined that the group is an Indian tribe. A statement by the State's chief executive officer verifying that a tribe is recognized by that State will also be sufficient to verify State recognition for the purpose of direct funding.
              (d) The plan required by section 2604(d)(4) of the Reconciliation Act (42 U.S.C. 8623(d)(4)) shall contain the certification and information required for States under section 2605 (b) and (c) of that Act (42 U.S.C. 8624 (b) and (c)). An Indian tribe or tribal organization is not required to comply with section 2605(a)(2) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 8624(a)(2)).

              (e) Where a tribe requests that the Secretary fund another entity to provide energy assistance for tribal members, as provided by section 2604(d)(3) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 8623(d)(3)), the Secretary shall consider the following factors in selecting the grantee: the ability of the other entity to provide low-income home energy assistance, existing tribal-State agreements as to the size and location of the service population, and the history of State services to the Indian people to be served by the other entity.
            
            
              § 96.49
              Due date for receipt of all information required for completion of tribal applications for the low-income home energy assistance block grants.
              Effective beginning in FY 2001, for the low-income home energy assistance program, Indian tribes and tribal organizations that make requests for direct funding from the Department must insure that all information necessary to complete their application is received by December 15 of the fiscal year for which funds are requested, unless the State(s) in which the tribe is located agrees to a later date. After December 15, funds will revert to the State(s) in which the tribe is located, unless the State(s) agrees to a later date. If funds revert to a State, the State is responsible for providing low-income home energy assistance program services to the service population of the tribe.
              [64 FR 55857, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Enforcement
            
              § 96.50
              Complaints.
              (a) This section applies to any complaint (other than a complaint alleging violation of the nondiscrimination provisions) that a State has failed to use its allotment under a block grant in accordance with the terms of the act establishing the block grant or the certifications and assurances made by the State pursuant to that act. The Secretary is not required to consider a complaint unless it is submitted as required by this section.
              (b) Complaints with respect to the health block grants must be submitted in writing to either the Assistant Secretary for Health or: For the preventive health and health services block grant, the Director, Centers for Disease Control; for the alcohol and drug abuse and mental health services block grant, the Administrator, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration; for the maternal and child health services block grant, the Administrator, Health Resources and Services Administration. Complaints with respect to the social services block grant must be submitted in writing to the Assistant Secretary for Human Development Services. Complaints with respect to the low-income home energy assistance program and the community services block grant must be submitted in writing to the Director, Office of Community Services. (The address for the Director, Center for Disease Control is 1600 Clifton Road, NE., Atlanta, Georgia 30333. For each of the other officials cited above the address is 200 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20201.) The complaint must identify the provision of the act, assurance, or certification that was allegedly violated; must specify the basis for the violations it charges; and must include all relevant information known to the person submitting it.
              (c) The Department shall promptly furnish a copy of any complaint to the affected State. Any comments received from the State within 60 days (or such longer period as may be agreed upon between the State and the Department) shall be considered by the Department in responding to the complaint. The Department will conduct an investigation of complaints where appropriate.
              (d) The Department will provide a written response to complaints within 180 days after receipt. If a final resolution cannot be provided at that time, the response will state the reasons why additional time is necessary. Under the low-income home energy assistance program, within 60 days after receipt of complaints, the Department will provide a written response to the complainant, stating the actions that it has taken to date and, if the complaint has not yet been fully resolved, the timetable for final resolution of the complaint.

              (e) The Department recognizes that under the block grant programs the States are primarily responsible for interpreting the governing statutory provisions. As a result, various States may reach different interpretations of the same statutory provisions. This circumstance is consistent with the intent of and statutory authority for the block grant programs. In resolving any issue raised by a complaint or a Federal audit the Department will defer to a State's interpretation of its assurances and of the provisions of the block grant statutes unless the interpretation is clearly erroneous. In any event, the Department will provide copies of complaints to the independent entity responsible for auditing the State's activities under the block grant program involved. Any determination by the Department that a State's interpretation is not clearly erroneous shall not preclude or otherwise prejudice the State auditors' consideration of the question.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982; 47 FR 43062, Sept. 30, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 37967, Oct. 13, 1987; 57 FR 1977, Jan. 16, 1992; 60 FR 21358, May 1, 1995]
            
            
              § 96.51
              Hearings.
              (a) The Department will order a State to repay amounts found not to have been expended in accordance with law of the certifications provided by the State only after the Department has provided the State notice of the order and an opportunity for a hearing. Opportunity for a hearing will not be provided, however, when the State, in resolving audit findings or at another time, has agreed that the amounts were not expended in accordance with law or the certifications. The hearing will be governed by subpart F of this part and will be held in the State if required by statute.
              (b) If a State refuses to repay amounts after a final decision that is not subject to further review in the Department, the amounts may be offset against payments to the State. If a statute requires an opportunity for a hearing before such an offset may be made, the hearing will be governed by subpart F of this part and will be held in the State if required by statute.
              (c) The Department will withhold funds from a State only if the Department has provided the State an opportunity for a hearing. The hearing will be governed by subpart F of this part and will be held in the State if required by statute.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 37967, Oct. 13, 1987]
            
            
              § 96.52
              Appeals.
              (a) Decisions resulting from repayment hearings held pursuant to § 96.51(a) of this part may be appealed by either the State or the Department to the Grant Appeals Board.
              (b) Decisions resulting from offset hearings held pursuant to § 96.51(b) of this part may not be appealed.
              (c) Decisions resulting from withholding hearings held pursuant to § 96.51(c) of this part may be appealed to the Secretary by the State or the Department as follows:
              (1) An application for appeal must be received by the Secretary no later than 60 days after the appealing party receives a copy of the presiding officer's decision. The application shall clearly identify the questions for which review is sought and shall explain fully the party's position with respect to those questions. A copy shall be furnished to the other party.
              (2) The Secretary may permit the filing of opposing briefs, hold informal conferences, or take whatever other steps the Secretary finds appropriate to decide the appeal.
              (3) The Secretary may refer an application for appeal to the Grant Appeals Board. Notwithstanding part 16 of this title, in the event of such a referral, the Board shall issue a recommended decision that will not become final until affirmed, reversed, or modified by the Secretary.
              (d) Any appeal to the Grant Appeals Board under this section shall be governed by part 16 of this title except that the Board shall not hold a hearing. The Board shall accept any findings with respect to credibility of witnesses made by the presiding officer. The Board may otherwise review and supplement the record as provided for in part 16 of this title and decide the issues raised.
            
            
              § 96.53
              Length of withholding.

              Under the low-income home energy assistance program and community services block grant, the Department may withhold funds until the Department finds that the reason for the withholding has been removed.
              [64 FR 55857, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Hearing Procedure
            
              § 96.60
              Scope.
              The procedures in this subpart apply when opportunity for a hearing is provided for by § 96.51 of this part.
            
            
              § 96.61
              Initiation of hearing.
              (a) A hearing is initiated by a notice of opportunity for hearing from the Department. The notice will:
              (1) Be sent by mail, telegram, telex, personal delivery, or any other mode of written communication;
              (2) Specify the facts and the action that are the subject of the opportunity for a hearing;
              (3) State that the notice of opportunity for hearing and the hearing are governed by these rules; and
              (4) State the time within which a hearing may be requested, and state the name, address, and telephone number of the Department employee to whom any request for hearing is to be addressed.
              (b) A State offered an opportunity for a hearing has the amount of time specified in the notice, which may not be less than 10 days after receipt of the notice, within which to request a hearing. The request may be filed by mail, telegram, telex, personal delivery, or any other mode of written communication, addressed to the designated Department employee. If no response is filed within that time, the offer is deemed to have been refused and no hearing will be held.
              (c) If a hearing is requested, the Department will designate a presiding officer, and (subject to § 96.51 of this part) the hearing will take place at a time and location agreed upon by the State requesting the hearing, the Department, and the presiding officer or, if agreement cannot be reached, at a reasonable time and location designated by the presiding officer.
            
            
              § 96.62
              Presiding officer.
              (a) A Department employee to whom the Secretary delegates such authority, or any other agency employee designated by an employee to whom such authority is delegated, may serve as the presiding officer and conduct a hearing under this subpart.
              (b) The presiding officer is to be free from bias or prejudice and may not have participated in the investigation or action that is the subject of the hearing or be subordinate to a person, other than the Secretary, who has participated in such investigation or action.
              (c) The Secretary is not precluded by this section from prior participation in the investigation or action that is the subject of the hearing.
              (d) A different presiding officer may be substituted for the one originally designated under § 96.61 of this part without notice to the parties.
            
            
              § 96.63
              Communications to presiding officer.
              (a) Those persons who are directly involved in the investigation or presentation of the position of the Department or any party at a hearing that is subject to this subpart should avoid any off-the-record communication on the matter to the presiding officer or his advisers if the communication is inconsistent with the requirement of § 96.68 of this part that the administrative record be the exclusive record for decision. If any communication of this type occurs, it is to be reduced to writing and made part of the record, and the other party provided an opportunity to respond.
              (b) A copy of any communications between a participant in the hearing and the presiding officer, e.g., a response by the presiding officer to a request for a change in the time of the hearing is to be sent to all parties by the person initiating the communication.
            
            
              § 96.64
              Intervention.
              Participation as parties in the hearing by persons other than the State and the Department is not permitted.
            
            
              § 96.65
              Discovery.
              The use of interrogatories, depositions, and other forms of discovery shall not be allowed.
            
            
              
              § 96.66
              Hearing procedure.
              (a) A hearing is public, except when the Secretary or the presiding officer determines that all or part of a hearing should be closed to prevent a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy (such as disclosure of information in medical records that would identify patients), to prevent the disclosure of a trade secret or confidential commercial or financial information, or to protect investigatory records compiled for law enforcement purposes that are not available for public disclosure.
              (b) A hearing will be conducted by the presiding officer. Employees of the Department will first give a full and complete statement of the action which is the subject of the hearing, together with the information and reasons supporting it, and may present any oral or written information relevant to the hearing. The State may then present any oral or written information relevant to the hearing. Both parties may confront and conduct reasonable cross-examination of any person (except for the presiding officer and counsel for the parties) who makes any statement on the matter at the hearing.
              (c) The hearing is informal in nature, and the rules of evidence do not apply. No motions or objections relating to the admissibility of information and views will be made or considered, but either party may comment upon or rebut all such data, information, and views.
              (d) The presiding officer may order the hearing to be transcribed. The State may have the hearing transcribed, at the State's expense, in which case a copy of the transcript is to be furnished to the Department at the Department's expense.
              (e) The presiding officer may, if appropriate, allow for the submission of post-hearing briefs. The presiding officer shall prepare a written decision, which shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence, shall include a statement of reasons for the decision, and shall be final unless appealed pursuant to § 96.52 of this part. If post-hearing briefs were not permitted, the parties to the hearing will be given the opportunity to review and comment on the presiding officer's decision prior to its being issued.
              (f) The presiding officer shall include as part of the decision a finding on the credibility of witnesses (other than expert witnesses) whenever credibility is a material issue.
              (g) The presiding officer shall furnish a copy of the decision to the parties.
              (h) The presiding officer has the power to take such actions and make such rulings as are necessary or appropriate to maintain order and to conduct a fair, expeditious, and impartial hearing, and to enforce the requirements of this subpart concerning the conduct of hearings. The presiding officer may direct that the hearing be conducted in any suitable manner permitted by law and these regulations.
              (i) The Secretary or the presiding officer has the power to suspend, modify, or waive any provision of this subpart.
            
            
              § 96.67
              Right to counsel.
              Any party to a hearing under this part has the right at all times to be advised and accompanied by counsel.
            
            
              § 96.68
              Administrative record of a hearing.
              (a) The exclusive administrative record of the hearing consists of the following:
              (1) The notice of opportunity for hearing and the response.
              (2) All written information and views submitted to the presiding officer at the hearing or after if specifically permitted by the presiding officer.
              (3) Any transcript of the hearing.
              (4) The presiding officer's decision and any briefs or comments on the decision under § 96.66(e) of this part.
              (5) All letters or communications between participants and the presiding officer or the Secretary referred to in § 96.63 of this part.
              (b) The record of the hearing is closed to the submission of information and views at the close of the hearing, unless the presiding officer specifically permits additional time for a further submission.
            
          
          
            
            Subpart G—Social Services Block Grants
            
              § 96.70
              Scope.
              This subpart applies to the social services block grant.
            
            
              § 96.71
              Definitions.
              (a) Section 2005 (a)(2) and (a)(5) (42 U.S.C. 1397d (a)(2) and (a)(5)) of the Social Security Act establishes prohibitions against the provision of room and board and medical care unless, among other reasons, they are an “integral but subordinate” part of a State-authorized social service. “Integral but subordinate” means that the room and board provided for a short term or medical care is a minor but essential adjunct to the service of which it is a part and is necessary to achieve the objective of that service. Room and board provided for a short term shall not be considered an integral but subordinate part of a social service when it is provided to an individual in a foster family home or other facility the primary purpose of which is to provide food, shelter, and care or supervision, except for temporary emergency shelter provided as a protective service.

              (b) As used in section 2005(a)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397d (a)(5)) with respect to the limitations governing the provision of services by employees of certain institutions, employees includes staff, contractors, or other individuals whose activities are under the professional direction or direct supervision of the institution.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982; 47 FR 43062, Sept. 30, 1982]
            
            
              § 96.72
              Transferability of funds.
              Under section 2002(d) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397a(d)), funds may be transferred in accordance with the provisions of that section to the preventive health and health services, alcohol and drug abuse and mental health services, primary care, maternal and child health services, and low-income home energy assistance block grants. In addition, funds may be transferred to other Federal block grants for support of health services, health promotion and disease prevention activities, or low-income home energy assistance (or any combination of those activities).
            
            
              § 96.73
              Sterilization.
              If a State authorizes sterilization as a family planning service, it must comply with the provisions of 42 CFR part 441, subpart F, except that the State plan requirement under 42 CFR 441.252 does not apply.
              [47 FR 33702, Aug. 4, 1982]
            
            
              § 96.74
              Annual reporting requirements.
              (a) Annual report. In accordance with 42 U.S.C. 1397e, each state must submit an annual report to the Secretary by the due dates specified in § 96.17 of this part. The annual report must cover the most recently completed fiscal year and, except for the data in paragraphs (a) (1) through (4) of this section, may be submitted in the format of the state's choice. The annual report must address the requirements in section 2006(a) of the Act, include the specific data required by section 2006(c), and include other information as follows:
              (1) The number of individuals who receive services paid for in whole or in part with federal funds under the Social Services Block Grant, showing separately the number of children and the number of adults who received such services (section 2006(c)(1));
              (2) The amount of Social Services Block Grant funds spent in providing each service, showing separately for each service the average amount spent per child recipient and per adult recipient (section 2006(c)(2));
              (3) The total amount of federal, state and local funds spent in providing each service, including Social Services Block Grant funds;
              (4) The method(s) by which each service is provided, showing separately the services provided by public agencies, private agencies, or both (section 2006(c)(4)); and
              (5) The criteria applied in determining eligibility for each service such as income eligibility guidelines, sliding fee scales, the effect of public assistance benefits, and any requirements for enrollment in school or training programs (section 2006(c)(3)).
              (b) Reporting requirement. (1) Each state must use the uniform definitions of services in appendix A of this part, categories 1-28, in submitting the data required in paragraph (a) of this section. Where a state cannot use the uniform definitions, it should report the data under category 29, “Other Services.” The state's definitions of each of the services listed in category 29 must be included in the annual report.
              (2) Each state must use the reporting form issued by the Department to report the data required in paragraphs (a) (1) through (4) of this section.
              (3) In reporting recipient and expenditure data, each state must report actual numbers of recipients and actual expenditures when this information is available. For purposes of this report, each state should, if possible, count only a single recipient for each service. States should also consider a service provided to a recipient for the length of the reporting period (one year) or any fraction thereof as a single service. Data based on sampling and/or estimates will be accepted when actual figures are unavailable. Each state must indicate for each service whether the data are based on actual figures, sampling, or estimates and must describe the sampling and/or estimation process(es) it used to obtain these data in the annual report. Each state must also indicate, in reporting recipient data, whether the data reflects an unduplicated count of recipients.
              (4) Each state must use category 30, “Other Expenditures,” to report non-service expenditures. Only total dollar amounts in this category are required, i.e., they need not be reported by recipient count or cost per adult/child. This will include carry over balances, carry forward balances, funds transferred to or from the SSBG program, and administrative costs as defined by the state.
              (5) Each state must use its own definition of the terms “child” and “adult” in reporting the data required in paragraphs (a) (1) through (5) of this section.
              (6) Each state's definition of “child” and “adult” must be reported as a part of the eligibility criteria for each service required in paragraph (a)(5) of this section. The data on eligibility criteria may be submitted in whatever format the state chooses as a part of its annual report.
              (c) Transfer of computer data. In addition to making the annual report available to the public and to the Department, a state may submit the information specified in paragraphs (a) (1) through (4) of this section using electronic equipment. A full description of procedures for electronic transmission of data, and of the availability of computer diskettes, is included in appendix B to this part.
              [58 FR 60129, Nov. 15, 1993]
            
          
          
            Subpart H—Low-income Home Energy Assistance Program
            
              § 96.80
              Scope.
              This subpart applies to the low-income home energy assistance program.
            
            
              § 96.81
              Carryover and reallotment.
              (a) Scope. Pursuant to section 2607(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626(b)), this section concerns procedures relating to carryover and reallotment of regular LIHEAP block grant funds authorized under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)).
              (b) Required carryover and reallotment report. Each grantee must submit a report to the Department by August 1 of each year, containing the information in paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(4) of this section. The Department shall make no payment to a grantee for a fiscal year unless the grantee has complied with this paragraph with respect to the prior fiscal year.
              (1) The amount of funds that the grantee requests to hold available for obligation in the next (following) fiscal year, not to exceed 10 percent of the funds payable to the grantee;
              (2) A statement of the reasons that this amount to remain available will not be used in the fiscal year for which it was allotted;
              (3) A description of the types of assistance to be provided with the amount held available; and
              (4) The amount of funds, if any, to be subject to reallotment.
              (c) Conditions for reallotment. If the total amount available for reallotment for a fiscal year is less than $25,000, the Department will not reallot such amount. If the total amount available for reallotment for a fiscal year is $25,000 or more, the Department will reallot such amount, except that the Department will not award less than $25 in reallotted funds to a grantee.
              [64 FR 55858, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.82
              Required report on households assisted.
              (a) Each grantee which is a State or an insular area which receives an annual allotment of at least $200,000 shall submit to the Department, as part of its LIHEAP grant application, the data required by section 2605(c)(1)(G) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(c)(1)(G)) for the 12-month period corresponding to the Federal fiscal year (October 1-September 30) preceding the fiscal year for which funds are requested. The data shall be reported separately for LIHEAP heating, cooling, crisis, and weatherization assistance.
              (b) Each grantee which is an insular area which receives an annual allotment of less than $200,000 or which is an Indian tribe or tribal organization which receives direct funding from the Department shall submit to the Department, as part of its LIHEAP grant application, data on the number of households receiving LIHEAP assistance during the 12-month period corresponding to the Federal fiscal year (October 1-September 30) preceding the fiscal year for which funds are requested. The data shall be reported separately for LIHEAP heating, cooling, crisis, and weatherization assistance.
              (c) Grantees will not receive their LIHEAP grant allotment for the fiscal year until the Department has received the report required under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section.
              [64 FR 55858, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.83
              Increase in maximum amount that may be used for weatherization and other energy-related home repair.
              (a) Scope. This section concerns requests for waivers increasing from 15 percent to up to 25 percent of LIHEAP funds allotted or available to a grantee for a fiscal year, the maximum amount that grantees may use for low-cost residential weatherization and other energy-related home repair for low-income households (hereafter referred to as “weatherization”), pursuant to section 2605(k) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(k)).
              (b) Public inspection and comment. Before submitting waiver requests to the Department, grantees must make proposed waiver requests available for public inspection within their jurisdictions in a manner that will facilitate timely and meaningful review of, and comment upon, these requests. Written public comments on proposed waiver requests must be made available for public inspection upon their receipt by grantees, as must any summaries prepared of written comments, and transcripts and/or summaries of verbal comments made on proposed requests at public meetings or hearings. Proposed waiver requests, and any preliminary waiver requests, must be made available for public inspection and comment until at least March 15 of the fiscal year for which the waiver is to be requested. Copies of actual waiver requests must be made available for public inspection upon submission of the requests to the Department.
              (c) Waiver request. After March 31 of each fiscal year, the chief executive officer (or his or her designee) may request a waiver of the weatherization obligation limit for this fiscal year, if the grantee meets criteria in paragraphs (c)(2)(i), (c)(2)(ii), and (c)(2)(iii) of this section, or can show “good cause” for obtaining a waiver despite a failure to meet one or more of these criteria. (If the request is made by the chief executive officer's designee and the Department does not have on file written evidence of the designation, the request also must include evidence of the appropriate delegation of authority.) Waiver requests must be in writing and must include the information specified in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(6) of this section. The grantee may submit a preliminary waiver request for a fiscal year, between February 1 and March 31 of the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested. If a grantee chooses to submit a preliminary waiver request, the preliminary request must include the information specified in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(6) of this section; in addition, after March 31 the chief executive officer (or his or her designee) must submit the information specified in paragraphs (c)(7) through (c)(10) of this section, to complete the preliminary waiver request.
              (1) A statement of the total percent of its LIHEAP funds allotted or available in the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested, that the grantee desires to use for weatherization.
              (2) A statement of whether the grantee has met each of the following three criteria:
              (i) In the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested, the combined total (aggregate) number of households in the grantee's service population that will receive LIHEAP heating, cooling, and crisis assistance benefits that are provided from Federal LIHEAP allotments from regular and supplemental appropriations will not be fewer than the combined total (aggregate) number that received such benefits in the preceding fiscal year;
              (ii) In the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested, the combined total (aggregate) amount, in dollars, of LIHEAP heating, cooling, and crisis assistance benefits received by the grantee's service population that are provided from Federal LIHEAP allotments from regular and supplemental appropriations will not be less than the combined total (aggregate) amount received in the preceding fiscal year; and
              (iii) All LIHEAP weatherization activities to be carried out by the grantee in the fiscal year for which the wavier is requested have been shown to produce measurable savings in energy expenditures.
              (3) With regard to criterion in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, a statement of the grantee's best estimate of the appropriate household totals for the fiscal year for which the wavier is requested and for the preceding fiscal year.
              (4) With regard to criterion in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section, a statement of the grantee's best estimate of the appropriate benefit totals, in dollars, for the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested and for the preceding fiscal year.
              (5) With regard to criterion in paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of this section, a description of the weatherization activities to be carried out by the grantee in the fiscal year for which the wavier is requested (with all LIHEAP funds proposed to be used for weatherization, not just with the amount over 15 percent), and an explanation of the specific criteria under which the grantee has determined whether these activities have been shown to produce measurable savings in energy expenditures.
              (6) A description of how and when the proposed wavier request was made available for timely and meaningful public review and comment, copies and/or summaries of public comments received on the request (including transcripts and/or summaries of any comments made on the request at public meetings or hearings), a statement of the method for reviewing public comments, and a statement of the changes, if any, that were made in response to these comments.
              (7) To complete a preliminary waiver request: Official confirmation that the grantee wishes approval of the waiver request.
              (8) To complete a preliminary waiver request: A statement of whether any public comments were received after preparation of the preliminary waiver request and, if so, copies and/or summaries of these comments (including transcripts and/or summaries of any comments made on the request at public meetings or hearings), and a statement of the changes, if any, that were made in response to these comments.
              (9) To complete a preliminary waiver request: A statement of whether any material/substantive changes of fact have occurred in information included in the preliminary waiver request since its submission, and, if so, a description of the change(s).
              (10) To complete a preliminary waiver request: A description of any other changes to the preliminary request.
              (d) “Standard” waiver. If the Department determines that a grantee has meet the three criteria in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, has provided all information required by paragraph (c) of this section, has shown adequate concern for timely and meaningful public review and comment, and has proposed weatherization that meets all relevant requirements of title XXVI of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621 et seq.) and 45 CFR part 96, the Department will approve a “standard” waiver.
              
              (e) “Good cause” waiver. (1) If a grantee does not meet one or more of the three criteria in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, then the grantee may submit documentation that demonstrates good cause why a waiver should be granted despite the grantee's failure to meet this criterion or these criteria. “Good cause” waiver requests must include the following information, in addition to the information specified in paragraph (c) of this section:
              (i) For each criterion under paragraph (c)(2) of this section that the grantee does not meet, an explanation of the specific reasons demonstrating good cause why the grantee does not meet the criterion and yet proposes to use additional funds for weatherization, citing measurable, quantified data, and stating the source(s) of the data used;
              (ii) A statement of the grantee's LIHEAP heating, cooling, and crisis assistance eligibility standards (eligibility criteria) and benefits levels for the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested and for the preceding fiscal year; and, if eligibility standards were less restrictive and/or benefit levels were higher in the preceding fiscal year for one or more of these program components, an explanation of the reasons demonstrating good cause why a waiver should be granted in spite of this fact;
              (iii) A statement of the grantee's opening and closing dates for applications for LIHEAP heating, cooling, and crisis assistance in the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested and in the preceding fiscal year, and a description of the grantee's outreach efforts for heating, cooling, and crisis assistance in the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested and in the preceding fiscal year, and, if the grantee's application period was longer and/or outreach efforts were greater in the preceding fiscal year for one or more of these program components, an explanation of the reasons demonstrating good cause why a waiver should be granted in spite of this fact; and
              (iv) If the grantee took, or will take, other actions that led, or will lead, to a reduction in the number of applications for LIHEAP heating, cooling, and/or crisis assistance, from the preceding fiscal year to the fiscal year for which the waiver is requested, a description of these actions and an explanation demonstrating good cause why a waiver should be granted in spite of these actions.

              (2) If the Department determines that a grantee requesting a “good cause” waiver has demonstrated good cause why a waiver should be granted, has provided all information required by paragraphs (c) and (e)(1) of this section, has shown adequate concern for timely and meaningful public review and comment, and has proposed weatherization that meets all relevant requirements of title XXVI of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621 et seq.) and 45 CFR part 96, the Department will approve a “good cause” waiver.
              (f) Approvals and disapprovals. After receiving the grantee's complete waiver request, the Department will respond in writing within 45 days, informing the grantee whether the request is approved on either a “standard” or “good cause” basis. The Department may request additional information and/or clarification from the grantee. If additional information and/or clarification is requested, the 45-day period for the Department's response will start when the additional information and/or clarification is received. No waiver will be granted for a previous fiscal year.
              (g) Effective period. Waivers will be effective from the date of the Department's written approval until the funds for which the waiver is granted are obligated in accordance with title XXVI of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621 et seq.) and 45 CFR part 96. Funds for which a weatherization waiver was granted that are carried over to the following fiscal year and used for weatherization shall not be considered “funds allotted” or “funds available” for the purposes of calculating the maximum amount that may be used for weatherization in the succeeding fiscal year.
              [60 FR 21358, May 1, 1995; 60 FR 33260, June 27, 1995]
            
            
              § 96.84
              Miscellaneous.
              (a) Rights and responsibilities of territories. Except as otherwise provided, a territory eligible for funds shall have the same rights and responsibilities as a State.
              (b) Applicability of assurances. The assurances in section 2605(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)), as amended, pertain to all forms of assistance provided by the grantee, with the exception of assurance 15, which applies to heating, cooling, and energy crisis intervention assistance.
              (c) Prevention of waste, fraud, and abuse. Grantees must establish appropriate systems and procedures to prevent, detect, and correct waste, fraud, and abuse in activities funded under the low-income home energy assistance program. The systems and procedures are to address possible waste, fraud, and abuse by clients, vendors, and administering agencies.
              (d) End of transfer authority. Beginning with funds appropriated for FY 1994, grantees may not transfer any funds pursuant to section 2604(f) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8623(f)) that are payable to them under the LIHEAP program to the block grant programs specified in section 2604(f).
              [57 FR 1978, Jan. 16, 1992, as amended at 64 FR 55858, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.85
              Income eligibility.
              (a) Application of poverty income guidelines and State median income estimates. In implementing the income eligibility standards in section 2605(b)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)(2)), grantees using the Federal government's official poverty income guidelines and State median income estimates for households as a basis for determining eligibility for assistance shall, by October 1 of each year, or by the beginning of the State fiscal year, whichever is later, adjust their income eligibility criteria so that they are in accord with the most recently published update of the guidelines or estimates. Grantees may adjust their income eligibility criteria to accord with the most recently published revision to the poverty income guidelines or State median income estimates for households at any time between the publication of the revision and the following October 1, or the beginning of the State fiscal year, whichever is later.
              (b) Adjustment of annual median income for household size. In order to determine the State median income for households that have other than four individuals, grantees shall adjust the State median income figures (published annually by the Secretary), by the following percentages:
              (1) One-person household, 52 percent;
              (2) Two-person household, 68 percent;
              (3) Three-person household, 84 percent;
              (4) Four-person household, 100 percent;
              (5) Five-person household, 116 percent;
              (6) Six-person household, 132 percent; and
              (7) For each additional household member above six persons, add three percentage points to the percentage adjustment for a six-person household.
              [53 FR 6827, Mar. 3, 1988, as amended at 64 FR 55858, Oct. 15, 1999]
            
            
              § 96.86
              Exemption from requirement for additional outreach and intake services.
              The requirement in section 2605(b)(15) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)(15)), as amended by section 704(a)(4) of the Augustus F. Hawkins Human Services Reauthorization Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-501)—concerning additional outreach and intake services—does not apply to:
              (a) Indian tribes and tribal organizations; and
              (b) Territories whose annual LIHEAP allotments under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) are $200,000 or less.
              [57 FR 1978, Jan. 16, 1992]
            
            
              § 96.87
              Leveraging incentive program.
              (a) Scope and eligible grantees. (1) This section concerns the leveraging incentive program authorized by section 2607A of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a).

              (2)(i) The only entities eligible to receive leveraging incentive funds from the Department are States (including the District of Columbia), Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and territories that received direct Federal LIHEAP funding under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) in both the base period for which leveraged resources are reported, and the award period for which leveraging incentive funds are sought; and tribes and tribal organizations described in paragraphs (a)(2)(ii) and (a)(2)(iii) of this section.
              (ii) Indian tribes that received LIHEAP services under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) through a directly-funded tribal organization in the base period for which leveraged resources are reported, and receive direct Federal LIHEAP funding under section 2602(b) in the award period, will receive leveraging incentive funds allocable to them if they submit leveraging reports meeting all applicable requirements. If the tribal organization continues to receive direct funding under section 2602(b) in the award period, the tribal organization also will receive incentive funds allocable to it if it submits a leveraging report meeting all applicable requirements. In such cases, incentive funds will be allocated among the involved entities that submit leveraging reports, as agreed by these entities. If they cannot agree, HHS will allocate incentive funds based on the comparative role of each entity in obtaining and/or administering the leveraged resources, and/or their relative number of LIHEAP-eligible households.
              (iii) If a tribe received direct Federal LIHEAP funding under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) in the base period for which resources leveraged by the tribe are reported, and the tribe receives LIHEAP services under section 2602(b) through a directly-funded tribal organization in the award period, the tribal organization will receive leveraging incentive funds on behalf of the tribe for the resources if the tribal organization submits a leveraging report meeting all applicable requirements.
              (b) Definitions—(1) Award period means the fiscal year during which leveraging incentive funds are distributed to grantees by the Department, based on the countable leveraging activities they reported to the Department for the preceding fiscal year (the base period).
              (2) Base period means the fiscal year for which a grantee's leveraging activities are reported to the Department; grantees' countable leveraging activities during the base period or base year are the basis for the distribution of leveraging incentive funds during the succeeding fiscal year (the award period or award year). Leveraged resources are counted in the base period during which their benefits are provided to low-income households.
              (3) Countable loan fund means revolving loan funds and similar loan instruments in which:
              (i) The sources of both the loaned and the repaid funds meet the requirements of this section, including the prohibitions of paragraphs (f)(1), (f)(2), and (f)(3) of this section;
              (ii) Neither the loaned nor the repaid funds are Federal funds or payments from low-income households, and the loans are not made to low-income households; and
              (iii) The benefits provided by the loaned funds meet the requirements of this section for countable leveraged resources and benefits.
              (4) Countable petroleum violation escrow funds means petroleum violation escrow (oil overcharge) funds that were distributed to a State or territory by the Department of Energy (DOE) after October 1, 1990, and interest earned in accordance with DOE policies on petroleum violation escrow funds that were distributed to a State or territory by DOE after October 1, 1990, that:
              (i) Were used to assist low-income households to meet the costs of home energy through (that is, within and as a part of) a State or territory's LIHEAP program, another Federal program, or a non-Federal program, in accordance with a submission for use of these petroleum violation escrow funds that was approved by DOE;
              (ii) Were not previously required to be allocated to low-income households; and
              (iii) Meet the requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of this section, and of paragraph (d)(2)(ii) or (d)(2)(iii) or this section.
              (5) Home energy means a source of heating or cooling in residential dwellings.
              (6) Low-income households means federally eligible (federally qualified) households meeting the standards for LIHEAP income eligibility and/or LIHEAP categorical eligibility as set by section 2605(b)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)(2)).
              (7) Weatherization means low-cost residential weatherization and other energy-related home repair for low-income households. Weatherization must be directly related to home energy.
              (c) LIHEAP funds used to identify, develop, and demonstrate leveraging programs. (1) Each fiscal year, States (excluding Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and territories) may spend up to the greater of $35,000 or 0.08 percent of their net Federal LIHEAP allotments (funds payable) allocated under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) specifically to identify, develop, and demonstrate leveraging programs under section 2607A(c)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a(c)(2)). Each fiscal year, Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and territories may spend up to the greater of two (2.0) percent or $100 of their Federal LIHEAP allotments allocated under section 2602(b) of Public law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) specifically to identify, develop, and demonstrate leveraging programs under section 2607A(c)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a(c)(2)). For the purpose of this paragraph, Federal LIHEAP allotments include funds from regular and supplemental appropriations, with the exception of leveraging incentive funds provided under section 2602(d) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(d)).
              (2) LIHEAP funds used under section 2607A(c)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a(c)(2)) specifically to identify, develop, and demonstrate leveraging programs are not subject to the limitation in section 2605(b)(9) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)(9)) on the maximum percent of Federal funds that may be used for costs of planning and administration.
              (d) Basic requirements for leveraged resources and benefits. (1) In order to be counted under the leveraging incentive program, leveraged resources and benefits must meet all of the following five criteria:
              (i) They are from non-Federal sources.
              (ii) They are provided to the grantee's low-income home energy assistance program, or to federally qualified low-income households as described in section 2605(b)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)(2)).
              (iii) They are measurable and quantifiable in dollars.
              (iv) They represent a net addition to the total home energy resources available to low-income households in excess of the amount of such resources that could be acquired by these households through the purchase of home energy, or the purchase of items that help these households meet the cost of home energy, at commonly available household rates or costs, or that could be obtained with regular LIHEAP allotments provided under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)).
              (v) They meet the requirements for countable leveraged resources and benefits throughout this section and section 2607A of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a).
              (2) Also, in order to be counted under the leveraging incentive program, leveraged resources and benefits must meet at least one of the following three criteria:
              (i) The grantee's LIHEAP program had an active, substantive role in developing and/or acquiring the resource/benefits from home energy vendor(s) through negotiation, regulation, and/or competitive bid. The actions or efforts of one or more staff of the grantee's LIHEAP program—at the central and/or local level—and/or one or more staff of LIHEAP program subrecipient(s) acting in that capacity, were substantial and significant in obtaining the resource/benefits from the vendor(s).
              (ii) The grantee appropriated or mandated the resource/benefits for distribution to low-income households through (that is, within and as a part of) its LIHEAP program. The resource/benefits are provided through the grantee's LIHEAP program to low-income households eligible under the grantee's LIHEAP standards, in accordance with the LIHEAP statute and regulations and consistent with the grantee's LIHEAP plan and program policies that were in effect during the base period, as if they were provided from the grantee's Federal LIHEAP allotment.

              (iii) The grantee appropriated or mandated the resource/benefits for distribution to low-income households as described in its LIHEAP plan (referred to in section 2605(c)(1)(A) of Public Law 97-35) (42 U.S.C. 8624(c)(1)(A)). The resource/benefits are provided to low-income households as a supplement and/or alternative to the grantee's LIHEAP program, outside (that is, not through, within, or as a part of) the LIHEAP program. The resource/benefits are integrated and coordinated with the grantee's LIHEAP program. Before the end of the base period, the plan identifies and describes the resource/benefits, their source(s), and their integration/coordination with the LIHEAP program. The Department will determine resources/benefits to be integrated and coordinated with the LIHEAP program if they meet at least one of the following eight conditions. If a resource meets at least one of conditions A through F when the grantee's LIHEAP program is operating (and meets all other applicable requirements), the resource also is countable when the LIHEAP program is not operating.
              (A) For all households served by the resource, the assistance provided by the resource depends on and is determined by the assistance provided to these households by the grantee's LIHEAP program in the base period. The resource supplements LIHEAP assistance that was not sufficient to meet households' home energy needs, and the type and amount of assistance provided by the resource is directly affected by the LIHEAP assistance received by the households.
              (B) Receipt of LIHEAP assistance in the base period is necessary to receive assistance from the resource. The resource serves only households that received LIHEAP assistance in the base period.
              (C) Ineligibility for the grantee's LIHEAP program, or denial of LIHEAP assistance in the base period because of unavailability of LIHEAP funds, is necessary to receive assistance from the resource.
              (D) For discounts and waivers: eligibility for and/or receipt of assistance under the grantee's LIHEAP program in the base period, and/or eligibility under the Federal standards set by section 2605(b)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)(2)), is necessary to receive the discount or waiver.
              (E) During the period when the grantee's LIHEAP program is operating, staff of the grantee's LIHEAP program and/or staff assigned to the LIHEAP program by a local LIHEAP administering agency or agencies, and staff assigned to the resource communicate orally and/or in writing about how to meet the home energy needs of specific, individual households. For the duration of the LIHEAP program, this communication takes place before assistance is provided to each household to be served by the resource, unless the applicant for assistance from the resource presents documentation of LIHEAP eligibility and/or the amount of LIHEAP assistance received or to be received.
              (F) A written agreement between the grantee's LIHEAP program or local LIHEAP administering agency, and the agency administering the resource, specifies the following about the resource: eligibility criteria; benefit levels; period of operation; how the LIHEAP program and the resource are integrated/coordinated; and relationship between LIHEAP eligibility and/or benefit levels, and eligibility and/or benefit levels for the resource. The agreement provides for annual or more frequent reports to be provided to the LIHEAP program by the agency administering the resource.
              (G) The resource accepts referrals from the grantee's LIHEAP program, and as long as the resource has benefits available, it provides assistance to all households that are referred by the LIHEAP program and that meet the resource's eligibility requirements. Under this condition, only the benefits provided to households referred by the LIHEAP program are countable.

              (H) Before the grantee's LIHEAP heating, cooling, crisis, and/or weatherization assistance component(s) open and/or after the grantee's LIHEAP heating, cooling, crisis, and/or weatherization assistance component(s) close for the season or for the fiscal year, or before the entire LIHEAP program opens and/or after the entire LIHEAP program closes for the season or for the fiscal year, the resource is made available specifically to fill the gap caused by the absence of the LIHEAP component(s) or program. The resource is not available while the LIHEAP component(s) or program is operating.
              (e) Countable leveraged resources and benefits. Resources and benefits that are countable under the leveraging incentive program include but are not limited to the following, provided that they also meet all other applicable requirements:
              (1) Cash resources: State, tribal, territorial, and other public and private non-Federal funds, including countable loan funds and countable petroleum violation escrow funds as defined in paragraphs (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section, that are used for:
              (i) Heating, cooling, and energy crisis assistance payments and cash benefits made in the base period to or on behalf of low-income households toward their home energy costs (including home energy bills, taxes on home energy sales/purchases and services, connection and reconnection fees, application fees, late payment charges, bulk fuel tank rental or purchase costs, and security deposits that are retained for six months or longer);
              (ii) Purchase of fuels that are provided to low-income households in the base period for home energy (such as fuel oil, liquefied petroleum gas, and wood);
              (iii) Purchase of weatherization materials that are installed in recipients' homes in the base period;
              (iv) Purchase of the following tangible items that are provided to low-income households and/or installed in recipients' homes in the base period: blankets, space heating devices, equipment, and systems; space cooling devices, equipment, and systems; and other tangible items that help low-income households meet the costs of home energy and are specifically approved by the Department as countable leveraged resources;
              (v) Installation, replacement, and repair of the following in the base period: weatherization materials; space heating devices, equipment, and systems; space cooling devices, equipment, and systems; and other tangible items that help low-income households meet the costs of home energy and are specifically approved by the Department;
              (vi) The following services, when they are an integral part of weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy in the base period: installation, replacement, and repair of windows, exterior doors, roofs, exterior walls, and exterior floors; pre-weatherization home energy audits of homes that were weatherized as a result of these audits; and post-weatherization inspection of homes; and
              (vii) The following services, when they are provided (carried out) in the base period: installation, replacement, and repair of smoke/fire alarms that are an integral part, and necessary for safe operation, of a home heating or cooling system installed or repaired as a weatherization activity; and asbestos removal and that is an integral part of, and necessary to carry out, weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy.
              (2) Home energy discounts and waivers that are provided in the base period to low-income households and pertain to generally applicable prices, rates, fees, charges, costs, and/or requirements, in the amount of the discount, reduction, waiver, or forgiveness, or that apply to certain tangible fuel and non-fuel items and to certain services, that are provided in the base period to low-income households and help these households meet the costs of home energy, in the amount of the discount or reduction:
              (i) Discounts or reductions in utility and bulk fuel prices, rates, or bills;
              (ii) Partial or full forgiveness of home energy bill arrearages;
              (iii) Partial or full waivers of utility and other home energy connection and reconnection fees, application fees, late payment charges, bulk fuel tank rental or purchase costs, and home energy security deposits that are retained for six months or longer;

              (iv) Reductions in and partial or full waivers of non-Federal taxes on home energy sales/purchases and services, and reductions in and partial or full waivers of other non-Federal taxes provided as tax “credits” to low-income households to offset their home energy costs, except when Federal funds or Federal tax “credits” provide payment or reimbursement for these reductions/waivers;
              
              (v) Discounts or reductions in the cost of the following tangible items that are provided to low-income households and/or installed in recipients' homes: weatherization materials; blankets; space heating devices, equipment, and systems; space cooling devices, equipment, and systems; and other tangible items that are specifically approved by the Department;
              (vi) Discounts or reductions in the cost of installation, replacement, and repair of the following: weatherization materials; space heating devices, equipment, and systems; space cooling devices, equipment, and systems; and other tangible items that help low-income households meet the costs of home energy and are specifically approved by the Department;
              (vii) Discounts or reductions in the cost of the following services, when the services are an integral part of weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy: installation, replacement, and repair of windows, exterior doors, roofs, exterior walls, and exterior floors; pre-weatherization home energy audits of homes that were weatherized as a result of these audits; and post-weatherization inspection of homes; and
              (viii) Discounts or reductions in the cost of installation, replacement, and repair of smoke/fire alarms that are an integral part, and necessary for safe operation, of a home heating or cooling system installed or repaired as a weatherization activity; and discounts or reductions in the cost of asbestos removal that is an integral part of, and necessary to carry out, weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy.
              (3) Certain third-party in-kind contributions that are provided in the base period to low-income households:
              (i) Donated fuels used by recipient households for home energy (such as fuel oil, liquefied petroleum gas, and wood);
              (ii) Donated weatherization materials that are installed in recipients' homes;
              (iii) Donated blankets; donated space heating devices, equipment, and systems; donated space cooling devices, equipment, and systems; and other donated tangible items that help low-income households meet the costs of home energy and are specifically approved by the Department as countable leveraged resources;
              (iv) Unpaid volunteers' services specifically to install, replace, and repair the following: weatherization materials; space heating devices, equipment, and systems; space cooling devices, equipment, and systems; and other items that help low-income households meet the costs of home energy and are specifically approved by the Department;
              (v) Unpaid volunteers' services specifically to provide (carry out) the following, when these services are an integral part of weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy: installation, replacement, and repair of windows, exterior doors, roofs, exterior walls, and exterior floors; pre-weatherization home energy audits of homes that were weatherized as a result of these audits; and post-weatherization inspection of homes;
              (vi) Unpaid volunteers' services specifically to: install, replace, and repair smoke/fire alarms as an integral part, and necessary for safe operation, of a home heating or cooling system installed or repaired as a weatherization activity; and remove asbestos as an integral part of, and necessary to carry out, weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy;
              (vii) Paid staff's services that are donated by the employer specifically to install, replace, and repair the following: weatherization materials; space heating devices, equipment, and systems; space cooling devices, equipment, and systems; and other items that help low-income households meet the costs of home energy and are specifically approved by the Department;

              (viii) Paid staff's services that are donated by the employer specifically to provide (carry out) the following, when these services are an integral part of weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy: installation, replacement, and repair of windows, exterior doors, roofs, exterior walls, and exterior floors; pre-weatherization home energy audits of homes that were weatherized as a result of these audits; and post-weatherization inspection of homes; and
              (ix) Paid staff's services that are donated by the employer specifically to: install, replace, and repair smoke/fire alarms as an integral part, and necessary for safe operation, of a home heating or cooling system installed or repaired as a weatherization activity; and remove asbestos as an integral part of, and necessary to carry out, weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy.
              (f) Resources and benefits that cannot be counted. The following resources and benefits are not countable under the leveraging incentive program:
              (1) Resources (or portions of resources) obtained, arranged, provided, contributed, and/or paid for, by a low-income household for its own benefit, or which a low-income household is responsible for obtaining or required to provide for its own benefit or for the benefit of others, in order to receive a benefit of some type;
              (2) Resources (or portions of resources) provided, contributed, and/or paid for by building owners, building managers, and/or home energy vendors, if the cost of rent, home energy, or other charge(s) to the recipient were or will be increased, or if other charge(s) to the recipient were or will be imposed, as a result;
              (3) Resources (or portions of resources) directly provided, contributed, and/or paid for by member(s) of the recipient household's family (parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, sons, daughters, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles, first cousins, nieces, and nephews, and their spouses), regardless of whether the family member(s) lived with the household, unless the family member(s) also provided the same resource to other low-income households during the base period and did not limit the resource to members of their own family;
              (4) Deferred home energy obligations;
              (5) Projected future savings from weatherization;
              (6) Delivery, and discounts in the cost of delivery, of fuel, weatherization materials, and all other items;
              (7) Purchase, rental, donation, and loan, and discounts in the cost of purchase and rental, of: supplies and equipment used to deliver fuel, weatherization materials, and all other items; and supplies and equipment used to install and repair weatherization materials and all other items;
              (8) Petroleum violation escrow (oil overcharge) funds that do not meet the definition in paragraph (b)(4) of this section;
              (9) Interest earned/paid on petroleum violation escrow funds that were distributed to a State or territory by the Department of Energy on or before October 1, 1990;
              (10) Interest earned/paid on Federal funds;
              (11) Interest earned/paid on customers' security deposits, utility deposits, etc., except when forfeited by the customer and used to provide countable benefits;
              (12) Borrowed funds that do not meet the requirements in paragraph (b)(3) above (including loans made by and/or to low-income households), interest paid on borrowed funds, and reductions in interest paid on borrowed funds;
              (13) Resources (or portions of resources) for which Federal payment or reimbursement has been or will be provided/received;
              (14) Tax deductions and tax credits received from any unit(s) of government by donors/contributors of resources for these donations, and by vendors for providing rate reductions, discounts, waivers, credits, and/or arrearage forgiveness to or for low-income households, etc.;
              (15) Funds and other resources that have been or will be used as matching or cost sharing for any Federal program;
              (16) Leveraged resources counted under any other Federal leveraging incentive program;
              (17) Costs of planning and administration, space costs, and intake costs;
              (18) Outreach activities, budget counseling, case management, and energy conservation education;
              (19) Training;

              (20) Installation, replacement, and repair of lighting fixtures and light bulbs;
              
              (21) Installation, replacement, and repair of smoke/fire alarms that are not an integral part, and necessary for safe operation, of a home heating or cooling system installed or repaired as a weatherization activity;
              (22) Asbestos removal that is not an integral part of, and necessary to carry out, weatherization to help low-income households meet the costs of home energy;
              (23) Paid services where payment is not made from countable leveraged resources, unless these services are donated as a countable in-kind contribution by the employer;
              (24) All in-kind contributions except those described in paragraph (e)(3) of this section; and
              (25) All other resources that do not meet the requirements of this section and of section 2607A of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a).
              (g) Valuation and documentation of leveraged resources and offsetting costs. (1) Leveraged cash resources will be valued at the fair market value of the benefits they provided to low-income households, as follows. Payments to or on behalf of low-income households for heating, cooling, and energy crisis assistance will be valued at their actual amount or value at the time they were provided. Purchased fuel, weatherization materials, and other countable tangible items will be valued at their fair market value (the commonly available household rate or cost in the local market area) at the time they were purchased. Installation, replacement, and repair of weatherization materials, and other countable services, will be valued at rates consistent with those ordinarily paid for similar work, by persons of similar skill in this work, in the grantee's or subrecipient's organization in the local area, at the time these services were provided. If the grantee or subrecipient does not have employees performing similar work, the rates will be consistent with those ordinarily paid by other employers for similar work, by persons of similar skill in this work, in the same labor market, at the time these services were provided. Fringe benefits and overhead costs will not be counted.
              (2) Home energy discounts, waivers, and credits will be valued at their actual amount or value.
              (3) Donated fuel, donated weatherization materials, and other countable donated tangible items will be valued at their fair market value (the commonly available household cost in the local market area) at the time of donation.
              (4) Donated unpaid services, and donated third-party paid services that are not in the employee's normal line of work, will be valued at rates consistent with those ordinarily paid for similar work, by persons of similar skill in this work, in the grantee's or subrecipient's organization in the local area, at the time these services were provided. If the grantee or subrecipient does not have employees performing similar work, the rates will be consistent with those ordinarily paid by other employers for similar work, by persons of similar skill in this work, in the same labor market, at the time these services were provided. Fringe benefits and overhead costs will not be counted. Donated third-party paid services of employees in their normal line of work will be valued at the employee's regular rate of pay, excluding fringe benefits and overhead costs.
              (5) Offsetting costs and charges will be valued at their actual amount or value.
              (i) Funds from grantees' regular LIHEAP allotments that are used specifically to identify, develop, and demonstrate leveraging programs under section 2607A(c)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a(c)(2)) will be deducted as offsetting costs in the base period in which these funds are obligated, whether or not there are any resulting leveraged benefits. Costs incurred from grantees' own funds to identify, develop, and demonstrate leveraging programs will be deducted in the first base period in which resulting leveraged benefits are provided to low-income households. If there is no resulting leveraged benefit from the expenditure of the grantee's own funds, the grantee's expenditure will not be counted or deducted.

              (ii) Any costs assessed or charged to low-income households on a continuing or on-going basis, year after year, specifically to participate in a counted leveraging program or to receive counted leveraged resources/benefits will be deducted in the base period these costs are paid. Any one-time costs or charges to low-income households specifically to participate in a counted leveraging program or to receive counted leveraged resources/benefits will be deducted in the first base period the leveraging program or resource is counted. Such costs or charges will be subtracted from the gross value of a counted resource or benefit for low-income households whose benefits are counted, but not for any households whose benefits are not counted.
              (6) Only the amount of the net addition to recipient low-income households' home energy resources may be counted in the valuation of a leveraged resource.
              (7) Leveraged resources and benefits, and offsetting costs and charges, will be valued according to the best data available to the grantee.
              (8) Grantees must maintain, or have readily available, records sufficient to document leveraged resources and benefits, and offsetting costs and charges, and their valuation. These records must be retained for three years after the end of the base period whose leveraged resources and benefits they document.
              (h) Leveraging report. (1) In order to qualify for leveraging incentive funds, each grantee desiring such funds must submit to the Department a report on the leveraged resources provided to low-income households during the preceding base period. These reports must contain the following information in a format established by the Department.
              (i) For each separate leveraged resource, the report must:
              (A) Briefly describe the specific leveraged resource and the specific benefit(s) provided to low-income households by this resource, and state the source of the resource;
              (B) State whether the resource was acquired in cash, as a discount/waiver, or as an in-kind contribution;
              (C) Indicate the geographical area in which the benefit(s) were provided to recipients;
              (D) State the month(s) and year(s) when the benefit(s) were provided to recipients;
              (E) State the gross dollar value of the countable benefits provided by the resource as determined in accordance with paragraph (g) of this section, indicate the source(s) of the data used, and describe how the grantee quantified the value and calculated the total amount;
              (F) State the number of low-income households to whom the benefit(s) were provided, and state the eligibility standard(s) for the low-income households to whom the benefit(s) were provided;
              (G) Indicate the agency or agencies that administered the resource/benefit(s); and
              (H) Indicate the criterion or criteria for leveraged resources in paragraph (d)(2) of this section that the resource/benefits meet, and for criteria in paragraphs (d)(2)(i) and (d)(2)(iii) of this section, explain how resources/benefits valued at $5,000 or more meet the criterion or criteria.
              (ii) State the total gross dollar value of the countable leveraged resources and benefits provided to low-income households during the base period (the sum of the amounts listed pursuant to paragraph (h)(1)(i)(E) of this section).
              (iii) State in dollars any costs incurred by the grantee to leverage resources, and any costs and charges imposed on low-income households to participate in a counted leveraging program or to receive counted leveraged benefits, as determined in accordance with paragraph (g)(5) of this section. Also state the amount of the grantee's regular LIHEAP allotment that the grantee used during the base period specifically to identify, develop, and demonstrate leveraging programs under section 2607A(c)(2) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626a(c)(2)).
              (iv) State the net dollar value of the countable leveraged resources and benefits for the base period. (Subtract the amounts in paragraph (h)(1)(iii) of this section from the amount in paragraph (h)(1)(ii) of this section.)

              (2) Leveraging reports must be postmarked or hand-delivered not later than November 30 of the fiscal year for which leveraging incentive funds are requested.
              
              (3) The Department may require submission of additional documentation and/or clarification as it determines necessary to verify information in a grantee's leveraging report, to determine whether a leveraged resource is countable, and/or to determine the net valuation of a resource. In such cases, the Department will set a date by which it must receive information sufficient to document countability and/or valuation. In such cases, if the Department does not receive information that it considers sufficient to document countability and/or valuation by the date it has set, then the Department will not count the resource (or portion of resource) in question.
              (i) Determination of grantee shares of leveraging incentive funds. Allocation of leveraging incentive funds to grantees will be computed according to a formula using the following factors and weights:
              (1) Fifty (50) percent based on the final net value of countable leveraged resources provided to low-income households during the base period by a grantee relative to its net Federal allotment of funds allocated under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) during the base period, as a proportion of the final net value of the countable leveraged resources provided by all grantees during the base period relative to their net Federal allotment of funds allocated under that section during the base period; and
              (2) Fifty (50) percent based on the final net value of countable leveraged resources provided to low-income households during the base period by a grantee as a proportion of the total final net value of the countable leveraged resources provided by all grantees during the base period; except that: No grantee may receive more than twelve (12.0) percent of the total amount of leveraging incentive funds available for distribution to grantees in any award period; and no grantee may receive more than the smaller of its net Federal allotment of funds allocated under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)) during the base period, or two times (double) the final net value of its countable leveraged resources for the base period. The calculations will be based on data contained in the leveraging reports submitted by grantees under paragraph (h) of this section as approved by the Department, and allocation data developed by the Department.
              (j) Uses of leveraging incentive funds. (1) Funds awarded to grantees under the leveraging incentive program must be used to increase or maintain heating, cooling, energy crisis, and/or weatherization benefits through (that is, within and as a part of) the grantee's LIHEAP program. These funds can be used for weatherization without regard to the weatherization maximum in section 2605(k) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(k)). However, they cannot be counted in the base for calculation of the weatherization maximum for regular LIHEAP funds authorized under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)). Leveraging incentive funds cannot be used for costs of planning and administration. However, in either the award period or the fiscal year following the award period, they can be counted in the base for calculation of maximum grantee planning and administrative costs under section 2605(b)(9) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8624(b)(9)). They cannot be counted in the base for calculation of maximum carryover of regular LIHEAP funds authorized under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)).
              (2) Grantees must include the uses of leveraging incentive funds in their LIHEAP plans (referred to in section 2605(c)(1)(A) of Public Law 97-35) (42 U.S.C. 8624(c)(1)(A)) for the fiscal year in which the grantee obligates these funds. Grantees must document uses of leveraging incentive funds in the same way they document uses of regular LIHEAP funds authorized under section 2602(b) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8621(b)). Leveraging incentive funds are subject to the same audit requirements as regular LIHEAP funds.
              (k) Period of obligation for leveraging incentive funds. Leveraging incentive funds are available for obligation during both the award period and the fiscal year following the award period, without regard to limitations on carryover of funds in section 2607(b)(2)(B) of Public Law 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8626(b)(2)(B)). Any leveraging incentive funds not obligated for allowable purposes by the end of this period must be returned to the Department.
              [60 FR 21359, May 1, 1995; 60 FR 36334, July 14, 1995]
            
            
              § 96.88
              Administrative costs.
              (a) Costs of planning and administration. Any expenditure for governmental functions normally associated with administration of a public assistance program must be included in determining administrative costs subject to the statutory limitation on administrative costs, regardless of whether the expenditure is incurred by the State, a subrecipient, a grantee, or a contractor of the State.
              (b) Administrative costs for territories and Indian tribes. For Indian tribes, tribal organizations and territories with allotments of $20,000 or less, the limitation on the cost of planning and administering the low-income home energy assistance program shall be 20 percent of funds payable and not transferred for use under another block grant. For tribes, tribal organizations and territories with allotments over $20,000, the limitation on the cost of planning and administration shall be $4,000 plus 10% of the amount of funds payable (and not transferred for use under another block grant) that exceeds $20,000.
              [52 FR 37967, Oct. 13, 1987]
            
            
              § 96.89
              Exemption from standards for providing energy crisis intervention assistance.
              The performance standards in section 2604(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (42 U.S.C. 8623), as amended by section 502(a) of the Human Services Reauthorization Act of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-425)—concerning provision of energy crisis assistance within specified time limits, acceptance of applications for energy crisis benefits at geographically accessible sites, and provision to physically infirm low-income persons of the means to apply for energy crisis benefits at their residences or to travel to application sites—shall not apply under the conditions described in this section.
              (a) These standards shall not apply to a program in a geographical area affected by (1) a major disaster or emergency designated by the President under the Disaster Relief Act of 1974, or (2) a natural disaster identified by the chief executive officer of a State, territory, or direct-grant Indian tribe or tribal organization, if the Secretary (or his or her designee) determines that the disaster or emergency makes compliance with the standards impracticable.
              (b) The Secretary's determination will be made after communication by the chief executive officer (or his or her designee) to the Secretary (or his or her designee) of the following:
              (1) Information substantiating the existence of a disaster or emergency;
              (2) Information substantiating the impracticability of compliance with the standards, including a description of the specific conditions caused by the disaster or emergency which make compliance impracticable; and
              (3) Information on the expected duration of the conditions that make compliance impracticable.
              If the communication is made by the chief executive officer's designee and the Department does not have on file written evidence of the designation, the communication must also include:
              (4) Evidence of the appropriate delegation of authority.
              (c) The initial communication by the chief executive officer may be oral or written. If oral, it must be followed as soon as possible by written communication confirming the information provided orally. The Secretary's exemption initially may be oral. If so, the Secretary will provide written confirmation of the exemption as soon as possible after receipt of appropriate written communication from the chief executive officer.
              (d) Exemption from the standards shall apply from the moment of the Secretary's determination, only in the geographical area affected by the disaster or emergency, and only for so long as the Secretary determines that the disaster or emergency makes compliance with the standards impracticable.
              [53 FR 6827, Mar. 3, 1988]
            
          
          
            
            Subpart I—Community Services Block Grants
            
              § 96.90
              Scope.
              This subpart applies to the community services block grant.
            
            
              § 96.91
              Audit requirement.
              Pursuant to section 1745(b) of the Reconciliation Act (31 U.S.C. 1243 note) an audit is required with respect to the 2-year period beginning on October 1, 1981, and with respect to each 2-year period thereafter. In its application for funds, a State may modify the assurance required by section 675(c)(9) of the Reconciliation Act (42 U.S.C. 9904(c)(9)) to conform to the requirements of section 1745(b).
            
            
              § 96.92
              Termination of funding.
              Where a State determines pursuant to section 675(c)(11) of the Community Services Block Grant Act that it will terminate present or future funding of any community action agency or migrant and seasonal farmworker organization which received funding in the previous fiscal year, the State must provide the organization with notice and an opportunity for hearing on the record prior to terminating funding. If a review by the Secretary of the State's final decision to terminate funding is requested pursuant to section 676A, the request must be made in writing, within 30 days of notification by the State of its final decision to terminate funding. The Department will confirm or reject the State's finding of cause, normally within 90 days. If a request for a review has been made, the State may not discontinue present or future funding until the Department confirms the State's finding of cause. If no request for a review is made within the 30-day limit, the State's decision will be effective at the expiration of that time.
              [52 FR 37968, Oct. 13, 1987]
            
          
          
            Subpart J—Primary Care Block Grants
            
              § 96.100
              Scope.
              This subpart applies to the primary care block grant.
            
            
              § 96.101
              Review of a State decision to discontinue funding of a community health center.
              Where a State determines for FY 1983, pursuant to section 1926(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300y-5(a)(2)), that a community health center does not meet the criteria for continued funding set forth in section 330 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c), the State must advise the Department of the decision and the basis upon which it was made. The Department will permit the center 30 days to respond to the State's determination. After evaluating the reasons advanced by the State and the center, the Department will determine within 30 days after the center's response is due whether the center meets the requirements for receiving a grant under the Public Health Service Act. The State may not discontinue funding the center until the Department has completed its review.
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982; 47 FR 43062, Sept. 30, 1982]
            
            
              § 96.102
              Carryover of unobligated funds.
              In implementing section 1925(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300y-4(a)(2)), the Secretary will determine that there is good cause for funds remaining unobligated if planned obligations could not be carried out because of a bona fide reason or if the State has determined that program objectives would be better served by deferring obligation of the funds to the following year.
            
          
          
            Subpart K—Transition Provisions
            
              § 96.110
              Scope.
              Except as otherwise stated, this subpart applies to the community services, preventive health and health services, alcohol and drug abuse and mental health services, and maternal and child health services block grants for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1981. The social services block grant and the low-income home energy assistance program are not subject to the provisions of this subpart.
            
            
              
              § 96.111
              Continuation of pre-existing regulations.
              The regulations previously issued by the Department and the Community Services Administration to govern administration of the programs replaced by the block grants specified in § 96.1 of this part shall continue in effect until revised to govern administration of those programs by the Department in those circumstances in which States have not qualified for block grants.
            
            
              § 96.112
              Community services block grant.
              (a) For the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1981, only, a State may choose to operate programs under the community services block grant or, instead, have the Secretary operate the programs replaced by the block grant. If a State does not notify the Secretary in accordance with the statutory deadlines each quarter, it will be deemed to have requested the Secretary to operate the programs for the following quarter.
              (b) A State or territory that does not have any eligible entity” as that term is defined in section 673(1) of the Reconciliation Act (42 U.S.C. 9902), as amended by section 17 of Pub. L. 97-115 (December 19, 1981), or any other entity for which funding is allowed under section 138 of Pub. L. 97-276, may distribute its allotment for the Fiscal Year beginning October 1, 1982 according to section 675(c)(2)(A)(ii) of the Reconciliation Act.
              (c) For any quarter in which the Secretary administers the programs, the Department's administration costs will be deducted from the State's allotment. The Department's total administration costs for making grants during fiscal year 1982 and for any monitoring of these grants in fiscal year 1983 will be deducted from each State's allotment in proportion to the total amount of grants awarded from the allotment during the period of administration by the Department (but not to exceed 5 percent of the State's fiscal year 1982 allotment).
              [47 FR 29486, July 6, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 9271, Mar. 4, 1983]
            
          
          
            Subpart L—Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 300x-21 to 300x-35 and 300x-51 to 300x-64.
            
            
              Source:
              58 FR 17070, Mar. 31, 1993, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 96.120
              Scope.
              This subpart applies to the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant administered by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 45 CFR part 96, subparts A through F, are applicable to this subpart to the extent that those subparts are consistent with subpart L. To the extent subparts A through F are inconsistent with subpart L, the provisions of subpart L are applicable.
            
            
              § 96.121
              Definitions.
              
                Block Grant means the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant, 42 U.S.C. 300x-21, et seq.
              
              
                Early Intervention Services Relating to HIV means:
              (1) appropriate pretest counseling for HIV and AIDS;
              (2) testing individuals with respect to such disease, including tests to confirm the presence of the disease, tests to diagnose the extent of the deficiency in the immune system, and tests to provide information on appropriate therapeutic measures for preventing and treating the deterioration of the immune system and for preventing and treating conditions arising from the disease;
              (3) appropriate post-test counseling; and
              (4) providing the therapeutic measures described in Paragraph (2) of this definition.
              
                Fiscal Year, unless provided otherwise, means the Federal fiscal year.
              
                Interim Services or Interim Substance Abuse Services means services that are provided until an individual is admitted to a substance abuse treatment program. The purposes of the services are to reduce the adverse health effects of such abuse, promote the health of the individual, and reduce the risk of transmission of disease. At a minimum, interim services include counseling and education about HIV and tuberculosis (TB), about the risks of needle-sharing, the risks of transmission to sexual partners and infants, and about steps that can be taken to ensure that HIV and TB transmission does not occur, as well as referral for HIV or TB treatment services if necessary. For pregnant women, interim services also include counseling on the effects of alcohol and drug use on the fetus, as well as referral for prenatal care.
              
                Primary Prevention Programs are those directed at individuals who have not been determined to require treatment for substance abuse. Such programs are aimed at educating and counseling individuals on such abuse and providing for activities to reduce the risk of such abuse.
              
                Principal Agency is the single State agency responsible for planning, carrying out and evaluating activities to prevent and treat substance abuse and related activities.
              
                Rural Area The definition of a rural area within a State shall be the latest definition of the Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce.
              
                Secretary is the Secretary of the United States Department of Health and Human Services or the Secretary's designee.
              
                State, unless provided otherwise, includes the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, America Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Micronesia, and the Marshall Islands.
              
                State Medical Director for Substance Abuse Services is a licensed physician with the knowledge, skill and ability to address the multiple physical and psychological problems associated with substance abuse, and who provides the principle agency with clinical consultation and direction regarding effective substance abuse treatment, effective primary medical care, effective infection control and public health and quality assurance.
              
                Substance Abuse is defined to include the abuse or illicit use of alcohol or other drugs.
              
                Tuberculosis Services means:
              (1) Counseling the individual with respect to tuberculosis;
              (2) Testing to determine whether the individual has been infected with mycobacteria tuberculosis to determine the appropriate form of treatment for the individual; and
              (3) Providing for or referring the individuals infected by mycobacteria tuberculosis for appropriate medical evaluation and treatment.
            
            
              § 96.122
              Application content and procedures.
              (a) For each fiscal year, beginning with fiscal year 1993, the State shall submit an application to such address as the Secretary determines is appropriate.
              (b) For fiscal year 1993, applicants must submit an application containing information which conforms to the assurances listed under § 96.123, the report as provided in § 96.122(f), and the State plan as provided in § 96.122(g).
              (c) Beginning fiscal year 1994, applicants shall only use standard application forms prescribed by the granting agency with the approval of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980. Applicants must follow all applicable instructions that bear OMB clearance numbers. The application will require the State to submit the assurances listed under § 96.123, the report as provided in § 96.122(f), and the State Plan as provided in § 96.122(g).
              (d) The State shall submit the application for a block grant by the date prescribed by law. The annual report required under § 96.130(e) is not required to be submitted as part of the application, but must be submitted no later than December 31 of the fiscal year for which the State is seeking a grant. Grant awards will not be made without the report required under § 96.130(e).

              (e) The funding agreements and assurances in the application shall be made through certification by the State's chief executive officer personally, or by an individual authorized to make such certification on behalf of the chief executive officer. When a delegation has occurred, a copy of the current delegation of authority must be submitted with the application.
              
              (f) A report shall be submitted annually with the application and State Plan. Among other things, the report must contain information as determined by the Secretary to be necessary to determine the purposes and the activities of the State, for which the Block Grant was expended. The report shall include (but is not limited to) the following:
              (1) For the fiscal year three years prior to the fiscal year for which the State is applying for funds:
              (i) A statement of whether the State exercised its discretion under applicable law to transfer Block Grant funds from substance abuse services to mental health services or vice versa, and a description of the transfers which were made;
              (ii) A description of the progress made by the State in meeting the prevention and treatment goals, objectives and activities submitted in the application for the relevant year;
              (iii) A description of the amounts expended under the Block Grant by the State agency, by activity;
              (iv) A description of the amounts expended on primary prevention and early intervention activities (if reporting on fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992 only) and for primary prevention activities (if reporting on fiscal years 1993 and subsequent years);
              (v) A description of the amounts expended for activities relating to substance abuse such as planning, coordination, needs assessment, quality assurance, training of counselors, program development, research and development and the development of information systems;
              (vi) A description of the entities, their location, and the total amount the entity received from Block Grant funds with a description of the activities undertaken by the entity;
              (vii) A description of the use of the State's revolving funds for establishment of group homes for recovering substance abusers, as provided by § 96.129, including the amount available in the fund throughout the fiscal year and the number and amount of loans made that fiscal year;
              (viii) A detailed description of the State's programs for women and, in particular for pregnant women and women with dependent children, if reporting on fiscal years 1990, 1991, or 1992; and pregnant women or women with dependent children for fiscal year 1993 and subsequent fiscal years;
              (ix) A detailed description of the State's programs for intravenous drug users; and
              (x) For applications for fiscal year 1996 and subsequent fiscal years, a description of the State's expenditures for tuberculosis services and, if a designated State, early intervention services for HIV.
              (2) For the most recent 12 month State expenditure period for which expenditure information is complete:
              (i) A description of the amounts expended by the principal agency for substance abuse prevention and treatment activities, by activity and source of funds;
              (ii) A description of substance abuse funding by other State agencies and offices, by activity and source of funds when available; and
              (iii) A description of the types and amounts of substance abuse services purchased by the principal agency.
              (3) For the fiscal year two years prior to the fiscal year for which the State is applying for funds:
              (i) A description of the amounts obligated under the Block Grant by the principal agency, by activity;
              (ii) A description of the amounts obligated for primary prevention and early intervention (if reporting on fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992 activities only) and primary prevention activities (if reporting on fiscal years 1993 and subsequent year activities);
              (iii) A description of the entities to which Block Grant funds were obligated;
              (iv) A description of the State's policies, procedures and laws regarding substance abuse prevention, especially the use of alcohol and tobacco products by minors;
              (v) For applications for fiscal year 1995 and all subsequent fiscal years, a description of the State's procedures and activities undertaken to comply with the requirement to conduct independent peer review as provided by § 96.136;

              (vi) For applications for fiscal year 1995 and all subsequent fiscal years, a description of the State's procedures and activities undertaken to comply with the requirement to develop capacity management and waiting list systems, as provided by §§ 96.126 and 96.131, as well as an evaluation summary of these activities; and
              (vii) For applications for fiscal year 1995 and subsequent fiscal years, a description of the strategies used for monitoring program compliance with §§ 96.126(f), 96.127(b), and 96.131(f), as well as a description of the problems identified and the corrective actions taken.
              (4) The aggregate State expenditures by the principle agency for authorized activities for the two State fiscal years preceding the fiscal year for which the State is applying for a grant, pursuant to § 96.134(d).
              (5) For the previous fiscal year:
              (i) A description of the State's progress in meeting the goals, objectives and activities included in the previous year's application, and a brief description of the recipients of the Block Grant funds;
              (ii) A description of the methods used to calculate the following:
              (A) The base for services to pregnant women and women with dependent children as required by § 96.124;
              (B) The base for tuberculosis services as required for § 96.127; and
              (C) For designated States, the base for HIV early intervention services as required by § 96.128;
              (iii) For applications for fiscal years 1994 and 1995 only, a description of the State's progress in the development of protocols for and the implementation of tuberculosis services, and, if a designated State, early intervention services for HIV; and
              (iv) For applications for fiscal year 1994 only, a description of the States progress in the development, implementation, and utilization of capacity management and waiting list systems.
              (v) A description of the activities the State has undertaken to comply with 42 CFR part 54.
              (6) For the first applicable fiscal year for which the State is applying for a grant, a copy of the statute enacting the law as described in § 96.130(b) and, for subsequent fiscal years for which the State is applying for a grant, any amendment to the law described in § 96.130(b).
              (7) In addition to the information above, any information that the Secretary may, from time to time, require, consistent with the Paperwork Reduction Act.
              (g) For each fiscal year, beginning fiscal year 1993, the State Plan shall be submitted to the Secretary and shall include the following:
              (1) For fiscal years 1993 and 1994, a statement on whether the Governor intends to exercise discretion under applicable law to transfer Block Grant funds from the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant allotment under section 1921 of the PHS Act to the Community Mental Health Services Block Grant allotment under section 1911 of the PHS Act or vice versa and a description of the planned transfer;
              (2) A budget of expenditures which provides an estimate of the use and distribution of Block Grant and other funds to be spent by the agency administering the Block Grant during the period covered by the application, by activity and source of funds;
              (3) A description of how the State carries out planning, including how the State identifies substate areas with the greatest need, what process the State uses to facilitate public comment on the plan, and what criteria the State uses in deciding how to allocate Block Grant funds;
              (4) A detailed description of the State procedures to monitor programs that reach 90% capacity pursuant to § 96.126(a);
              (5) A detailed description of the State procedures to implement the 14/120 day requirement provided by § 96.126(b) as well as the interim services to be provided and a description of the strategies to be used in monitoring program compliance in accordance with § 96.126(f);
              (6) A full description of the outreach efforts States will require entities which receive funds to provide pursuant to § 96.126(e);

              (7) A detailed description of the State procedures implementing TB services pursuant to § 96.127, and a description of the strategies to be used in monitoring program compliance in accordance with § 96.127(b);
              (8) A detailed description of the State's procedures implementing HIV services pursuant to § 96.128, if considered a designated State;
              (9) A description of estimates of non-Federal dollars to be spent for early intervention services relating to HIV, if a designated State, and tuberculosis services for the fiscal year covered by the application, as well as the amounts actually spent for such services for the two previous fiscal years;
              (10) For fiscal year 1993, a detailed description of the State's revolving fund for establishment of group homes for recovering substance abusers pursuant to § 96.129 and, for subsequent years, any revisions to the program;
              (11) A detailed description of State procedures implementing § 96.131 relating to treatment services for pregnant women;
              (12) Unless waived, a description on how the State will improve the process for referrals for treatment, will ensure that continuing education is provided, and will coordinate various activities and services as provided by § 96.132;
              (13) Statewide assessment of needs as provided in § 96.133;
              (14) The aggregate State dollar projected expenditures by the principal agency of a State for authorized activities for the fiscal year for which the Block Grant is to be expended, as well as the aggregate obligations or expenditures, when available, for authorized activities for the two years prior to such fiscal year as required by § 96.134;
              (15) Unless waived, a description of the services and activities to be provided by the State with Block Grant funds consistent with § 96.124 for allocations to be spent on services to pregnant women and women with dependent children, alcohol and other drug treatment and prevention, including primary prevention, and any other requirement;
              (16) A description of the State procedures to implement § 96.132(e) regarding inappropriate disclosure of patient records;
              (17) A description of the amounts to be spent for primary prevention in accordance with § 96.125;
              (18) A description of the amounts to be spent on activities relating to substance abuse such as planning coordination, needs assessment, quality assurance, training of counselors, program development, research and development and the development of information systems;
              (19) A description of the State plans regarding purchasing substance abuse services;
              (20) A description of how the State intends to monitor and evaluate the performance of substance abuse service providers in accordance with § 96.136;
              (21) A description of the State's overall goals for Block Grant expenditures, specific objectives under each goal, and the activities the State will carry out to achieve these objectives; and
              (22) Such other information as the Secretary may, from time to time, require, consistent with the Paperwork Reduction Act.
              (h) The Secretary will approve an application which includes the assurances, the State plan and the report that satisfies the requirements of this part and the relevant sections of the PHS Act. As indicated above, the State is required to provide descriptions of the State's procedures to implement the provisions of the Act and the regulations. Unless provided otherwise by these regulations, the Secretary will approve procedures which are provided as examples in the regulations, or the State may submit other procedures which the Secretary determines to reasonably implement the requirements of the Act.
              [58 FR 17070, Mar. 31, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 1508, Jan. 19, 1996; 65 FR 45305, July 21, 2000; 66 FR 46226, Sept. 4, 2001; 68 FR 56448, Sept. 4, 2003]
            
            
              § 96.123
              Assurances.
              (a) The application must include assurances that:
              (1) the State will expend the Block Grant in accordance with the percentage to be allocated to treatment, prevention, and other activities as prescribed by law and, also, for the purposes prescribed by law;

              (2) The activities relating to intravenous drug use pursuant to § 96.126 will be carried out;
              
              (3) The TB services and referral will be carried out pursuant to § 96.127, as well as the early intervention services for HIV provided for in § 96.128, if a designated State;
              (4) The revolving funds to establish group homes for recovering substance abusers is in place consistent with the provisions of § 96.129 and the loans will be made and used as provided for by law;
              (5) The State has a law in effect making it illegal to sell or distribute tobacco products to minors as provided in § 96.130(b), will conduct annual, unannounced inspections as prescribed in § 96.130, will enforce such law in a manner that can reasonably be expected to reduce the extent to which tobacco products are available to individuals under the age of 18, and will submit an annual report as required under §§ 96.122(d) and 96.130(e);
              (6) Pregnant women are provided preference in admission to treatment centers as provided by § 96.131, and are provided interim services as necessary and as required by law;
              (7) The State will improve the process in the State for referrals of individuals to the treatment modality that is most appropriate for the individuals, will ensure that continuing education is provided to employees of any funded entity providing prevention activities or treatment services, and will coordinate prevention activities and treatment services with the provision of other appropriate services as provided by § 96.132;
              (8) The State will submit an assessment of need as required by section 96.133;
              (9) The State will for such year maintain aggregate State expenditures by the principal agency of a State for authorized activities at a level that is not less than the average level of such expenditures maintained by the State for the 2-year period preceding the fiscal year for which the State is applying for the grant as provided by § 96.134;
              (10) The Block Grant will not be used to supplant State funding of alcohol and other drug prevention and treatment programs;
              (11) For purposes of maintenance of effort pursuant to §§ 96.127(f), 96.128(f), and 96.134, the State will calculate the base using Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and the composition of the base will be applied consistently from year to year;
              (12) The State will for the fiscal year for which the grant is provided comply with the restrictions on the expenditure of Block Grant funds as provided by § 96.135;
              (13) The State will make the State Plan public within the State in such manner as to facilitate comment from any person (including any Federal or other public agency) during the development of the State Plan and after the submission of the State Plan (including any revisions) to the Secretary as provided by § 1941 of the PHS Act;
              (14) The State will for the fiscal year for which the grant is provided, provide for independent peer review to assess the quality, appropriateness, and efficacy of treatment services provided in the State to individuals under the program involved as required by § 96.136;
              (15) The State has in effect a system to protect from inappropriate disclosure patient records maintained by the State in connection with an entity which is receiving amounts from the grant;
              (16) The State will comply with chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code, pertaining to audits; and
              (17) The State will abide by all applicable Federal laws and regulations, including those relating to lobbying (45 CFR part 93), drug-free workplace (45 CFR 76.600), discrimination (PHS Act Sec. 1947), false statements or failure to disclose certain events (PHS Act Sec. 1946), and, as to the State of Hawaii, services for Native Hawaiians (PHS Act Sec. 1953).
              (18) The State will comply with the requirements of 42 CFR part 54.
              [58 FR 17070, Mar. 31, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 1508, Jan. 19, 1996; 66 FR 46227, Sept. 4, 2001; 68 FR 56448, Sept. 30, 2003]
            
            
              § 96.124
              Certain allocations.
              (a) States are required to expend the Block Grant on various activities in certain proportions. Specifically, as to treatment and prevention, the State shall expend the grant as follows:

              (1) not less than 35 percent for prevention and treatment activities regarding alcohol; and
              
              (2) not less than 35 percent for prevention and treatment activities regarding other drugs.
              (b) The States are also to expend the Block Grant on primary prevention programs as follows:
              (1) Consistent with § 96.125, the State shall expend not less than 20 percent for programs for individuals who do not require treatment for substance abuse, which programs—
              (i) educate and counsel the individuals on such abuse; and
              (ii) provide for activities to reduce the risk of such abuse by the individuals;
              (2) The State shall, in carrying out paragraph (b)(1) of this section—
              (i) give priority to programs for populations that are at risk of developing a pattern of such abuse; and
              (ii) ensure that programs receiving priority under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section develop community-based strategies for prevention of such abuse, including strategies to discourage the use of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products by individuals to whom it is unlawful to sell or distribute such beverages or products.
              (c) Subject to paragraph (d) of this section, a State is required to expend the Block Grant on women services as follows:
              (1) The State for fiscal year 1993 shall expend not less than five percent of the grant to increase (relative to fiscal year 1992) the availability of treatment services designed for pregnant women and women with dependent children (either by establishing new programs or expanding the capacity of existing programs). The base for fiscal year 1993 shall be an amount equal to the fiscal year 1992 alcohol and drug services Block Grant expenditures and State expenditures for pregnant women and women with dependent children as described in paragraph (e) of this section, and to this base shall be added at least 5 percent of the 1993 Block Grant allotment. The base shall be calculated using Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and the composition of the base shall be applied consistently from year to year. States shall report the methods used to calculate their base for fiscal year 1992 expenditures on treatment for pregnant women and women with dependent children.
              (2) For fiscal year 1994, the State shall, consistent with paragraph (c)(1) of this section, expend not less than five percent of the grant to increase (relative to fiscal year 1993) the availability of such services to pregnant women and women with dependent children.
              (3) For grants beyond fiscal year 1994, the States shall expend no less than an amount equal to the amount expended by the State for fiscal year 1994.
              (d) Upon the request of a State, the Secretary may waive all or part of the requirement in paragraph (c) of this section if the Secretary determines that the State is providing an adequate level of services for this population. In determining whether an adequate level of services is being provided the Secretary will review the extent to which such individuals are receiving services. This determination may be supported by a combination of criminal justice data, the National Drug and Treatment Units Survey, statewide needs assessment data, waiting list data, welfare department data, including medicaid expenditures, or other State statistical data that are systematically collected. The Secretary will also consider the extent to which the State offers the minimum services required under § 96.124(e). The Secretary shall approve or deny a request for a waiver not later than 120 days after the date on which the request is made. Any waiver provided by the Secretary shall be applicable only to the fiscal year involved.

              (e) With respect to paragraph (c) of this section, the amount set aside for such services shall be expended on individuals who have no other financial means of obtaining such services as provided in § 96.137. All programs providing such services will treat the family as a unit and therefore will admit both women and their children into treatment services, if appropriate. The State shall ensure that, at a minimum, treatment programs receiving funding for such services also provide or arrange for the provision of the following services to pregnant women and women with dependent children, including women who are attempting to regain custody of their children:
              
              (1) primary medical care for women, including referral for prenatal care and, while the women are receiving such services, child care;
              (2) primary pediatric care, including immunization, for their children;
              (3) gender specific substance abuse treatment and other therapeutic interventions for women which may address issues of relationships, sexual and physical abuse and parenting, and child care while the women are receiving these services;
              (4) therapeutic interventions for children in custody of women in treatment which may, among other things, address their developmental needs, their issues of sexual and physical abuse, and neglect; and
              (5) sufficient case management and transportation to ensure that women and their children have access to services provided by paragraphs (e) (1) through (4) of this section.
              (f) Procedures for the implementation of paragraphs (c) and (e) of this section will be developed in consultation with the State Medical Director for Substance Abuse Services.
            
            
              § 96.125
              Primary prevention.

              (a) For purposes of § 96.124, each State/Territory shall develop and implement a comprehensive prevention program which includes a broad array of prevention strategies directed at individuals not identified to be in need of treatment. The comprehensive program shall be provided either directly or through one or more public or nonprofit private entities. The comprehensive primary prevention program shall include activities and services provided in a variety of settings for both the general population, as well as targeting sub-groups who are at high risk for substance abuse.
              (b) In implementing the prevention program the State shall use a variety of strategies, as appropriate for each target group, including but not limited to the following:
              (1) Information Dissemination: This strategy provides awareness and knowledge of the nature and extent of alcohol, tobacco and drug use, abuse and addiction and their effects on individuals, families and communities. It also provides knowledge and awareness of available prevention programs and services. Information dissemination is characterized by one-way communication from the source to the audience, with limited contact between the two. Examples of activities conducted and methods used for this strategy include (but are not limited to) the following:
              (i) Clearinghouse/information resource center(s);
              (ii) Resource directories;
              (iii) Media campaigns;
              (iv) Brochures;
              (v) Radio/TV public service announcements;
              (vi) Speaking engagements;
              (vii) Health fairs/health promotion; and
              (viii) Information lines.
              (2) Education: This strategy involves two-way communication and is distinguished from the Information Dissemination strategy by the fact that interaction between the educator/facilitator and the participants is the basis of its activities. Activities under this strategy aim to affect critical life and social skills, including decision-making, refusal skills, critical analysis (e.g. of media messages) and systematic judgment abilities. Examples of activities conducted and methods used for this strategy include (but are not limited to) the following:
              (i) Classroom and/or small group sessions (all ages);
              (ii) Parenting and family management classes;
              (iii) Peer leader/helper programs;
              (iv) Education programs for youth groups; and
              (v) Children of substance abusers groups.
              (3) Alternatives: This strategy provides for the participation of target populations in activities that exclude alcohol, tobacco and other drug use. The assumption is that constructive and healthy activities offset the attraction to, or otherwise meet the needs usually filled by alcohol, tobacco and other drugs and would, therefore, minimize or obviate resort to the latter. Examples of activities conducted and methods used for this strategy include (but are not limited to) the following:
              (i) Drug free dances and parties;
              (ii) Youth/adult leadership activities;
              
              (iii) Community drop-in centers; and
              (iv) Community service activities.
              (4) Problem Identification and Referral: This strategy aims at identification of those who have indulged in illegal/age-inappropriate use of tobacco or alcohol and those individuals who have indulged in the first use of illicit drugs in order to assess if their behavior can be reversed through education. It should be noted, however, that this strategy does not include any activity designed to determine if a person is in need of treatment. Examples of activities conducted and methods used for this strategy include (but are not limited to) the following:
              (i) Employee assistance programs;
              (ii) Student assistance programs; and
              (iii) Driving while under the influence/driving while intoxicated education programs.
              (5) Community-Based Process: This strategy aims to enhance the ability of the community to more effectively provide prevention and treatment services for alcohol, tobacco and drug abuse disorders. Activities in this strategy include organizing, planning, enhancing efficiency and effectiveness of services implementation, inter-agency collaboration, coalition building and networking. Examples of activities conducted and methods used for this strategy include (but are not limited to) the following:
              (i) Community and volunteer training, e.g., neighborhood action training, training of key people in the system, staff/officials training;
              (ii) Systematic planning;
              (iii) Multi-agency coordination and collaboration;
              (iv) Accessing services and funding; and
              (v) Community team-building.
              (6) Environmental: This strategy establishes or changes written and unwritten community standards, codes and attitudes, thereby influencing incidence and prevalence of the abuse of alcohol, tobacco and other drugs used in the general population. This strategy is divided into two subcategories to permit distinction between activities which center on legal and regulatory initiatives and those which relate to the service and action-oriented initiatives. Examples of activities conducted and methods used for this strategy shall include (but not be limited to) the following:
              (i) Promoting the establishment and review of alcohol, tobacco and drug use policies in schools;
              (ii) Technical assistance to communities to maximize local enforcement procedures governing availability and distribution of alcohol, tobacco and other drug use;
              (iii) Modifying alcohol and tobacco advertising practices; and
              (iv) Product pricing strategies.
            
            
              § 96.126
              Capacity of treatment for intravenous substance abusers.
              (a) In order to obtain Block Grant funds, the State must require programs that receive funding under the grant and that treat individuals for intravenous substance abuse to provide to the State, upon reaching 90 percent of its capacity to admit individuals to the program, a notification of that fact within seven days. In carrying out this section, the State shall establish a capacity management program which reasonably implements this section—that is, which enables any such program to readily report to the State when it reaches 90 percent of its capacity—and which ensures the maintenance of a continually updated record of all such reports and which makes excess capacity information available to such programs.
              (b) In order to obtain Block Grant funds, the State shall ensure that each individual who requests and is in need of treatment for intravenous drug abuse is admitted to a program of such treatment not later than—
              (1) 14 days after making the request for admission to such a program; or
              (2) 120 days after the date of such request, if no such program has the capacity to admit the individual on the date of such request and if interim services, including referral for prenatal care, are made available to the individual not later than 48 hours after such request.

              (c) In carrying out subsection (b), the State shall establish a waiting list management program which provides systematic reporting of treatment demand. The State shall require that any program receiving funding from the grant, for the purposes of treating injecting drug abusers, establish a waiting list that includes a unique patient identifier for each injecting drug abuser seeking treatment including those receiving interim services, while awaiting admission to such treatment. For individuals who cannot be placed in comprehensive treatment within 14 days, the State shall ensure that the program provide such individuals interim services as defined in § 96.121 and ensure that the programs develop a mechanism for maintaining contact with the individuals awaiting admission. The States shall also ensure that the programs consult the capacity management system as provided in paragraph (a) of this section so that patients on waiting lists are admitted at the earliest possible time to a program providing such treatment within reasonable geographic area.
              (d) In carrying out paragraph (b)(2) of this section the State shall ensure that all individuals who request treatment and who can not be placed in comprehensive treatment within 14 days, are enrolled in interim services and those who remain active on a waiting list in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, are admitted to a treatment program within 120 days. If a person cannot be located for admission into treatment or, if a person refuses treatment, such persons may be taken off the waiting list and need not be provided treatment within 120 days. For example, if such persons request treatment later, and space is not available, they are to be provided interim services, placed on a waiting list and admitted to a treatment program within 120 days from the latter request.
              (e) The State shall require that any entity that receives funding for treatment services for intravenous drug abuse carry out activities to encourage individuals in need of such treatment to undergo such treatment. The States shall require such entities to use outreach models that are scientifically sound, or if no such models are available which are applicable to the local situation, to use an approach which reasonably can be expected to be an effective outreach method. The model shall require that outreach efforts include the following:
              (1) Selecting, training and supervising outreach workers;
              (2) Contacting, communicating and following-up with high risk substance abusers, their associates, and neighborhood residents, within the constraints of Federal and State confidentiality requirements, including 42 CFR part 2;
              (3) Promoting awareness among injecting drug abusers about the relationship between injecting drug abuse and communicable diseases such as HIV;
              (4) Recommend steps that can be taken to ensure that HIV transmission does not occur; and
              (5) Encouraging entry into treatment.
              (f) The State shall develop effective strategies for monitoring programs compliance with this section. States shall report under the requirements of § 96.122(g) on the specific strategies to be used to identify compliance problems and corrective actions to be taken to address those problems.
            
            
              § 96.127
              Requirements regarding tuberculosis.
              (a) States shall require any entity receiving amounts from the grant for operating a program of treatment for substance abuse to follow procedures developed by the principal agency of a State for substance abuse, in consultation with the State Medical Director for Substance Abuse Services, and in cooperation with the State Department of Health/Tuberculosis Control Officer, which address how the program—
              (1) Will, directly or through arrangements with other public or nonprofit private entities, routinely make available tuberculosis services as defined in § 96.121 to each individual receiving treatment for such abuse;
              (2) In the case of an individual in need of such treatment who is denied admission to the program on the basis of the lack of the capacity of the program to admit the individual, will refer the individual to another provider of tuberculosis services; and

              (3) Will implement infection control procedures established by the principal agency of a State for substance abuse, in cooperation with the State Department of Health/Tuberculosis Control Officer, which are designed to prevent the transmission of tuberculosis, including the following:
              (i) Screening of patients;
              (ii) Identification of those individuals who are at high risk of becoming infected; and
              (iii) Meeting all State reporting requirements while adhering to Federal and State confidentiality requirements, including 42 CFR part 2; and
              (4) will conduct case management activities to ensure that individuals receive such services.
              (b) The State shall develop effective strategies for monitoring programs compliance with this section. States shall report under the requirements of § 96.122(g) on the specific strategies to be used to identify compliance problems and corrective actions to be taken to address those problems. The principal agency, in cooperation with the State Department of Health/Tuberculosis Control Officer, shall also establish linkages with other health care providers to ensure that tuberculosis services are routinely made available. All individuals identified with active tuberculosis shall be reported to the appropriate State official as required by law and consistent with paragraph (a)(3)(iii) of this section.
              (c) With respect to services provided for by a State for purposes of compliance with this section, the State shall maintain Statewide expenditures of non-Federal amounts for such services at a level that is not less than an average level of such expenditures maintained by the State for the 2-year period preceding the first fiscal year for which the State receives such a grant. In making this determination, States shall establish a reasonable funding base for fiscal year 1993. The base shall be calculated using Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and the composition of the base shall be applied consistently from year to year.
            
            
              § 96.128
              Requirements regarding human immunodeficiency virus.
              (a) In the case of a designated State as described in paragraph (b) of this section, the State shall do the following—
              (1) with respect to individuals undergoing treatment for substance abuse, the State shall, subject to paragraph (c) of this section, carry out one or more projects to make available to the individuals early intervention services for HIV disease as defined in § 96.121 at the sites at which the individuals are undergoing such treatment;
              (2) for the purpose of providing such early intervention services through such projects, the State shall make available from the grant the amounts prescribed by section 1924 of the PHS Act;
              (3) the State shall, subject to paragraph (d) of this section, carry out such projects only in geographic areas of the State that have the greatest need for the projects;
              (4) the State shall require programs participating in the project to establish linkages with a comprehensive community resource network of related health and social services organizations to ensure a wide-based knowledge of the availability of these services; and
              (5) the State shall require any entity receiving amounts from the Block Grant for operating a substance abuse treatment program to follow procedures developed by the principal agency of a State for substance abuse, in consultation with the State Medical Director for Substance Abuse Services, and in cooperation with the State Department of Health/Communicable Disease Officer.
              (b) For purposes of this section, a “designated State” is any State whose rate of cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome is 10 or more such cases per 100,000 individuals (as indicated by the number of such cases reported to and confirmed by the Director of the Centers for Disease Control for the most recent calendar year for which the data are available).

              (c) With respect to programs that provide treatment services for substance abuse, the State shall ensure that each such program participating in a project under paragraph (a) of this section will be a program that began operation prior to the fiscal year for which the State is applying to receive the grant. A program that so began operation may participate in a project under paragraph (a) of this section without regard to whether the program has been providing early intervention services for HIV disease.
              (d) If the State plans to carry out 2 or more projects under paragraph (a) of this section, the State shall carry out one such project in a rural area of the State, unless the requirement is waived. The Secretary shall waive the requirement if the State certifies to the Secretary that:
              (1) The rate of cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome is less than or equal to two such cases per 100,000 individuals in any rural area of the State, or there are so few infected persons that establishing a project in the area is not reasonable; or
              (2) There are no rural areas in the State as defined in § 96.121.
              (e) With respect to the provision of early intervention services for HIV disease to an individual, the State shall ensure that the entities comply with § 96.137 regarding payment and § 96.135 regarding restrictions on expenditure of grant. The State shall also ensure that such services will be undertaken voluntarily by, and with the informed consent of, the individual, and undergoing such services will not be required as a condition of receiving treatment services for substance abuse or any other services.
              (f) With respect to services provided for a State for purposes of compliance with this section, the State shall maintain Statewide expenditures of non-Federal amounts for such services at a level that is not less than the average level of such expenditures maintained by the State for 2-year period preceding the first fiscal year for which the State receives such a grant. In making this determination, States shall establish a reasonable base for fiscal year 1993. The base shall be calculated using Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and the composition of the base shall be applied consistently from year to year.
            
            
              § 96.129
              Revolving funds for establishment of homes in which recovering substance abusers may reside.
              (a) The State shall establish and provide for the ongoing operation of a revolving fund as follows:
              (1) The purpose of the fund is to make loans for the costs of establishing programs for the provision of housing in which individuals recovering from alcohol and drug abuse may reside in groups of not less than six individuals;
              (2) Not less than $100,000 will be available for the revolving fund;
              (3) Loans made from the revolving fund do not exceed $4,000 and that each such loan is repaid to the revolving fund not later than 2 years after the date on which the loan is made;
              (4) Each such loan is repaid by such residents through monthly installments by the date specified in the loan agreement involved;
              (5) Such loans are made only to nonprofit private entities agreeing that, in the operation of the program established pursuant to the loan—
              (i) The use of alcohol or any illegal drug in the housing provided by the program will be prohibited;
              (ii) Any resident of the housing who violates such prohibition will be expelled from the housing;
              (iii) The costs of the housing, including fees for rent and utilities, will be paid by the residents of the housing; and
              (iv) The residents of the housing will, through a majority vote of the residents, otherwise establish policies governing residence in the housing, including the manner in which applications for residence in the housing are approved;
              (6) States shall identify and clearly define legitimate purposes for which the funds will be spent, such as first month's rent, necessary furniture (e.g., beds), facility modifications (e.g., conversion of basement into a game room or extra bedrooms), and purchase of amenities which foster healthy group living (e.g., dishwasher);
              (7) In managing the revolving fund, the State and the financial entity managing the fund for the State shall abide by all Federal, State and local laws and regulations;

              (8) If the State decides to indirectly manage the fund using a private nonprofit entity as the fund management group, the State shall establish reasonable criteria for selecting the group, such as qualifications, expertise, experience, and capabilities of the group, and the State shall require that these entities abide by all Federal, State and local laws and regulations;
              (9) The State may seek assistance to approve or deny applications from entities that meet State-established criteria;
              (10) The State shall set reasonable criteria in determining the eligibility of prospective borrowers such as qualifications, expertise, capabilities, the acceptability of a proposed plan to use the funds and operate the house, and an assessment of the potential borrower's ability to pay back the funds;
              (11) The State shall establish a procedure and process for applying for a loan under the program which may include completion of the application, personal interviews and submission of evidence to support eligibility requirements, as well as establish a written procedure for repayment which will set forth reasonable penalties for late or missed payments and liability and recourse for default;
              (12) The State shall provide clearly defined written instructions to applicants which lays out timeliness, milestones, required documentation, notification of reasonable penalties for late or missed payments and recourse for default, notification on legitimate purposes for which the loan may be spent, and other procedures required by the State; and
              (13) The State shall keep a written record of the number of loans and amount of loans provided, the identities of borrowers and the repayment history of each borrower and retain it for three years.
              (b) The requirements established in paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply to any territory of the United States other than the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
            
            
              § 96.130
              State law regarding sale of tobacco products to individuals under age of 18.
              (a) For purposes of this section, the term “first applicable fiscal year” means fiscal year 1994, except in the case of any State described in section 1926(a)(2) of the PHS Act, in which case “first applicable fiscal year” means fiscal year 1995. The term “outlet” is any location which sells at retail or otherwise distributes tobacco products to consumers including (but not limited to) locations that sell such products over-the-counter or through vending machines.
              (b) The Secretary may make a grant to a State only if the State, for the first applicable fiscal year and subsequent fiscal years, has in effect a law providing that it is unlawful for any manufacturer, retailer, or distributor of tobacco products to sell or distribute any such product to any individual under age 18 through any sales or distribution outlet, including over-the-counter and vending machine sales.
              (c) For the first and second applicable fiscal years, the State shall, at a minimum, conduct annually a reasonable number of random, unannounced inspections of outlets to ensure compliance with the law and plan and begin to implement any other actions which the State believes are necessary to enforce the law.
              (d) For the third and subsequent fiscal years, the States shall do the following:
              (1) The State shall conduct annual, random, unannounced inspections of both over-the-counter and vending machine outlets. The random inspections shall cover a range of outlets (not preselected on the basis of prior violations) to measure overall levels of compliance as well as to identify violations.
              (2) Random, unannounced inspections shall be conducted annually to ensure compliance with the law and shall be conducted in such a way as to provide a probability sample of outlets. The sample must reflect the distribution of the population under age 18 throughout the State and the distribution of the outlets throughout the State accessible to youth.
              (e) As provided by § 96.122(d), the State shall annually submit to the Secretary a report which shall include the following:
              (1) a detailed description of the State's activities to enforce the law required in paragraph (b) of this section during the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year for which that State is seeking the grant;

              (2) a detailed description regarding the overall success the State has achieved during the previous fiscal year in reducing the availability of tobacco products to individuals under the age of 18, including the results of the unannounced inspections as provided by paragraph (d) of this section for which the results of over-the-counter and vending machine outlet inspections shall be reported separately;
              (3) a detailed description of how the unannounced inspections were conducted and the methods used to identify outlets;
              (4) the strategies to be utilized by the State for enforcing such law during the fiscal year for which the grant is sought; and
              (5) the identity of the agency or agencies designated by the Governor to be responsible for the implementation of the requirements of section 1926 of the PHS Act.
              (f) Beginning in the second applicable fiscal year, the annual report required under paragraph (e) of this section shall be made public within the State, along with the State plan as provided in section 1941 of the PHS Act.
              (g) Beginning with applications for the fourth applicable fiscal year and all subsequent fiscal years, the Secretary will negotiate with the State, as part of the State's plan, the interim performance target the State will meet for that fiscal year and in subsequent years will seek evidence of progress toward achieving or surpassing a performance objective in which the inspection failure rate would be no more than 20% within several years.
              (h) Beginning with the second applicable fiscal year and all subsequent fiscal years, the Secretary shall make a determination, before making a Block Grant to a State for that fiscal year, whether the State reasonably enforced its law in the previous fiscal year pursuant to this section. In making this determination, the Secretary will consider the following factors:
              (1) During the first and second applicable fiscal years, the State must conduct the activities prescribed in paragraph (c) of this section.
              (2) During the third applicable fiscal year, the State must conduct random, unannounced inspections in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section.
              (3) During the fourth and all subsequent applicable fiscal years, the State must do the following:
              (i) conduct random, unannounced inspections in accordance with paragraph (d); and
              (ii) except as provided by paragraph (h)(4) of this section, the State must be in substantial compliance with the target negotiated with the Secretary under paragraph (g) of this section for that fiscal year.
              (4) If a State has not substantially complied with the target as prescribed under paragraph (h)(3)(ii) of this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary, in extraordinary circumstances, may consider a number of factors, including survey data showing that the State is making significant progress toward reducing use of tobacco products by children and youth, data showing that the State has progressively decreased the availability of tobacco products to minors, the composition of the outlets inspected as to whether they were over-the-counter or vending machine outlets, and the State's plan for improving the enforcement of the law in the next fiscal year.
              (i) If, after notice to the State and an opportunity for a hearing, the Secretary determines under paragraph (h) of this section that the State has not maintained compliance, the Secretary will reduce the amount of the allotment in such amounts as is required by section 1926(c) of the PHS Act.
              (j) States may not use the Block Grant to fund the enforcement of their statute, except that they may expend funds from the primary prevention setaside of their Block Grant allotment under 45 CFR 96.124(b)(1) for carrying out the administrative aspects of the requirements such as the development of the sample design and the conducting of the inspections.
              [61 FR 1508, Jan. 19, 1996, as amended at 66 FR 46227, Sept. 4, 2001]
            
            
              § 96.131
              Treatment services for pregnant women.

              (a) The State is required to, in accordance with this section, ensure that each pregnant woman in the State who seeks or is referred for and would benefit from such services is given preference in admissions to treatment facilities receiving funds pursuant to the grant. In carrying out this section, the State shall require all entities that serve women and who receive such funds to provide preference to pregnant women. Programs which serve an injecting drug abuse population and who receive Block Grant funds shall give preference to treatment as follows:
              (1) Pregnant injecting drug users;
              (2) Pregnant substance abusers;
              (3) Injecting drug users; and
              (4) All others.
              (b) The State will, in carrying out this provision publicize the availability to such women of services from the facilities and the fact that pregnant women receive such preference. This may be done by means of street outreach programs, ongoing public service announcements (radio/television), regular advertisements in local/regional print media, posters placed in targeted areas, and frequent notification of availability of such treatment distributed to the network of community based organizations, health care providers, and social service agencies.
              (c) The State shall in carrying out paragraph (a) of this section require that, in the event that a treatment facility has insufficient capacity to provide treatment services to any such pregnant woman who seeks the services from the facility, the facility refer the woman to the State. This may be accomplished by establishing a capacity management program, utilizing a toll-free number, an automated reporting system and/or other mechanisms to ensure that pregnant women in need of such services are referred as appropriate. The State shall maintain a continually updated system to identify treatment capacity for any such pregnant women and will establish a mechanism for matching the women in need of such services with a treatment facility that has the capacity to treat the woman.
              (d) The State, in the case of each pregnant woman for whom a referral under paragraph (a) of this section is made to the State—
              (1) will refer the woman to a treatment facility that has the capacity to provide treatment services to the woman; or
              (2) will, if no treatment facility has the capacity to admit the woman, make available interim services, including a referral for prenatal care, available to the woman not later than 48 hours after the woman seeks the treatment services.
              (e) Procedures for the implementation of this section shall be developed in consultation with the State Medical Director for Substance Abuse Services.
              (f) The State shall develop effective strategies for monitoring programs compliance with this section. States shall report under the requirements of § 96.122(g) on the specific strategies to be used to identify compliance problems and corrective actions to be taken to address those problems.
            
            
              § 96.132
              Additional agreements.
              (a) With respect to individuals seeking treatment services, the State is required to improve (relative to fiscal year 1992) the process in the State for referring the individuals to treatment facilities that can provide to the individuals the treatment modality that is most appropriate for the individuals. Examples of how this may be accomplished include the development and implementation of a capacity management/waiting list management system; the utilization of a toll-free number for programs to report available capacity and waiting list data; and the utilization of standardized assessment procedures that facilitate the referral process.
              (b) With respect to any facility for treatment services or prevention activities that is receiving amounts from a Block Grant, continuing education in such services or activities (or both, as the case may be) shall be made available to employees of the facility who provide the services or activities. The States will ensure that such programs include a provision for continuing education for employees of the facility in its funding agreement.

              (c) The State shall coordinate prevention and treatment activities with the provision of other appropriate services (including health, social, correctional and criminal justice, educational, vocational rehabilitation, and employment services). In evaluating compliance with this section, the Secretary will consider such factors as the existence of memoranda of understanding between various service providers/agencies and evidence that the State has included prevention and treatment services coordination in its grants and contracts.
              (d) Upon the request of a State, the Secretary may provide to a State a waiver of any or all of the requirements established in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this section, if the Secretary determines that, with respect to services for the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, the requirement involved is unnecessary for maintaining quality in the provision of such services in the State. In evaluating whether to grant or deny a waiver, the Secretary will rely on information drawn from the independent peer review/quality assurance activities conducted by the State. For example, a State may be eligible for a waiver of the requirement of paragraph (a) of this section if a State already has a well developed process for referring individuals to treatment facilities that can provide to the individuals the treatment modality that is most appropriate for the individuals. The Secretary will approve or deny a request for a waiver not later than 120 days after the date on which the request is made. Any waiver provided by the Secretary for paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this section, will be applicable only to the fiscal year involved.
              (e) The State is also required to have in effect a system to protect from inappropriate disclosure patient records maintained by the State in connection with an activity funded under the program involved or by any entity which is receiving amounts from the grant and such system shall be in compliance with all applicable State and Federal laws and regulations, including 42 CFR part 2. This system shall include provisions for employee education on the confidentiality requirements and the fact that disciplinary action may occur upon inappropriate disclosures. This requirement cannot be waived.
            
            
              § 96.133
              Submission to Secretary of Statewide assessment of needs.
              (a) The State is required to submit to the Secretary an assessment of the need in the State for authorized activities, both by locality and by the State in general. The State is to provide a broad range of information which includes the following:
              (1) The State is to submit data which shows the incidence and prevalence in the State of drug abuse and the incidence and prevalence in the State of alcohol abuse and alcoholism. For fiscal years 1993 through 1996, the State shall submit its best available data on the incidence and prevalence of drug and alcohol abuse and alcoholism. The State shall also provide a summary describing the weakness and bias in the data and a description on how the State plans to strengthen the data in the future.
              (2) The State shall provide a description on current substance abuse prevention and treatment activities:
              (i) For fiscal year 1993, the State shall provide its best available data on current prevention and treatment activities in the State in such detail as it finds reasonably practicable given its own data collection activities and records.

              (ii) For fiscal year 1994 and subsequent years, the State shall provide a detailed description on current prevention and treatment activities in the State. This report shall include a detailed description of the intended use of the funds relating to prevention and treatment, as well as a description of treatment capacity. As to primary prevention activities, the activities must be broken down by strategies used, such as those provided in section 96.125, including the specific activities conducted. The State shall provide the following data if available: the specific risk factors being addressed by activity; the age, race/ethnicity and gender of the population being targeted by the prevention activity; and the community size and type where the activity is carried out. As to all treatment and prevention activities, including primary prevention, the State shall provide the identities of the entities that provide the services and describe the services provided. The State shall submit information on treatment utilization to describe the type of care and the utilization according to primary diagnosis of alcohol or drug abuse, or a dual diagnosis of drug and alcohol abuse.
              (3) The State may describe the need for technical assistance to carry out Block Grant activities, including activities relating to the collection of incidence and prevalence data identified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
              (4) The State shall establish goals and objectives for improving substance abuse treatment and prevention activities and shall report activities taken in support of these goals and objectives in its application.
              (5) The State shall submit a detailed description on the extent to which the availability of prevention and treatment activities is insufficient to meet the need for the activities, the interim services to be made available under sections 96.126 and 96.131, and the manner in which such services are to be so available. Special attention should be provided to the following groups:
              (i) Pregnant addicts;
              (ii) Women who are addicted and who have dependent children;
              (iii) Injecting drug addicts; and
              (iv) Substance abusers infected with HIV or who have tuberculosis.
              (6) Documentation describing the results of the State's management information system pertaining to capacity and waiting lists shall also be submitted, as well as a summary of such information for admissions and, when available, discharges. As to prevention activities, the report shall include a description of the populations at risk of becoming substance abusers.
            
            
              § 96.134
              Maintenance of effort regarding State expenditures.
              (a) With respect to the principal agency of a State for carrying out authorized activities, the agency shall for each fiscal year maintain aggregate State expenditures by the principal agency for authorized activities at a level that is not less than the average level of such expenditures maintained by the State for the two year period preceding the fiscal year for which the State is applying for the grant. The Block Grant shall not be used to supplant State funding of alcohol and other drug prevention and treatment programs.
              (b) Upon the request of a State, the Secretary may waive all or part of the requirement established in paragraph (a) of this section if the Secretary determines that extraordinary economic conditions in the State justify the waiver. The State involved must submit information sufficient for the Secretary to make the determination, including the nature of the extraordinary economic circumstances, documented evidence and appropriate data to support the claim, and documentation on the year for which the State seeks the waiver. The Secretary will approve or deny a request for a waiver not later than 120 days after the date on which the request is made. Any waiver provided by the Secretary shall be applicable only to the fiscal year involved. “Extraordinary economic conditions” mean a financial crisis in which the total tax revenue declines at least one and one-half percent, and either unemployment increases by at least one percentage point, or employment declines by at least one and one-half percent.
              (c) In making a Block Grant to a State for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall make a determination of whether, for the previous fiscal year or years, the State maintained material compliance with any agreement made under paragraph (a) of this section. If the Secretary determines that a State has failed to maintain such compliance, the Secretary shall reduce the amount of the allotment for the State for the fiscal year for which the grant is being made by an amount equal to the amount constituting such failure for the previous fiscal year.

              (d) The Secretary may make a Block Grant for a fiscal year only if the State involved submits to the Secretary information sufficient for the Secretary to make the determination required in paragraph (a) of this section, which includes the dollar amount reflecting the aggregate State expenditures by the principal agency for authorized activities for the two State fiscal years preceding the fiscal year for which the State is applying for the grant. The base shall be calculated using Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and the composition of the base shall be applied consistently from year to year.
            
            
              § 96.135
              Restrictions on expenditure of grant.
              (a) The State shall not expend the Block Grant on the following activities:
              (1) To provide inpatient hospital services, except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section;
              (2) To make cash payments to intended recipients of health services;
              (3) To purchase or improve land, purchase, construct, or permanently improve (other than minor remodeling) any building or other facility, or purchase major medical equipment;
              (4) To satisfy any requirement for the expenditure of non-Federal funds as a condition for the receipt of Federal funds;
              (5) To provide financial assistance to any entity other than a public or nonprofit private entity; or
              (6) To provide individuals with hypodermic needles or syringes so that such individuals may use illegal drugs, unless the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service determines that a demonstration needle exchange program would be effective in reducing drug abuse and the risk that the public will become infected with the etiologic agent for AIDS.
              (b) The State shall limit expenditures on the following:
              (1) The State involved will not expend more than 5 percent of the grant to pay the costs of administering the grant; and
              (2) The State will not, in expending the grant for the purpose of providing treatment services in penal or correctional institutions of the State, expend more than an amount prescribed by section 1931(a)(3) of the PHS Act.
              (c) Exception regarding inpatient hospital services.
              (1) With respect to compliance with the agreement made under paragraph (a) of this section, a State (acting through the Director of the principal agency) may expend a grant for inpatient hospital-based substance abuse programs subject to the limitations of paragraph (c)(2) of this section only when it has been determined by a physician that:
              (i) The primary diagnosis of the individual is substance abuse, and the physician certifies this fact;
              (ii) The individual cannot be safely treated in a community-based, nonhospital, residential treatment program;
              (iii) The Service can reasonably be expected to improve an individual's condition or level of functioning;
              (iv) The hospital-based substance abuse program follows national standards of substance abuse professional practice; and
              (2) In the case of an individual for whom a grant is expended to provide inpatient hospital services described above, the allowable expenditure shall conform to the following:
              (i) The daily rate of payment provided to the hospital for providing the services to the individual will not exceed the comparable daily rate provided for community-based, nonhospital, residential programs of treatment for substance abuse; and
              (ii) The grant may be expended for such services only to the extent that it is medically necessary, i.e., only for those days that the patient cannot be safely treated in a residential, community-based program.
              (d) The Secretary may approve a waiver for construction under paragraph (a)(3) of this section within 120 days after the date of a request only if:
              (1) The State demonstrates to the Secretary that adequate treatment cannot be provided through the use of existing facilities and that alternative facilities in existing suitable buildings are not available;
              (2) The State has carefully designed a plan that minimizes the costs of renovation or construction;
              (3) The State agrees, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the State in carrying out the purpose of the waiver, to make available non-Federal contributions in cash toward such costs in an amount equal to not less than $1 for each $1 of Federal funds provided under the Block Grant; and

              (4) The State submits the following to support paragraphs (b)(1), (2) and (3), of this section:
              
              (i) Documentation to support paragraph (d)(1) of this section, such as local needs assessments, waiting lists, survey data and other related information;
              (ii) A brief description of the project to be funded, including the type(s) of services to be provided and the projected number of residential and/or outpatient clients to be served;
              (iii) The specific amount of Block Grant funds to be used for this project;
              (iv) The number of outpatient treatment slots planned or the number of residential beds planned, if applicable;
              (v) The estimate of the total cost of the construction or rehabilitation (and a description of how these estimates were determined), based on an independent estimate of said cost, using standardized measures as determined by an appropriate State construction certifying authority;
              (vi) An assurance by the State that all applicable National (e.g., National Fire Protection Association, Building Officials and Codes Administrators International), Federal (National Environmental Policy Act), State, and local standards for construction or rehabilitation of health care facilities will be complied with;
              (vii) Documentation of the State's commitment to obligate these funds by the end of the first year in which the funds are available, and that such funds must be expended by the end of the second year (section 1914(a)(2) of the PHS Act);
              (viii) A certification that there is public support for a waiver, as well as a description of the procedure used (and the results therein) to ensure adequate comment from the general public and the appropriate State and local health planning organizations, local governmental entities and public and private-sector service providers that may be impacted by the waiver request;
              (ix) Evidence that a State is committed to using the proposed new or rehabilitated substance abuse facility for the purposes stated in the request for at least 20 years for new construction and at least 10 years for rehabilitated facilities;
              (x) An assurance that, if the facility ceases to be used for such services, or if the facility is sold or transferred for a purpose inconsistent with the State's waiver request, monies will be returned to the Federal Government in an amount proportionate to the Federal assistance provided, as it relates to the value of the facility at the time services cease or the facility sold or transferred;
              (xi) A description of the methods used to minimize the costs of the construction or rehabilitation, including documentation of the costs of the residential facilities in the local area or other appropriate equivalent sites in the State;
              (xii) An assurance that the State shall comply with the matching requirements of paragraph (d)(3) of this section; and
              (xiii) Any other information the Secretary may determine to be appropriate.
            
            
              § 96.136
              Independent peer review.
              (a) The State shall for the fiscal year for which the grant is provided, provide for independent peer review to assess the quality, appropriateness, and efficacy of treatment services provided in the State to individuals under the program involved, and ensure that at least 5 percent of the entities providing services in the State under such program are reviewed. The programs reviewed shall be representative of the total population of such entities.

              (b) The purpose of independent peer review is to review the quality and appropriateness of treatment services. The review will focus on treatment programs and the substance abuse service system rather than on the individual practitioners. The intent of the independent peer review process is to continuously improve the treatment services to alcohol and drug abusers within the State system. “Quality,” for purposes of this section, is the provision of treatment services which, within the constraints of technology, resources, and patient/client circumstances, will meet accepted standards and practices which will improve patient/client health and safety status in the context of recovery. “Appropriateness,” for purposes of this section, means the provision of treatment services consistent with the individual's identified clinical needs and level of functioning.
              (c) The independent peer reviewers shall be individuals with expertise in the field of alcohol and drug abuse treatment. Because treatment services may be provided by multiple disciplines, States will make every effort to ensure that individual peer reviewers are representative of the various disciplines utilized by the program under review. Individual peer reviewers must also be knowledgeable about the modality being reviewed and its underlying theoretical approach to addictions treatment, and must be sensitive to the cultural and environmental issues that may influence the quality of the services provided.
              (d) As part of the independent peer review, the reviewers shall review a representative sample of patient/client records to determine quality and appropriateness of treatment services, while adhering to all Federal and State confidentiality requirements, including 42 CFR part 2. The reviewers shall examine the following:
              (1) Admission criteria/intake process;
              (2) Assessments;
              (3) Treatment planning, including appropriate referral, e.g., prenatal care and tuberculosis and HIV services;
              (4) Documentation of implementation of treatment services;
              (5) Discharge and continuing care planning; and
              (6) Indications of treatment outcomes.
              (e) The State shall ensure that the independent peer review will not involve practitioners/providers reviewing their own programs, or programs in which they have administrative oversight, and that there be a separation of peer review personnel from funding decisionmakers. In addition, the State shall ensure that independent peer review is not conducted as part of the licensing/certification process.
              (f) The States shall develop procedures for the implementation of this section and such procedures shall be developed in consultation with the State Medical Director for Substance Abuse Services.
            
            
              § 96.137
              Payment schedule.
              (a) The Block Grant money that may be spent for §§ 96.124(c) and (e), 96.127 and 96.128 is governed by this section which ensures that the grant will be the “payment of last resort.” The entities that receive funding under the Block Grant and provides services required by the above-referenced sections shall make every reasonable effort, including the establishment of systems for eligibility determination, billing, and collection, to:
              (1) Collect reimbursement for the costs of providing such services to persons who are entitled to insurance benefits under the Social Security Act, including programs under title XVIII and title XIX, any State compensation program, any other public assistance program for medical expenses, any grant program, any private health insurance, or any other benefit program; and
              (2) Secure from patients or clients payments for services in accordance with their ability to pay.
            
          
          
             
            
              Pt. 96, App. A
              Appendix A to Part 96—Uniform Definitions of Services
              1. Adoption Services
              2. Case Management Services
              3. Congregate Meals
              4. Counseling Services
              5. Day Care Services—Adults
              6. Day Care Services—Children
              7. Education and Training Services
              8. Employment Services
              9. Family Planning Services
              10. Foster Care Services for Adults
              11. Foster Care Services for Children
              12. Health Related and Home Health Services
              13. Home Based Services
              14. Home Delivered Meals
              15. Housing Services
              16. Independent and Transitional Living Services
              17. Information and Referral Services
              18. Legal Services
              19. Pregnancy and Parenting Services for Young Parents
              20. Prevention and Intervention Services
              21. Protective Services for Adults
              22. Protective Services for Children
              23. Recreational Services
              24. Residential Treatment Services

              25. Special Services for Persons with Developmental or Physical Disabilities, or Persons with Visual or Auditory Impairments
              
              26. Special Services for Youth Involved in or At Risk of Involvement in Criminal Activity
              27. Substance Abuse Services
              28. Transportation Services
              29. Other Services
              Uniform Definitions of Services
              1. Adoption Services
              Adoption services are those services or activities provided to assist in bringing about the adoption of a child. Component services and activities may include, but are not limited to, counseling the biological parent(s), recruitment of adoptive homes, and pre- and post-placement training and/or counseling.
              2. Case Management Services
              Case management services are services or activities for the arrangement, coordination, and monitoring of services to meet the needs of individuals and families. Component services and activities may include individual service plan development; counseling; monitoring, developing, securing, and coordinating services; monitoring and evaluating client progress; and assuring that clients' rights are protected.
              3. Congregate Meals
              Congregate meals are those services or activities designed to prepare and serve one or more meals a day to individuals in central dining areas in order to prevent institutionalization, malnutrition, and feelings of isolation. Component services or activities may include the cost of personnel, equipment, and food; assessment of nutritional and dietary needs; nutritional education and counseling; socialization; and other services such as transportation and information and referral.
              4. Counseling Services
              Counseling services are those services or activities that apply therapeutic processes to personal, family, situational, or occupational problems in order to bring about a positive resolution of the problem or improved individual or family functioning or circumstances. Problem areas may include family and marital relationships, parent-child problems, or drug abuse.
              5. Day Care Services—Adults
              Day care services for adults are those services or activities provided to adults who require care and supervision in a protective setting for a portion of a 24-hour day. Component services or activities may include opportunity for social interaction, companionship and self-education; health support or assistance in obtaining health services; counseling; recreation and general leisure time activities; meals; personal care services; plan development; and transportation.
              6. Day Care Services—Children
              Day care services for children (including infants, pre-schoolers, and school age children) are services or activities provided in a setting that meets applicable standards of state and local law, in a center or in a home, for a portion of a 24-hour day. Component services or activities may include a comprehensive and coordinated set of appropriate developmental activities for children, recreation, meals and snacks, transportation, health support services, social service counseling for parents, plan development, and licensing and monitoring of child care homes and facilities.
              7. Education and Training Services
              Education and training services are those services provided to improve knowledge or daily living skills and to enhance cultural opportunities. Services may include instruction or training in, but are not limited to, such issues as consumer education, health education, community protection and safety education, literacy education, English as a second language, and General Educational Development (G.E.D.). Component services or activities may include screening, assessment and testing; individual or group instruction; tutoring; provision of books, supplies and instructional material; counseling; transportation; and referral to community resources.
              8. Employment Services
              Employment services are those services or activities provided to assist individuals in securing employment or acquiring or learning skills that promote opportunities for employment. Component services or activities may include employment screening, assessment, or testing; structured job skills and job seeking skills; specialized therapy (occupational, speech, physical); special training and tutoring, including literacy training and pre-vocational training; provision of books, supplies and instructional material; counseling, transportation; and referral to community resources.
              9. Family Planning Services

              Family planning services are those educational, comprehensive medical or social services or activities which enable individuals, including minors, to determine freely the number and spacing of their children and to select the means by which this may be achieved. These services and activities include a broad range of acceptable and effective methods and services to limit or enhance fertility, including contraceptive methods (including natural family planning and abstinence), and the management of infertility (including referral to adoption). Specific component services and activities may include preconceptional counseling, education, and general reproductive health care, including diagnosis and treatment of infections which threaten reproductive capability. Family planning services do not include pregnancy care (including obstetric or prenatal care).
              10. Foster Care Services for Adults
              Foster care services for adults are those services or activities that assess the need and arrange for the substitute care and alternate living situation of adults in a setting suitable to the individual's needs. Individuals may need such services because of social, physical or mental disabilities, or as a consequence of abuse or neglect. Care may be provided in a community-based setting, or such services may arrange for institutionalization when necessary. Component services or activities include assessment of the individual's needs; case planning and case management to assure that the individual receives proper care in the placement; counseling to help with personal problems and adjusting to new situations; assistance in obtaining other necessary supportive services; determining, through periodic reviews, the continued appropriateness of and need for placement; and recruitment and licensing of foster care homes and facilities.
              11. Foster Care Services for Children
              Foster care services for children are those services or activities associated with the provision of an alternative family life experience for abused, neglected or dependent children, between birth and the age of majority, on the basis of a court commitment or a voluntary placement agreement signed by the parent or guardian. Services may be provided to children in foster family homes, foster homes of relatives, group homes, emergency shelters, residential facilities, child care institutions, pre-adoptive homes or supervised independent living situation. Component services or activities may include assessment of the child's needs; case planning and case management to assure that the child receives proper care in the placement; medical care as an integral but subordinate part of the service; counseling of the child, the child's parents, and the foster parents; referral and assistance in obtaining other necessary supportive services; periodical reviews to determine the continued appropriateness and need for placement; and recruitment and licensing of foster homes and child care institutions.
              12. Health Related and Home Health Services
              Health related and home health services are those in-home or out-of-home services or activities designed to assist individuals and families to attain and maintain a favorable condition of health. Component services and activities may include providing an analysis or assessment of an individual's health problems and the development of a treatment plan; assisting individuals to identify and understand their health needs; assisting individuals to locate, provide or secure, and utilize appropriate medical treatment, preventive medical care, and health maintenance services, including in-home health services and emergency medical services; and providing follow-up services as needed.
              13. Home Based Services
              Home based services are those in-home services or activities provided to individuals or families to assist with household or personal care activities that improve or maintain adequate family well-being. These services may be provided for reasons of illness, incapacity, frailty, absence of a caretaker relative, or to prevent abuse and neglect of a child or adult. Major service components include homemaker services, chore services, home maintenance services, and household management services. Component services or activities may include protective supervision of adults and/or children to help prevent abuse, temporary non-medical personal care, house-cleaning, essential shopping, simple household repairs, yard maintenance, teaching of homemaking skills, training in self-help and self-care skills, assistance with meal planning and preparation, sanitation, budgeting, and general household management.
              14. Home Delivered Meals
              Home-delivered meals are those services or activities designed to prepare and deliver one or more meals a day to an individual's residence in order to prevent institutionalization, malnutrition, and feelings of isolation. Component services or activities may include the cost of personnel, equipment, and food; assessment of nutritional and dietary needs; nutritional education and counseling; socialization services; and information and referral.
              15. Housing Services

              Housing services are those services or activities designed to assist individuals or families in locating, obtaining, or retaining suitable housing. Component services or activities may include tenant counseling; helping individuals and families to identify and correct substandard housing conditions on behalf of individuals and families who are unable to protect their own interests; and assisting individuals and families to understand leases, secure utilities, make moving arrangements and minor renovations.
              
              16. Independent and Transitional Living Services
              Independent and transitional living services are those services and activities designed to help older youth in foster care or homeless youth make the transition to independent living, or to help adults make the transition from an institution, or from homelessness, to independent living. Component services or activities may include educational and employment assistance, training in daily living skills, and housing assistance. Specific component services and activities may include supervised practice living and post-foster care services.
              17. Information and Referral Services
              Information and referral services are those services or activities designed to provide information about services provided by public and private service providers and a brief assessment of client needs (but not diagnosis and evaluation) to facilitate appropriate referral to these community resources.
              18. Legal Services
              Legal services are those services or activities provided by a lawyer or other person(s) under the supervision of a lawyer to assist individuals in seeking or obtaining legal help in civil matters such as housing, divorce, child support, guardianship, paternity, and legal separation. Component services or activities may include receiving and preparing cases for trial, provision of legal advice, representation at hearings, and counseling.
              19. Pregnancy and Parenting Services for Young Parents
              Pregnancy and parenting services are those services or activities for married or unmarried adolescent parents and their families designed to assist young parents in coping with the social, emotional, and economic problems related to pregnancy and in planning for the future. Component services or activities may include securing necessary health care and living arrangements; obtaining legal services; and providing counseling, child care education, and training in and development of parenting skills.
              20. Prevention and Intervention Services
              Prevention and intervention services are those services or activities designed to provide early identification and/or timely intervention to support families and prevent or ameliorate the consequences of, abuse, neglect, or family violence, or to assist in making arrangement for alternate placements or living arrangements where necessary. Such services may also be provided to prevent the removal of a child or adult from the home. Component services and activities may include investigation; assessment and/or evaluation of the extent of the problem; counseling, including mental health counseling or therapy as needed; developmental and parenting skills training; respite care; and other services including supervision, case management, and transportation.
              21. Protective Services for Adults
              Protective services for adults are those services or activities designed to prevent or remedy abuse, neglect or exploitation of adults who are unable to protect their own interests. Examples of situations that may require protective services are injury due to maltreatment or family violence; lack of adequate food, clothing or shelter; lack of essential medical treatment or rehabilitation services; and lack of necessary financial or other resources. Component services or activities may include investigation; immediate intervention; emergency medical services; emergency shelter; developing case plans; initiation of legal action (if needed); counseling for the individual and the family; assessment/evaluation of family circumstances; arranging alternative or improved living arrangements; preparing for foster placement, if needed; and case management and referral to service providers.
              22. Protective Services for Children
              Protective services for children are those services or activities designed to prevent or remedy abuse, neglect, or exploitation of children who may be harmed through physical or mental injury, sexual abuse or exploitation, and negligent treatment or maltreatment, including failure to be provided with adequate food, clothing, shelter, or medical care. Component services or activities may include immediate investigation and intervention; emergency medical services; emergency shelter; developing case plans; initiation of legal action (if needed); counseling for the child and the family; assessment/evaluation of family circumstances; arranging alternative living arrangement; preparing for foster placement, if needed; and case management and referral to service providers.
              23. Recreational Services
              Recreational services are those services or activities designed to provide, or assist individuals to take advantage of, individual or group activities directed towards promoting physical, cultural, and/or social development.
              24. Residential Treatment Services

              Residential treatment services provide short-term residential care and comprehensive treatment and services for children or adults whose problems are so severe or are such that they cannot be cared for at home or in foster care and need the specialized services provided by specialized facilities. Component services and activities may include diagnosis and psychological evaluation; alcohol and drug detoxification services; individual, family, and group therapy and counseling; remedial education and GED preparation; vocational or pre-vocational training; training in activities of daily living; supervised recreational and social activities; case management; transportation; and referral to and utilization of other services.
              25. Special Services for Persons With Developmental or Physical Disabilities, or Persons With Visual or Auditory Impairments
              Special services for persons with developmental or physical disabilities, or persons with visual or auditory impairments, are services or activities to maximize the potential of persons with disabilities, help alleviate the effects of physical, mental or emotional disabilities, and to enable these persons to live in the least restrictive environment possible. Component services or activities may include personal and family counseling; respite care; family support; recreation; transportation; aid to assist with independent functioning in the community; and training in mobility, communication skills, the use of special aids and appliances, and self-sufficiency skills. Residential and medical services may be included only as an integral, but subordinate, part of the services.
              26. Special Services for Youth Involved in or at Risk of Involvement With Criminal Activity
              Special services for youth involved in or at risk of involvement with criminal activity are those services or activities for youth who are, or who may become, involved with the juvenile justice system and their families. Components services or activities are designed to enhance family functioning and/or modify the youth's behavior with the goal of developing socially appropriate behavior and may include counseling, intervention therapy, and residential and medical services if included as an integral but subordinate part of the service.
              27. Substance Abuse Services
              Substance abuse services are those services or activities that are primarily designed to deter, reduce, or eliminate substance abuse or chemical dependence. Except for initial detoxification services, medical and residential services may be included but only as an integral but subordinate part of the service. Component substance abuse services or activities may include a comprehensive range of personal and family counseling methods, methadone treatment for opiate abusers, or detoxification treatment for alcohol abusers. Services may be provided in alternative living arrangements such as institutional settings and community-based halfway houses.
              28. Transportation Services
              Transportation services are those services or activities that provide or arrange for the travel, including travel costs, of individuals in order to access services, or obtain medical care or employment. Component services or activities may include special travel arrangements such as special modes of transportation and personnel to accompany or assist individuals or families to utilize transportation.
              29. Other Services
              Other Services are services that do not fall within the definitions of the preceding 28 services. The definition used by the State for each of these services should appear elsewhere in the annual report.
              [58 FR 60128, Nov. 15, 1993]
            
            
              Pt. 96, App. B
              Appendix B to Part 96—SSBG Reporting Form and Instructions
              Instructions
              This form must be used by states as the reporting instrument to satisfy the requirements of 45 CFR 96.74(a) (1) through (4). Following are instructions on how to complete the form:
              General
              1. Enter the name of the state submitting the form.
              2. Enter the fiscal year for which the form is being submitted. Either the state or federal fiscal year may be used.
              3. Enter the month and year of the beginning and end of the fiscal year—e.g., 07/91 to 06/92.
              Services
              4. The “service” column contains a list of services that are to be used for national reporting. This list in no way mandates how a state is to design its program of services under the SSBG, but rather is to be used only to obtain nationally comparable statistics. If the services that your state provides reasonably fit the uniform service definitions in appendix A, use them. In cases where no fit is possible between the state services and the services on the form, use item number 29—the other services category. Please list all services reported under item 29, using a separate sheet if necessary. The state's definition of these services must appear in the state's annual report.
              Recipient Data
              In reporting the following data:
              
              • Each state should use its own definitions of the terms “adult” and “child.” These definitions should be described elsewhere in the annual report. If the definitions of adult and child vary by services, all such definitions must be included.
              • States should, if possible, consider as the “recipient” of the service the individual to whom the service is provided. This means that the child would be considered the recipient of child day care services, even if such services are provided to allow the child's adult caretaker to pursue employment. Similarly, an adult who receives counseling services should be considered as the recipient of that service, even if the service is provided as part of a child's protective services plan. In cases where each member of a family, for example, receives an individual service such as counseling, each family member should be considered as a separate recipient.
              • States should, if possible, consider as a service, i.e., a count of one, any service provided to a single recipient for the duration of the reporting period (one year), or any fraction thereof. In cases where an individual received a service during the reporting period, then discontinued the service, and then received the service again, the individual should only be counted once, if possible.
              • The criteria applied in determining eligibility for each service—such as income eligibility guidelines, sliding fee scales, the effect of public assistance benefits, and any requirements for enrollment in school or training programs—should be described elsewhere in the annual report.
              5. Under “Number of Recipients—Adults” enter the number of adults who have received each service funded in whole or part under the SSBG.
              6. Under “Number of Recipients—Children” enter the number of children who have received each service funded in whole or part under the SSBG.
              7. Under “Number of Recipients—Total” enter the total number of recipients of each service. This should be the sum of the adults and children reported in the preceding “adult” and “children” columns.
              Expenditure Data
              8. Under “Expenditures—Total $” enter all funds that the state expends on each service. This should include SSBG funds as well as funds from other federal sources, state funds, and local funds. A listing of the sources of these funds, and the amounts allocated, should appear elsewhere in the annual report.
              9. Under “Expenditures—SSBG $” enter the total SSBG funds expended for each service. This column should be totaled, and the sum placed at the bottom of the column in the “Totals” box.
              10. Under “Expenditures—Per Adult” enter the average amount of SSBG funds expended on each adult recipient of each service.
              11. Under “Expenditures—Per Child” enter the average amount of SSBG funds expended on each child recipient of each service.
              12. Item 30 in the “Total SSBG $” column should contain other expenditures and income as follows:
              a. “Transfers In” should contain funds transferred from other federal block grants to the SSBG program. A listing of the source(s) of block grant funds and their amounts should appear elsewhere in the annual report.
              b. “Transfers Out” should show funds transferred from the SSBG program to other federal block grants. A listing of the program(s) to which SSBG funds were transferred, and the amounts, should appear elsewhere in the annual report.
              c. “Carry Forward” should show funds the state intends to carry over from the reporting fiscal year to the following fiscal year. The SSBG statute permits states two years to expend SSBG funds.
              d. “Carry Over” should show funds carried from a previous fiscal year into the current reporting year.
              e. “Administrative Costs” should show all other non-service use of SSBG funds—e.g., funds expended for training, licensing activities, or overhead costs.
              f. This column should be totaled, and the sum placed at the bottom of the column in the “Totals” box.
              13. Under “Provisions Method—Public/Private” enter a check mark on “X” in the appropriate column(s) to indicate whether a service was provided by public agencies or private agencies. In some cases, a given service may have been provided by both methods, in which case both columns would be checked for that service.
              14. Enter the name, title, and telephone number of a contact person who can answer questions about the data.
              15. Code Column:

              Six of the columns on this form have a “C” column to the right of them. These are “Code” columns to permit a state to indicate, for expenditure data, whether each cell of data is A (actual), E (estimated), or S (sampled), and for recipient data, whether the data is based on an unduplicated (U) or duplicated (D) count of recipients. These codes will permit the Department to determine the relative degree of statistical validity of the data. Actual recipient counts and expenditure amounts must be used when available. If actual counts are not available, sampling and/or estimating may be used to derive the numbers in this report. A description of the sampling and/or estimation methods used to derive any data must appear elsewhere in the annual report.
              
              Report Submission Using PC Diskettes
              States with personal computer (PC) equipment may submit this data using PC diskettes in addition to the hardcopy form which will be included in the complete annual report. Diskettes may be either 51/4″ or 31/2″; data may be submitted using Lotus 1-2-3, Quattro Pro, DBase III or IV, Wordstar, Word Perfect, or ASCII formats. Use of Lotus 1-2-3 is preferred, but any of the other formats listed may be used. If a state wishes to use a format other than one listed here, please call Bryant Tudor on (202) 401-5535 or Frank Burns on (202) 401-5536, or write to the Office of Community Services, Administration for Children and Families, Fourth Floor—East Wing, 370 L'Enfant Promenade, SW., Washington, DC 10447. Use of diskettes can greatly reduce transcription errors and also facilitate processing of the data once received. We anticipate that many states will want to avail themselves of this method of reporting.
              
                
                EC01JA91.006
              
              [58 FR 60128, Nov. 15, 1993]
            
          
        
        
          
          Pt. 97
          PART 97—CONSOLIDATION OF GRANTS TO THE INSULAR AREAS
          
            Sec.
            97.10
            What is a consolidated grant?
            97.11
            Which jurisdictions may apply for a consolidated grant?
            97.12
            Which grants may be consolidated?
            97.13
            How does an insular area apply for a consolidated grant?
            97.14
            How will grant awards be made?
            97.15
            For what purposes can grant funds be used?
            97.16
            What fiscal, matching and administrative requirements apply to grantees?
          
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 501, Pub. L. 95-134, as amended, 48 U.S.C. 1469a.
          
          
            Source:
            47 FR 56468, Dec. 16, 1982, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 97.10
            What is a consolidated grant?
            As used in this part, a consolidated grant means a grant award to an insular area, the funds of which are derived from the allocations under two or more of the programs specified in § 97.12.
          
          
            § 97.11
            Which jurisdictions may apply for a consolidated grant?
            The following jurisdictions (insular areas), as appropriate with respect to each block and formula grant program, may apply for a consolidated grant under this part: the Virgin Islands; Guam; American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands; and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (the Republic of Palau). In addition, the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands may apply for a consolidated grant for certain PHS programs as indicated in § 97.12.
            [56 FR 38346, Aug. 13, 1991]
          
          
            § 97.12
            Which grants may be consolidated?

            (a) These regulations apply to the consolidation of grants under the programs listed in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section and to any additional program(s) as determined by the Secretary. The list of programs will be periodically updated in the Code of Federal Regulations through publication in the Federal Register.
            
            (b) Block Grants.
            (1) Preventive Health and Health Services, 42 U.S.C. 300w-300w-10. 1
              
            
            
              
                1 Certain Public Health Service programs for which the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands may apply for a consolidated grant.
            
            (2) Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental Health Services, 42 U.S.C. 300x-300x-9. 2
              
            
            
              
                2 See footnote 1 in § 97.12(a)(1).
            
            (3) Maternal and Child Health Services, 42 U.S.C. 701-709. 3
              
            
            
              
                3 See footnote 1 in § 97.12(a)(1).
            
            (4) Social Services, 42 U.S.C. 1397-1397f.
            (5) Community Services, 42 U.S.C. 9901-9912.
            (6) Low-Income Home Energy Assistance, 42 U.S.C. 8621-8629.
            (7) Community Youth Activity, 42 U.S.C. 11841. 4
              
            
            
              
                4 See footnote 1 in § 97.12(a)(1).
            
            (c) Other Grants.
            (1) Child Welfare Services, 42 U.S.C. 620, et seq.
            
            (2) Developmental Disabilities, 42 U.S.C. 6021-6030.
            (3) Aging Supportive Services and Senior Centers, 42 U.S.C. 3030d.
            (4) Congregate Meals for the Elderly, 42 U.S.C. 3030e.
            (5) Home Delivered Meals for the Elderly, 42 U.S.C. 3030f.
            (6) Child Abuse and Neglect State Grants, 42 U.S.C. 5103(b).
            (7) Dependent Care Planning and Development State Grants, 42 U.S.C. 9871, et. seq.

            (8) Family Violence Prevention and Services, 42 U.S.C. 10401, et seq.
            
            (9) Children's Justice Act, 42 U.S.C. 5101, et seq.
            

            (10) Child Development Associate Scholarship Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C. 10901, et seq.
            
            (11) Emergency Community Services Homeless, 42 U.S.C. 11301.
            (12) Community Food and Nutrition, 42 U.S.C. 9910a.
            (13) Protection and Advocacy for Mentally Ill Individuals, 42 U.S.C. 9501.

            (14) Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness, 42 U.S.C. 290 (cc-21) et seq.
            
            [56 FR 38346, Aug. 13, 1991]
          
          
            
            § 97.13
            How does an insular area apply for a consolidated grant?
            (a) An insular area may apply for a consolidated grant in lieu of filing an individual application for any of the programs listed in § 97.12 for which the insular area is eligible.
            (b) The chief executive officer or his designee may submit a consolidated grant application at any time prior to expenditure of the funds proposed for consolidation. The application must specify the amount of funds proposed for consolidation, the titles of the programs that are the sources of funds that are to be consolidated and the titles of the programs under whose statutory authority the funds are to be expended.
            (c) The application must contain the assurances, certifications, and other information required by the statutes and regulations applicable to those programs under which funds will be expended. If any of the requirements for these latter programs are substantially the same, they may be met by a single assurance, certification, or narrative, as appropriate. The application need not meet the application or other requirements for programs which are sources of funds for the consolidated grant but under whose authority no funds will be expended.
            (d) If after receiving a consolidated grant, an insular area wishes to use funds for a purpose authorized by an eligible program that is not included in the consolidated grant, or by an eligible program that was included in the grant but was not intended as a program under which funds would be expended, the insular area must submit an amended application indicating the proposed change and containing the assurances, certifications and other information applicable to that program.
          
          
            § 97.14
            How will grant awards be made?
            The Secretary, or his designee, will award a consolidated grant to each insular area that applies for a consolidated grant and meets the requirements of this part and of the statutes and regulations applicable to the programs under whose authority the consolidated grant funds will be expended. As long as the amount requested does not exceed the amount for which the insular area is eligible under the programs that are being consolidated, the amount of the award will equal the amount requested in the application.
          
          
            § 97.15
            For what purposes can grant funds be used?
            Funds awarded under a consolidated grant must be used for purposes authorized by the statutes and regulations of the programs included in the consolidated grant. In its application for a consolidated grant the insular area is to indicate the amount of funds that will be allocated to the eligible programs.
          
          
            § 97.16
            What fiscal, matching and administrative requirements apply to grantees?
            (a) An insular area receiving a consolidated grant must comply with the statutes and regulations applicable to the programs under which the funds are to be used, except as otherwise provided in this part.
            (b) In regard to programs included in a consolidated grant, an insular area need not comply with any of the statutory or regulatory provisions requiring recipients to match federal funds with their own or other funds.
            (c) A single report may be submitted in lieu of any individual reports that may be required under the programs included in a consolidated grant.
          
        
        
          Pt. 98
          PART 98—CHILD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT FUND
          
            
              Subpart A—Goals, Purposes and Definitions
              Sec.
              98.1
              Purposes.
              98.2
              Definitions.
              98.3
              Effect on State law.
            
            
              Subpart B—General Application Procedures
              98.10
              Lead Agency responsibilities.
              98.11
              Administration under contracts and agreements.
              98.12
              Coordination and consultation.
              98.13
              Applying for Funds.
              98.14
              Plan process.
              98.15
              Assurances and certifications.
              98.16
              Plan provisions.
              98.17
              Period covered by Plan.
              
              98.18
              Approval and disapproval of Plans and Plan amendments.
              98.19
              Requests for temporary relief from requirements.
            
            
              Subpart C—Eligibility for Services
              98.20
              A child's eligibility for child care services.
              98.21
              Eligibility determination processes.
            
            
              Subpart D—Program Operations (Child Care Services)—Parental Rights and Responsibilities
              98.30
              Parental choice.
              98.31
              Parental access.
              98.32
              Parental complaints.
              98.33
              Consumer and provider education.
              98.34
              Parental rights and responsibilities.
            
            
              Subpart E—Program Operations (Child Care Services)—Lead Agency and Provider Requirements
              98.40
              Compliance with applicable State and local regulatory requirements.
              98.41
              Health and safety requirements.
              98.42
              Enforcement of licensing and health and safety requirements.
              98.43
              Criminal background checks.
              98.44
              Training and professional development.
              98.45
              Equal access.
              98.46
              Priority for child care services.
              98.47
              List of providers.
              98.48
              Nondiscrimination in admissions on the basis of religion.
              98.49
              Nondiscrimination in employment on the basis of religion.
            
            
              Subpart F—Use of Child Care and Development Funds
              98.50
              Child care services.
              98.51
              Services for children experiencing homelessness.
              98.52
              Child care resource and referral system.
              98.53
              Activities to improve the quality of child care.
              98.54
              Administrative costs.
              98.55
              Matching fund requirements.
              98.56
              Restrictions on the use of funds.
              98.57
              Cost allocation.
            
            
              Subpart G—Financial Management
              98.60
              Availability of funds.
              98.61
              Allotments from the Discretionary Fund.
              98.62
              Allotments from the Mandatory Fund.
              98.63
              Allotments from the Matching Fund.
              98.64
              Reallotment and redistribution of funds.
              98.65
              Audits and financial reporting.
              98.66
              Disallowance procedures.
              98.67
              Fiscal requirements.
              98.68
              Program integrity.
            
            
              Subpart H—Program Reporting Requirements
              98.70
              Reporting requirements.
              98.71
              Content of report.
            
            
              Subpart I—Indian Tribes
              98.80
              General procedures and requirements.
              98.81
              Application and Plan procedures.
              98.82
              Coordination.
              98.83
              Requirements for tribal programs.
              98.84
              Construction and renovation of child care facilities.
            
            
              Subpart J—Monitoring, Non-Compliance and Complaints
              98.90
              Monitoring.
              98.91
              Non-compliance.
              98.92
              Penalties and sanctions.
              98.93
              Complaints.
            
            
              Subpart K—Error Rate Reporting
              98.100
              Error Rate Report.
              98.101
              Case Review Methodology.
              98.102
              Content of Error Rate Reports.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 618, 9858.
          
          
            Source:
            63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—Goals, Purposes and Definitions
            
              § 98.1
              Purposes.
              (a) The purposes of the CCDF are:
              (1) To allow each State maximum flexibility in developing child care programs and policies that best suit the needs of children and parents within that State;
              (2) To promote parental choice to empower working parents to make their own decisions regarding the child care services that best suits their family's needs;
              (3) To encourage States to provide consumer education information to help parents make informed choices about child care services and to promote involvement by parents and family members in the development of their children in child care settings;

              (4) To assist States in delivering high-quality, coordinated early childhood care and education services to maximize parents' options and support parents trying to achieve independence from public assistance;
              (5) To assist States in improving the overall quality of child care services and programs by implementing the health, safety, licensing, training, and oversight standards established in this subchapter and in State law (including State regulations);
              (6) To improve child care and development of participating children; and
              (7) To increase the number and percentage of low-income children in high-quality child care settings.
              (b) The purpose of this part is to provide the basis for administration of the Fund. These regulations provide that State, Territorial, and Tribal Lead Agencies:
              (1) Maximize parental choice of safe, healthy and nurturing child care settings through the use of certificates and through grants and contracts, and by providing parents with information about child care programs;
              (2) Include in their programs a broad range of child care providers, including center-based care, family child care, in home care, care provided by relatives and sectarian child care providers;
              (3) Improve the quality and supply of child care and before- and after-school care services that meet applicable requirements and promote healthy child development and learning and family economic stability;
              (4) Coordinate planning and delivery of services at all levels, including Federal, State, Tribal, and local;
              (5) Design flexible programs that provide for the changing needs of recipient families and engage families in their children's development and learning;
              (6) Administer the CCDF responsibly to ensure that statutory requirements are met and that adequate information regarding the use of public funds is provided;
              (7) Design programs that provide uninterrupted service to families and providers, to the extent allowed under the statute, to support parental education, training, and employment and continuity of care that minimizes disruptions to children's learning and development;
              (8) Provide a progression of training and professional development opportunities for caregivers, teachers, and directors to increase their effectiveness in supporting children's development and learning and strengthen and retain (including through financial incentives and compensation improvements) the child care workforce.
              [81 FR 67573, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.2
              Definitions.
              For the purpose of this part and part 99:
              
                The Act refers to the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990, section 5082 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, Pub. L. 101-508, as amended and codified at 42 U.S.C. 9858 et seq.
              
              
                ACF means the Administration for Children and Families;
              
                Application is a request for funding that includes the information required at § 98.13;
              
                Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services;
              
                Caregiver means an individual who provides child care services directly to an eligible child on a person-to-person basis;
              
                Categories of care means center-based child care, family child care, and in home care;
              
                Center-based child care provider means a provider licensed or otherwise authorized to provide child care services for fewer than 24 hours per day per child in a non-residential setting, unless care in excess of 24 hours is due to the nature of the parent(s)' work;
              
                Child care certificate means a certificate (that may be a check, or other disbursement) that is issued by a grantee directly to a parent who may use such certificate only as payment for child care services or as a deposit for child care services if such a deposit is required of other children being cared for by the provider, pursuant to § 98.30. Nothing in this part shall preclude the use of such certificate for sectarian child care services if freely chosen by the parent. For the purposes of this part, a child care certificate is assistance to the parent, not assistance to the provider;
              
                Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF) means the child care programs conducted under the provisions of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act, as amended. The Fund consists of Discretionary Funds authorized under section 658B of the amended Act, and Mandatory and Matching Funds appropriated under section 418 of the Social Security Act;
              
                Child care provider that receives assistance means a child care provider that receives Federal funds under the CCDF pursuant to grants, contracts, or loans, but does not include a child care provider to whom Federal funds under the CCDF are directed only through the operation of a certificate program;
              
                Child care services, for the purposes of § 98.50, means the care given to an eligible child by an eligible child care provider;
              
                Child experiencing homelessness means a child who is homeless as defined in section 725 of SubtitleVII-B of the McKinney-Vento Act (42 U.S.C. 11434a);
              
                Child with a disability means:
              (1) A child with a disability, as defined in section 602 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1401);

              (2) A child who is eligible for early intervention services under part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1431 et seq.);
              (3) A child who is less than 13 years of age and who is eligible for services under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794); and
              (4) A child with a disability, as defined by the State, Territory or Tribe involved;
              
                Construction means the erection of a facility that does not currently exist;
              
                The Department means the Department of Health and Human Services;
              
                Director means a person who has primary responsibility for the daily operations and management for a child care provider, which may include a family child care provider, and which may serve children from birth to kindergarten entry and children in school-age child care;
              
                Discretionary funds means the funds authorized under section 658B of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act. The Discretionary funds were formerly referred to as the Child Care and Development Block Grant;
              
                Eligible child means an individual who meets the requirements of § 98.20;
              
                Eligible child care provider means:
              (1) A center-based child care provider, a family child care provider, an in-home child care provider, or other provider of child care services for compensation that—
              (i) Is licensed, regulated, or registered under applicable State or local law as described in § 98.40; and
              (ii) Satisfies State and local requirements, including those referred to in § 98.41 applicable to the child care services it provides; or
              (2) A child care provider who is 18 years of age or older who provides child care services only to eligible children who are, by marriage, blood relationship, or court decree, the grandchild, great grandchild, siblings (if such provider lives in separate residence), niece, or nephew of such provider, and complies with any applicable requirements that govern child care provided by the relative involved;
              
                English learner means an individual who is an English learner, as defined in section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 or who is limited English proficient, as defined in section 637 of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9832);
              
                Facility means real property or modular unit appropriate for use by a grantee to carry out a child care program;
              
                Family child care provider means one or more individual(s) who provide child care services for fewer than 24 hours per day per child, in a private residence other than the child's residence, unless care in excess of 24 hours is due to the nature of the parent(s)' work;
              
                Indian Tribe means any Indian Tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq.) that is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians;
              
                In-home child care provider means an individual who provides child care services in the child's own home;
              
                Lead Agency means the State, territorial or tribal entity, or joint interagency office, designated or established under §§ 98.10 and 98.16(a) to which a grant is awarded and that is accountable for the use of the funds provided. The Lead Agency is the entire legal entity even if only a particular component of the entity is designated in the grant award document;
              
                Licensing or regulatory requirements means requirements necessary for a provider to legally provide child care services in a State or locality, including registration requirements established under State, local or tribal law;
              
                Liquidation period means the applicable time period during which a fiscal year's grant shall be liquidated pursuant to the requirements at § 98.60.;
              
                Major renovation means: (1) structural changes to the foundation, roof, floor, exterior or load-bearing walls of a facility, or the extension of a facility to increase its floor area; or (2) extensive alteration of a facility such as to significantly change its function and purpose, even if such renovation does not include any structural change;
              
                Mandatory funds means the general entitlement child care funds described at section 418(a)(1) of the Social Security Act;
              
                Matching funds means the remainder of the general entitlement child care funds that are described at section 418(a)(2) of the Social Security Act;
              
                Modular unit means a portable structure made at another location and moved to a site for use by a grantee to carry out a child care program;
              
                Obligation period means the applicable time period during which a fiscal year's grant shall be obligated pursuant to § 98.60;
              
                Parent means a parent by blood, marriage or adoption and also means a legal guardian, or other person standing in loco parentis;
              
                The Plan means the Plan for the implementation of programs under the CCDF;
              
                Program period means the time period for using a fiscal year's grant and does not extend beyond the last day to liquidate funds;
              
                Programs refers generically to all activities under the CCDF, including child care services and other activities pursuant to § 98.50 as well as quality activities pursuant to § 98.53;
              
                Provider means the entity providing child care services;
              
                The regulation refers to the actual regulatory text contained in parts 98 and 99 of this chapter;
              
                Real property means land, including land improvements, structures and appurtenances thereto, excluding movable machinery and equipment;
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services;
              
                Sectarian organization or sectarian child care provider means religious organizations or religious providers generally. The terms embrace any organization or provider that engages in religious conduct or activity or that seeks to maintain a religious identity in some or all of its functions. There is no requirement that a sectarian organization or provider be managed by clergy or have any particular degree of religious management, control, or content;
              
                Sectarian purposes and activities means any religious purpose or activity, including but not limited to religious worship or instruction;
              
                Services for which assistance is provided means all child care services funded under the CCDF, either as assistance directly to child care providers through grants, contracts, or loans, or indirectly as assistance to parents through child care certificates;
              
                Sliding fee scale means a system of cost-sharing by a family based on income and size of the family, in accordance with § 98.45(k);
              
                State means any of the States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of the United States, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and includes Tribes unless otherwise specified;
              
                Teacher means a lead teacher, teacher, teacher assistant, or teacher aide who is employed by a child care provider for compensation on a regular basis, or a family child care provider, and whose responsibilities and activities are to organize, guide, and implement activities in a group or individual basis, or to assist a teacher or lead teacher in such activities, to further the cognitive, social, emotional, and physical development of children from birth to kindergarten entry and children in school-age child care;
              
                Tribal mandatory funds means the child care funds set aside at section 418(a)(4) of the Social Security Act. The funds consist of between one and two percent of the aggregate Mandatory and Matching child care funds reserved by the Secretary in each fiscal year for payments to Indian Tribes and tribal organizations;
              
                Tribal organization means the recognized governing body of any Indian Tribe, or any legally established organization of Indians, including a consortium, which is controlled, sanctioned, or chartered by such governing body or which is democratically elected by the adult members of the Indian community to be served by such organization and which includes the maximum participation of Indians in all phases of its activities: Provided, that in any case where a contract is let or grant is made to an organization to perform services benefiting more than one Indian Tribe, the approval of each such Indian Tribe shall be a prerequisite to the letting or making of such contract or grant; and
              
                Types of providers means the different classes of providers under each category of care. For the purposes of the CCDF, types of providers include non-profit providers, for-profit providers, sectarian providers and relatives who provide care.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67573, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.3
              Effect on State law.
              (a) Nothing in the Act or this part shall be construed to supersede or modify any provision of a State constitution or State law that prohibits the expenditure of public funds in or by sectarian organizations, except that no provision of a State constitution or State law shall be construed to prohibit the expenditure in or by sectarian institutions of any Federal funds provided under this part.
              (b) If a State law or constitution would prevent CCDF funds from being expended for the purposes provided in the Act, without limitation, then States shall segregate State and Federal funds.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—General Application Procedures
            
              § 98.10
              Lead Agency responsibilities.
              The Lead Agency (which may be an appropriate collaborative agency), or a joint interagency office, as designated or established by the Governor of the State (or by the appropriate Tribal leader or applicant), shall:
              (a) Administer the CCDF program, directly or through other governmental or non-governmental agencies, in accordance with § 98.11;
              (b) Apply for funding under this part, pursuant to § 98.13;
              (c) Consult with appropriate representatives of local government in developing a Plan to be submitted to the Secretary pursuant to § 98.14(b);
              (d) Hold at least one public hearing in accordance with § 98.14(c);
              (e) Coordinate CCDF services pursuant to § 98.12; and
              (f) Consult, collaborate, and coordinate in the development of the State Plan in a timely manner with Indian Tribes or tribal organizations in the State (at the option of the Tribe or tribal organization).
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67574, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.11
              Administration under contracts and agreements.
              (a) The Lead Agency has broad authority to administer the program through other governmental or non-governmental agencies. In addition, the Lead Agency can use other public or private local agencies to implement the program; however:
              (1) The Lead Agency shall retain overall responsibility for the administration of the program, as defined in paragraph (b) of this section;
              (2) The Lead Agency shall serve as the single point of contact for issues involving the administration of the grantee's CCDF program; and

              (3) Administrative and implementation responsibilities undertaken by agencies other than the Lead Agency shall be governed by written agreements that specify the mutual roles and responsibilities of the Lead Agency and the other agencies in meeting the requirements of this part. The contents of the written agreement may vary based on the role the agency is asked to assume or the type of project undertaken, but must include, at a minimum, tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing tasks, a budget which itemizes categorical expenditures consistent with CCDF requirements at § 98.65(h), and indicators or measures to assess performance.
              (b) In retaining overall responsibility for the administration of the program, the Lead Agency shall:
              (1) Determine the basic usage and priorities for the expenditure of CCDF funds;
              (2) Promulgate all rules and regulations governing overall administration of the Plan;
              (3) Submit all reports required by the Secretary;
              (4) Ensure that the program complies with the approved Plan and all Federal requirements;
              (5) Oversee the expenditure of funds by subrecipients and contractors, in accordance with 75 CFR parts 351 to 353;
              (6) Monitor programs and services;
              (7) Fulfill the responsibilities of any subgrantee in any: disallowance under subpart G; complaint or compliance action under subpart J; or hearing or appeal action under part 99 of this chapter; and
              (8) Ensure that all State and local or non-governmental agencies through which the State administers the program, including agencies and contractors that determine individual eligibility, operate according to the rules established for the program.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67574, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.12
              Coordination and consultation.
              The Lead Agency shall:
              (a) Coordinate the provision of services for which assistance is provided under this part with the agencies listed in § 98.14(a).
              (b) Consult, in accordance with § 98.14(b), with representatives of general purpose local government during the development of the Plan; and
              (c) Coordinate, to the maximum extent feasible, per § 98.10(f) with any Indian Tribes in the State receiving CCDF funds in accordance with subpart I of this part.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67574, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.13
              Applying for Funds.
              The Lead Agency of a State or Territory shall apply for Child Care and Development funds by providing the following:
              (a) The amount of funds requested at such time and in such manner as prescribed by the Secretary.
              (b) The following assurances or certifications:
              (1) An assurance that the Lead Agency will comply with the requirements of the Act and this part;
              (2) A lobbying certification that assures that the funds will not be used for the purpose of influencing pursuant to 45 CFR part 93, and, if necessary, a Standard Form LLL (SF-LLL) that discloses lobbying payments;
              (3) An assurance that the Lead Agency provides a drug-free workplace pursuant to 45 CFR 76.600, or a statement that such an assurance has already been submitted for all HHS grants;
              (4) A certification that no principals have been debarred pursuant to 45 CFR 76.500;
              (5) Assurances that the Lead Agency will comply with the applicable provisions regarding nondiscrimination at 45 CFR part 80 (implementing title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended), 45 CFR part 84 (implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended), 45 CFR part 86 (implementing title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended) and 45 CFR part 91 (implementing the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended), and;
              (6) Assurances that the Lead Agency will comply with the applicable provisions of Public Law 103-277, Part C—Environmental Tobacco Smoke, also known as the Pro-Children Act of 1994, regarding prohibitions on smoking.
              (c) The Child Care and Development Fund Plan, at times and in such manner as required in § 98.17; and
              (d) Such other information as specified by the Secretary.
            
            
              
              § 98.14
              Plan process.
              In the development of each Plan, as required pursuant to § 98.17, the Lead Agency shall:
              (a)(1) Coordinate the provision of child care services funded under this part with other Federal, State, and local child care and early childhood development programs (including such programs for the benefit of Indian children, infants and toddlers, children with disabilities, children experiencing homelessness, and children in foster care) to expand accessibility and continuity of care as well as full-day services. The Lead Agency shall also coordinate the provision of services with the State, and if applicable, tribal agencies responsible for:
              (i) Public health, including the agency responsible for immunizations;
              (ii) Employment services/workforce development;
              (iii) Public education (including agencies responsible for prekindergarten services, if applicable, and early intervention and preschool services provided under Part B and C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400));
              (iv) Providing Temporary Assistance for Needy Families;
              (v) Child care licensing;

              (vi) Head Start collaboration, as authorized by the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.);

              (vii) State Advisory Council on Early Childhood Education and Care (designated or established pursuant to the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.)) or similar coordinating body;
              (viii) Statewide after-school network or other coordinating entity for out-of-school time care (if applicable);
              (ix) Emergency management and response;
              (x) Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) authorized by the National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1766) and other relevant nutrition programs;
              (xi) Services for children experiencing homelessness, including State Coordinators of Education for Homeless Children and Youth (EHCY State Coordinators) and, to the extent practicable, local liaisons designated by Local Educational Agencies (LEAs) in the State as required by the McKinney-Vento Act (42 U.S.C. 11432) and Continuum of Care grantees;

              (xii) Medicaid and the State children's health insurance programs (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq., 1397aa et seq.);
              (xiii) Mental health services; and
              (xiv) Child care resources and referral agencies, child care consumer education organizations, and providers of early childhood education training and professional development.
              (2) Provide a description of the results of the coordination with each of these agencies in the CCDF Plan.
              (3) If the Lead Agency elects to combine funding for CCDF services with any other early childhood program, provide a description in the CCDF Plan of how the Lead Agency will combine and use the funding.
              (4) Demonstrate in the CCDF Plan how the State, Territory, or Tribe encourages partnerships among its agencies, other public agencies, Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations, and private entities, including faith-based and community-based organizations, to leverage existing service delivery systems for child care and development services and to increase the supply and quality of child care and development services and to increase the supply and quality of child care services for children who are less than 13 years of age, such as by implementing voluntary shared service alliance models.
              (b) Consult with appropriate representatives of local governments;
              (c)(1) Hold at least one hearing in the State, after at least 20 days of statewide public notice, to provide to the public an opportunity to comment on the provision of child care services under the Plan.
              (2) The hearing required by paragraph (c)(1) shall be held before the Plan is submitted to ACF, but no earlier than nine months before the Plan becomes effective.
              (3) In advance of the hearing required by this section, the Lead Agency shall make available to the public the content of the Plan as described in § 98.16 that it proposes to submit to the Secretary, which shall include posting the Plan content on a Web site.

              (d) Make the submitted and final Plan, any Plan amendments, and any approved requests for temporary relief (in accordance with § 98.19) publicly available on a Web site.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67574, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.15
              Assurances and certifications.
              (a) The Lead Agency shall include the following assurances in its CCDF Plan:
              (1) Upon approval, it will have in effect a program that complies with the provisions of the CCDF Plan, and that is administered in accordance with the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990, as amended, section 418 of the Social Security Act, and all other applicable Federal laws and regulations;
              (2) The parent(s) of each eligible child within the area served by the Lead Agency who receives or is offered child care services for which financial assistance is provided is given the option either:
              (i) To enroll such child with a child care provider that has a grant or contract for the provision of the service; or
              (ii) To receive a child care certificate as defined in § 98.2;
              (3) In cases in which the parent(s), pursuant to § 98.30, elects to enroll their child with a provider that has a grant or contract with the Lead Agency, the child will be enrolled with the eligible provider selected by the parent to the maximum extent practicable;
              (4) In accordance with § 98.30, the child care certificate offered to parents shall be of a value commensurate with the subsidy value of child care services provided under a grant or contract;
              (5) With respect to State and local regulatory requirements (or tribal regulatory requirements), health and safety requirements, payment rates, and registration requirements, State or local (or tribal) rules, procedures or other requirements promulgated for the purpose of the CCDF will not significantly restrict parental choice from among categories of care or types of providers, pursuant to § 98.30(f).
              (6) That if expenditures for pre-Kindergarten services are used to meet the maintenance-of-effort requirement, the State has not reduced its level of effort in full-day/full-year child care services, pursuant to § 98.55(h)(1).
              (7) Training and professional development requirements comply with § 98.44 and are applicable to caregivers, teaching staff, and directors working for child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF.
              (8) To the extent practicable, enrollment and eligibility policies support the fixed costs of providing child care services by delinking provider payment rates from an eligible child's occasional absences in accordance with § 98.45(l).
              (9) The State will maintain or implement early learning and developmental guidelines that are developmentally appropriate for all children from birth to kindergarten entry, describing what such children should know and be able to do, and covering the essential domains of early childhood development (cognition, including language arts and mathematics; social, emotional and physical development; and approaches toward learning) for use statewide by child care providers and caregivers. Such guidelines shall—
              (i) Be research-based and developmentally, culturally, and linguistically appropriate, building in a forward progression, and aligned with entry to kindergarten;
              (ii) Be implemented in consultation with the State educational agency and the State Advisory Council on Early Childhood Education and Care (designated or established pursuant to section 642B(b)(I)(A)(i) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9837b(b)(1)(A)(i)) or similar coordinating body, and in consultation with child development and content experts; and
              (iii) Be updated as determined by the State.
              (10) Funds received by the State to carry out this subchapter will not be used to develop or implement an assessment for children that—
              (i) Will be the primary or sole basis for a child care provider being determined to be ineligible to participate in the program carried out under this subchapter;

              (ii) Will be used as the primary or sole basis to provide a reward or sanction for an individual provider;
              
              (iii) Will be used as the primary or sole method for assessing program effectiveness; or
              (iv) Will be used to deny children eligibility to participate in the program carried out under this subchapter.
              (11) To the extent practicable and appropriate, any code or software for child care information systems or information technology that a Lead Agency or other agency expends CCDF funds to develop must be made available upon request to other public agencies, including public agencies in other States, for their use in administering child care or related programs.
              (b) The Lead Agency shall include the following certifications in its CCDF Plan:
              (1) The State has developed the CCDF Plan in consultation with the State Advisory Council on Early Childhood Education and Care (designated or established pursuant to section 642B(b)(I)(A)(i) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9837b(b)(1)(A)(i))) or similar coordinating body, pursuant to § 98.14(a)(1)(vii);
              (2) In accordance with § 98.31, the Lead Agency has procedures in place to ensure that providers of child care services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF, afford parents unlimited access to their children and to the providers caring for their children, during the normal hours of operations and whenever such children are in the care of such providers;
              (3) As required by § 98.32, the State maintains a record of substantiated parental complaints and makes information regarding such complaints available to the public on request;
              (4) It will collect and disseminate to parents of eligible children, the general public and, where applicable, child care providers, consumer education information that will promote informed child care choices, information on access to other programs for which families may be eligible, and information on developmental screenings, as required by § 98.33;
              (5) In accordance with § 98.33(a), that the State makes public, through a consumer-friendly and easily accessible Web site, the results of monitoring and inspection reports, as well as the number of deaths, serious injuries, and instances of substantiated child abuse that occurred in child care settings;
              (6) There are in effect licensing requirements applicable to child care services provided within the State, pursuant to § 98.40;
              (7) There are in effect within the State (or other area served by the Lead Agency), under State or local (or tribal) law, requirements designed to protect the health and safety of children that are applicable to child care providers that provide services for which assistance is made available under the CCDF, pursuant to § 98.41;
              (8) In accordance with § 98.42(a), procedures are in effect to ensure that child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF comply with all applicable State or local (or tribal) health and safety requirements;
              (9) Caregivers, teachers, and directors of child care providers comply with the State's, Territory's, or Tribe's procedures for reporting child abuse and neglect as required by section 106(b)(2)(B)(i) of the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (42 U.S.C. 5106a(b)(2)(B)(i)), if applicable, or other child abuse reporting procedures and laws in the service area, as required by § 98.41(e);
              (10) There are in effect monitoring policies and practices pursuant to § 98.42;
              (11) Payment rates for the provision of child care services, in accordance with § 98.45, are sufficient to ensure equal access for eligible children to comparable child care services in the State or sub-State area that are provided to children whose parents are not eligible to receive assistance under this program or under any other Federal or State child care assistance programs;
              (12) Payment practices of child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF reflect generally-accepted payment practices of child care providers that serve children who do not receive CCDF assistance, pursuant to § 98.45(l); and

              (13) There are in effect policies to govern the use and disclosure of confidential and personally identifiable information about children and families receiving CCDF assistance and child care providers receiving CCDF funds.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67575, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.16
              Plan provisions.
              A CCDF Plan shall contain the following:
              (a) Specification of the Lead Agency whose duties and responsibilities are delineated in § 98.10;
              (b) A description of processes the Lead Agency will use to monitor administrative and implementation responsibilities undertaken by agencies other than the Lead Agency including descriptions of written agreements, monitoring and auditing procedures, and indicators or measures to assess performance pursuant to § 98.11(a)(3);
              (c) The assurances and certifications listed under § 98.15;
              (d)(1) A description of how the CCDF program will be administered and implemented, if the Lead Agency does not directly administer and implement the program;
              (2) Identification of the public or private entities designated to receive private donated funds and the purposes for which such funds will be expended, pursuant to § 98.55(f);
              (e) A description of the coordination and consultation processes involved in the development of the Plan and the provision of services, including a description of public-private partnership activities that promote business involvement in meeting child care needs pursuant to § 98.14;
              (f) A description of the public hearing process, pursuant to § 98.14(c);
              (g) Definitions of the following terms for purposes of determining eligibility, pursuant to §§ 98.20(a) and 98.46:
              (1) Special needs child;
              (2) Physical or mental incapacity (if applicable);
              (3) Attending (a job training or educational program);
              (4) Job training and educational program;
              (5) Residing with;
              (6) Working;
              (7) Protective services (if applicable), including whether children in foster care are considered in protective services for purposes of child care eligibility; and whether respite care is provided to custodial parents of children in protective services.
              (8) Very low income; and
              (9) In loco parentis;
              (h) A description and demonstration of eligibility determination and redetermination processes to promote continuity of care for children and stability for families receiving CCDF services, including:
              (1) An eligibility redetermination period of no less than 12 months in accordance with § 98.21(a);
              (2) A graduated phase-out for families whose income exceeds the Lead Agency's threshold to initially qualify for CCDF assistance, but does not exceed 85 percent of State median income, pursuant to § 98.21(b);
              (3) Processes that take into account irregular fluctuation in earnings, pursuant to § 98.21(c);
              (4) Procedures and policies to ensure that parents are not required to unduly disrupt their education, training, or employment to complete eligibility redetermination, pursuant to § 98.21(d);
              (5) Limiting any requirements to report changes in circumstances in accordance with § 98.21(e);
              (6) Policies that take into account children's development and learning when authorizing child care services pursuant to § 98.21(f); and
              (7) Other policies and practices such as timely eligibility determination and processing of applications;
              (i) For child care services pursuant to § 98.50:
              (1) A description of such services and activities;
              (2) Any limits established for the provision of in-home care and the reasons for such limits pursuant to § 98.30(e)(1)(iii);
              (3) A list of political subdivisions in which such services and activities are offered, if such services and activities are not available throughout the entire service area;
              (4) A description of how the Lead Agency will meet the needs of certain families specified at § 98.50(e);
              (5) Any eligibility criteria, priority rules, and definitions established pursuant to §§ 98.20 and 98.46;

              (j) A description of the activities to provide comprehensive consumer and provider education, including the posting of monitoring and inspection reports, pursuant to § 98.33, to increase parental choice, and to improve the quality of child care, pursuant to § 98.53;
              (k) A description of the sliding fee scale(s) (including any factors other than income and family size used in establishing the fee scale(s)) that provide(s) for cost-sharing by the families that receive child care services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF and how co-payments are affordable for families, pursuant to § 98.45(k). This shall include a description of the criteria established by the Lead Agency, if any, for waiving contributions for families;
              (l) A description of the health and safety requirements, applicable to all providers of child care services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF, in effect pursuant to § 98.41, and any exemptions to those requirements for relative providers made in accordance with § 98.42(c);
              (m) A description of child care standards for child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF, in accordance with § 98.41(d), that includes group size limits, child-staff ratios, and required qualifications for caregivers, teachers, and directors;
              (n) A description of monitoring and other enforcement procedures in effect to ensure that child care providers comply with applicable health and safety requirements pursuant to § 98.42;
              (o) A description of criminal background check requirements, policies, and procedures in accordance with § 98.43, including a description of the requirements, policies, and procedures in place to respond to other States', Territories', and Tribes' requests for background check results in order to accommodate the 45 day timeframe;
              (p) A description of training and professional development requirements for caregivers, teaching staff, and directors of providers of services for which assistance is provided in accordance with § 98.44;
              (q) A description of the child care certificate payment system(s), including the form or forms of the child care certificate, pursuant to § 98.30(c);
              (r) Payment rates and a summary of the facts, including a local market rate survey or alternative methodology relied upon to determine that the rates provided are sufficient to ensure equal access pursuant to § 98.45;
              (s) A detailed description of the State's hotline for complaints, its process for substantiating and responding to complaints, whether or not the State uses monitoring as part of its process for responding to complaints for both CCDF and non-CCDF providers, how the State maintains a record of substantiated parental complaints, and how it makes information regarding those complaints available to the public on request, pursuant to § 98.32;
              (t) A detailed description of the procedures in effect for affording parents unlimited access to their children whenever their children are in the care of the provider, pursuant to § 98.31;
              (u) A detailed description of the licensing requirements applicable to child care services provided, any exemption to licensing requirements that is applicable to child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF and a demonstration of why such exemption does not endanger the health, safety, or development of children, and a description of how such licensing requirements are effectively enforced, pursuant to § 98.40;
              (v) Pursuant to § 98.33(f), the definitions or criteria used to implement the exception, provided in section 407(e)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 607(e)(2)), to individual penalties in the TANF work requirement applicable to a single custodial parent caring for a child under age six;
              (w)(1) When any Matching funds under § 98.55(b) are claimed, a description of the efforts to ensure that pre-Kindergarten programs meet the needs of working parents;

              (2) When State pre-Kindergarten expenditures are used to meet more than 10% of the amount required at § 98.55(c)(1), or for more than 10% of the funds available at § 98.55(b), or both, a description of how the State will coordinate its pre-Kindergarten and child care services to expand the availability of child care;
              
              (x) A description of the Lead Agency's strategies (which may include alternative payment rates to child care providers, the provision of direct grants or contracts, offering child care certificates, or other means) to increase the supply and improve the quality of child care services for children in underserved areas, infants and toddlers, children with disabilities as defined by the Lead Agency, and children who receive care during nontraditional hours, including whether the Lead Agency plans to use grants and contracts in building supply and how supply-building mechanisms will address the needs identified. The description must identify shortages in the supply of high-quality child care providers, list the data sources used to identify shortages, and describe the method of tracking progress to support equal access and parental choice. If the Lead Agency employs grants and contracts to meet the purposes of this section, the Lead Agency must provide CCDF families the option to choose a certificate for the purposes of acquiring care;
              (y) A description of how the Lead Agency prioritizes increasing access to high-quality child care and development services for children of families in areas that have significant concentrations of poverty and unemployment and that do not have sufficient numbers of such programs, pursuant to § 98.46;
              (z) A description of how the Lead Agency develops and implements strategies to strengthen the business practices of child care providers to expand the supply, and improve the quality of, child care services;
              (aa) A demonstration of how the State, Territory or Tribe will address the needs of children, including the need for safe child care, before, during and after a state of emergency declared by the Governor or a major disaster or emergency (as defined by section 102 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C. 5122) through a Statewide Disaster Plan (or Disaster Plan for a Tribe's service area) that:
              (1) For a State, is developed in collaboration with the State human services agency, the State emergency management agency, the State licensing agency, the State health department or public health department, local and State child care resource and referral agencies, and the State Advisory Council on Early Childhood Education and Care (designated or established pursuant to section 642B(b)(I)(A)(i) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9837b(b)(1)(A)(i))) or similar coordinating body; and
              (2) Includes the following components:
              (i) Guidelines for continuation of child care subsidies and child care services, which may include the provision of emergency and temporary child care services during a disaster, and temporary operating standards for child care after a disaster;
              (ii) Coordination of post-disaster recovery of child care services; and
              (iii) Requirements that child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF, as well as other child care providers as determined appropriate by the State, Territory or Tribe, have in place:
              (A) Procedures for evacuation, relocation, shelter-in-place, lock-down, communication and reunification with families, continuity of operations, accommodations of infants and toddlers, children with disabilities, and children with chronic medical conditions; and
              (B) Procedures for staff and volunteer emergency preparedness training and practice drills, including training requirements for child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under CCDF at § 98.41(a)(1)(vii);
              (bb) A description of payment practices applicable to providers of child care services for which assistance is provided under this part, pursuant to § 98.45(l), including practices to ensure timely payment for services, to delink provider payments from children's occasional absences to the extent practicable, and to reflect generally-accepted payment practices;

              (cc) A description of internal controls to ensure integrity and accountability, processes in place to investigate and recover fraudulent payments and to impose sanctions on clients or providers in response to fraud, and procedures in place to document and verity eligibility, pursuant to § 98.68;
              
              (dd) A description of how the Lead Agency will provide outreach and services to eligible families with limited English proficiency and persons with disabilities and facilitate participation of child care providers with limited English proficiency and disabilities in the subsidy system;
              (ee) A description of policies to prevent suspension, expulsion, and denial of services due to behavior of children birth to age five in child care and other early childhood programs receiving assistance under this part, which must be disseminated as part of consumer and provider education efforts in accordance with § 98.33(b)(1)(v);
              (ff) Designation of a State, territorial, or tribal entity to which child care providers must submit reports of any serious injuries or deaths of children occurring in child care, in accordance with § 98.42(b)(4);
              (gg) A description of how the Lead Agency will support child care providers in the successful engagement of families in children's learning and development;
              (hh) A description of how the Lead Agency will respond to complaints submitted through the national hotline and Web site, required in section 658L(b) of the CCDBG Act of 2014 (42 U.S.C. 9858j(b)), including the designee responsible for receiving and responding to such complaints regarding both licensed and license-exempt child care providers;
              (ii) Such other information as specified by the Secretary.
              [81 FR 67576, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.17
              Period covered by Plan.
              (a) For States, Territories, and Indian Tribes the Plan shall cover a period of three years.
              (b) The Lead Agency shall submit a new Plan prior to the expiration of the time period specified in paragraph (a) of this section, at such time as required by the Secretary in written instructions.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67578, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.18
              Approval and disapproval of Plans and Plan amendments.
              (a) Plan approval. The Assistant Secretary will approve a Plan that satisfies the requirements of the Act and this part. Plans will be approved not later than the 90th day following the date on which the Plan submittal is received, unless a written agreement to extend that period has been secured.
              (b) Plan amendments. (1) Approved Plans shall be amended whenever a substantial change in the program occurs. A Plan amendment shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of the change. Plan amendments will be approved or denied not later than the 90th day following the date on which the amendment is received, unless a written agreement to extend that period has been secured.

              (2) Lead Agencies must ensure advanced written notice is provided to affected parties (i.e., parents and child care providers) of substantial changes in the program that adversely affect eligibility, payment rates, and/or sliding fee scales.
              (c) Appeal of disapproval of a Plan or Plan amendment. (1) An applicant or Lead Agency dissatisfied with a determination of the Assistant Secretary pursuant to paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section with respect to any Plan or amendment may, within 60 days after the date of receipt of notification of such determination, file a petition with the Assistant Secretary asking for reconsideration of the issue of whether such Plan or amendment conforms to the requirements for approval under the Act and pertinent Federal regulations.
              (2) Within 30 days after receipt of such petition, the Assistant Secretary shall notify the applicant or Lead Agency of the time and place at which the hearing for the purpose of reconsidering such issue will be held.
              (3) Such hearing shall be held not less than 30 days, nor more than 90 days, after the notification is furnished to the applicant or Lead Agency, unless the Assistant Secretary and the applicant or Lead Agency agree in writing on another time.

              (4) Action pursuant to an initial determination by the Assistant Secretary described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section that a Plan or amendment is not approvable shall not be stayed pending the reconsideration, but in the event that the Assistant Secretary subsequently determines that the original decision was incorrect, the Assistant Secretary shall certify restitution forthwith in a lump sum of any funds incorrectly withheld or otherwise denied. The hearing procedures are described in part 99 of this chapter.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67578, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.19
              Requests for temporary relief from requirements.
              (a) Requests for relief. The Secretary may temporarily waive one or more of the requirements contained in the Act or this part, with the exception of State Match and Maintenance of Effort requirements for a State, consistent with the conditions described in section 658I(c)(1) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 9858g(c)(1)), provided that the waiver request:
              (1) Describes circumstances that prevent the State, Territory, or Tribe from complying with any statutory or regulatory requirements of this part;
              (2) By itself, contributes to or enhances the State's, Territory's, or Tribe's ability to carry out the purposes of the Act and this part;
              (3) Will not contribute to inconsistency with the purposes of the Act or this part, and;
              (4) Meets the requirements set forth in paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section.
              (b) Types. Types of waivers include:
              (1) Transitional and legislative waivers. Lead Agencies may apply for temporary waivers meeting the requirements described in paragraph (a) of this section that would provide transitional relief from conflicting or duplicative requirements preventing implementation, or an extended period of time in order for a State, territorial, or tribal legislature to enact legislation to implement the provisions of this subchapter. Such waivers are:
              (i) Limited to a one-year initial period;
              (ii) May be extended, in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section, for at most one additional year from the date of approval of the extension,
              (iii) Are designed to provide States, Territories and Tribes at most one full legislative session to enact legislation to implement the provisions of the Act or this part, and;
              (iv) Are conditional, dependent on progress towards implementation, and may be terminated by the Secretary at any time in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.
              (2) Waivers for extraordinary circumstances. States, Territories and Tribes may apply for waivers meeting the requirements described in paragraph (a) of this section, in cases of extraordinary circumstances, which are defined as temporary circumstances or situations, such as a natural disaster or financial crisis. Such waivers are:
              (i) Limited to an initial period of no more than 2 years from the date of approval;
              (ii) May be extended, in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section, for at most one additional year from the date of approval of the extension, and;
              (iii) May be terminated by the Secretary at any time in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.
              (c) Contents. Waiver requests must be submitted to the Secretary in writing and:
              (1) Indicate which type of waiver, as detailed in paragraph (b) of this section, the State, Territory or Tribe is requesting;
              (2) Detail each sanction or provision of the Act or regulations that the State, Territory or Tribe seeks relief from;
              (3) Describe how a waiver from that sanction or provision will, by itself, improve delivery of child care services for children; and
              (4) Certify and describe how the health, safety, and well-being of children served through assistance received under this part will not be compromised as a result of the waiver.
              (d) Notification. Within 90 days after receipt of the waiver request or, if additional follow up information has been requested, the receipt of such information, the Secretary will notify the Lead Agency of the approval or disapproval of the request.
              (e) Termination. The Secretary shall terminate approval of a request for a waiver authorized under the Act or this section if the Secretary determines, after notice and opportunity for a hearing based on the rules of procedure in part 99 of this chapter, that the performance of a State, Territory or Tribe granted relief under this section has been inadequate, or if such relief is no longer necessary to achieve its original purposes.
              (f) Renewal. The Secretary may approve or disapprove a request from a State, Territory or Tribe for renewal of an existing waiver under the Act or this section for a period no longer than one year. A State, Territory or Tribe seeking to renew their waiver approval must inform the Secretary of this intent no later than 30 days prior to the expiration date of the waiver. The State, Territory or Tribe shall re-certify in its extension request the provisions in paragraph (a) of this section, and shall also explain the need for additional time of relief from such sanction(s) or provisions.
              (g) Restrictions. The Secretary may not:
              (1) Permit Lead Agencies to alter the federal eligibility requirements for eligible children, including work requirements, job training, or educational program participation, that apply to the parents of eligible children under this part;
              (2) Waive anything related to the Secretary's authority under this part; or
              (3) Require or impose any new or additional requirements in exchange for receipt of a waiver if such requirements are not specified in the Act.
              [81 FR 67578, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Eligibility for Services
            
              § 98.20
              A child's eligibility for child care services.
              (a) To be eligible for services under § 98.50, a child shall, at the time of eligibility determination or redetermination:
              (1)(i) Be under 13 years of age; or,
              (ii) At the option of the Lead Agency, be under age 19 and physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself or herself, or under court supervision;
              (2)(i) Reside with a family whose income does not exceed 85 percent of the State's median income (SMI), which must be based on the most recent SMI data that is published by the Bureau of the Census, for a family of the same size; and
              (ii) Whose family assets do not exceed $1,000,000 (as certified by such family member); and
              (3)(i) Reside with a parent or parents who are working or attending a job training or educational program; or
              (ii) Receive, or need to receive, protective services, which may include specific populations of vulnerable children as identified by the Lead Agency, and reside with a parent or parents other than the parent(s) described in paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section.
              (A) At grantee option, the requirements in paragraph (a)(2) of this section may be waived for families eligible for child care pursuant to this paragraph, if determined to be necessary on a case-by-case basis.
              (B) At grantee option, the waiver provisions in paragraph (a)(3)(ii)(A) of this section apply to children in foster care when defined in the Plan, pursuant to § 98.16(g)(7).
              (b) A grantee or other administering agency may establish eligibility conditions or priority rules in addition to those specified in this section and § 98.46, which shall be described in the Plan pursuant to § 98.16(i)(5), so long as they do not:
              (1) Discriminate against children on the basis of race, national origin, ethnic background, sex, religious affiliation, or disability;
              (2) Limit parental rights provided under subpart D of this part;
              (3) Violate the provisions of this section, § 98.46, or the Plan. In particular, such conditions or priority rules may not be based on a parent's preference for a category of care or type of provider. In addition, such additional conditions or rules may not be based on a parent's choice of a child care certificate; or
              (4) Impact eligibility other than at the time of eligibility determination or redetermination.

              (c) For purposes of implementing the citizenship eligibility verification requirements mandated by title IV of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, 8 U.S.C. 1601 et seq., only the citizenship and immigration status of the child, who is the primary beneficiary of the CCDF benefit, is relevant. Therefore, a Lead Agency or other administering agency may not condition a child's eligibility for services under § 98.50 based upon the citizenship or immigration status of their parent or the provision of any information about the citizenship or immigration status of their parent.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67579, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.21
              Eligibility determination processes.
              (a) A Lead Agency shall re-determine a child's eligibility for child care services no sooner than 12 months following the initial determination or most recent redetermination, subject to the following:
              (1) During the period of time between determinations or redeterminations, if the child met all of the requirements in § 98.20(a) on the date of the most recent eligibility determination or redetermination, the child shall be considered eligible and will receive services at least at the same level, regardless of:
              (i) A change in family income, if that family income does not exceed 85 percent of SMI for a family of the same size; or
              (ii) A temporary change in the ongoing status of the child's parent as working or attending a job training or educational program. A temporary change shall include, at a minimum:
              (A) Any time-limited absence from work for an employed parent due to reasons such as need to care for a family member or an illness;;
              (B) Any interruption in work for a seasonal worker who is not working between regular industry work seasons;
              (C) Any student holiday or break for a parent participating in training or education;
              (D) Any reduction in work, training or education hours, as long as the parent is still working or attending training or education;
              (E) Any other cessation of work or attendance at a training or education program that does not exceed three months or a longer period of time established by the Lead Agency;
              (F) Any change in age, including turning 13 years old during the eligibility period; and
              (G) Any change in residency within the State, Territory, or Tribal service area.
              (2)(i) Lead Agencies have the option, but are not required, to discontinue assistance due to a parent's loss of work or cessation of attendance at a job training or educational program that does not constitute a temporary change in accordance with paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section. However, if the Lead Agency exercises this option, it must continue assistance at least at the same level for a period of not less than three months after each such loss or cessation in order for the parent to engage in job search and resume work, or resume attendance at a job training or educational activity.
              (ii) At the end of the minimum three-month period of continued assistance, if the parent is engaged in a qualifying work, education, or training activity with income below 85% of SMI, assistance cannot be terminated and the child must continue receiving assistance until the next scheduled re-determination, or at Lead Agency option, for an additional minimum 12—month eligibility period.
              (iii) If a Lead Agency chooses to initially qualify a family for CCDF assistance based a parent's status of seeking employment or engaging in job search, the Lead Agency has the option to end assistance after a minimum of three months if the parent has still not found employment, although assistance must continue if the parent becomes employed during the job search period.
              (3) Lead Agencies cannot increase family co-payment amounts, established in accordance with § 98.45(k), within the minimum 12-month eligibility period except as described in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.

              (4) Because a child meeting eligibility requirements at the most recent eligibility determination or redetermination is considered eligible between redeterminations as described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, any payment for such a child shall not be considered an error or improper payment under subpart K of this part due to a change in the family's circumstances.
              
              (5) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(1), the Lead Agency may discontinue assistance prior to the next re-determination in limited circumstances where there have been:
              (i) Excessive unexplained absences despite multiple attempts by the Lead Agency or designated entity to contact the family and provider, including prior notification of possible discontinuation of assistance;
              (A) If the Lead Agency chooses this option, it shall define the number of unexplained absences that shall be considered excessive;
              (B) [Reserved]
              (ii) A change in residency outside of the State, Territory, or Tribal service area; or
              (iii) Substantiated fraud or intentional program violations that invalidate prior determinations of eligibility.
              (b)(1) Lead Agencies that establish family income eligibility at a level less than 85 percent of SMI for a family of the same size (in order for a child to initially qualify for assistance) must provide a graduated phase-out by implementing two-tiered eligibility thresholds, with the second tier of eligibility (used at the time of eligibility re-determination) set at:
              (i) 85 percent of SMI for a family of the same size; or
              (ii) An amount lower than 85 percent of SMI for a family of the same size, but above the Lead Agency's initial eligibility threshold, that:
              (A) Takes into account the typical household budget of a low income family; and
              (B) Provides justification that the second eligibility threshold is:
              (1) Sufficient to accommodate increases in family income over time that are typical for low-income workers and that promote and support family economic stability; and
              (2) Reasonably allows a family to continue accessing child care services without unnecessary disruption.
              (2) At re-determination, a child shall be considered eligible (pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section) if their parents, at the time of redetermination, are working or attending a job training or educational program even if their income exceeds the Lead Agency's income limit to initially quality for assistance, as long as their income does not exceed the second tier of the eligibility described in (b)(1);
              (3) A family meeting the conditions described in (b)(2) shall be eligible for services pursuant to the conditions described in § 98.20 and all other paragraphs of § 98.21, with the exception of the co-payment restrictions at § 98.21(a)(3). To help families transition off of child care assistance, Lead Agencies may gradually adjust co-pay amounts for families whose children are determined eligible under the graduate phase-out conditions described in paragraph (b)(2) and may require additional reporting on changes in family income as described in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, provided such requirements do not constitute an undue burden, pursuant to conditions described in (e)(2)(ii) and (iii) of this section.
              (c) The Lead Agency shall establish processes for initial determination and redetermination of eligibility that take into account irregular fluctuation in earnings, including policies that ensure temporary increases in income, including temporary increases that result in monthly income exceeding 85 percent of SMI (calculated on a monthly basis), do not affect eligibility or family co-payments.
              (d) The Lead Agency shall establish procedures and policies to ensure parents, especially parents receiving assistance through the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, are not required to unduly disrupt their education, training, or employment in order to complete the eligibility redetermination process.
              (e) The Lead Agency shall specify in the Plan any requirements for parents to notify the Lead Agency of changes in circumstances during the minimum 12-month eligibility period, and describe efforts to ensure such requirements do not place an undue burden on eligible families that could impact continued eligibility between redeterminations.

              (1) The Lead Agency must require families to report a change at any point during the minimum 12-month period, limited to:
              
              (i) If the family's income exceeds 85% of SMI, taking into account irregular income fluctuations; or
              (ii) At the option of the Lead Agency, the family has experienced a non-temporary cessation of work, training, or education.
              (2) Any additional requirements the Lead Agency chooses, at its option, to impose on parents to provide notification of changes in circumstances to the Lead Agency or entities designated to perform eligibility functions shall not constitute an undue burden on families. Any such requirements shall:

              (i) Limit notification requirements to items that impact a family's eligibility (e.g., only if income exceeds 85 percent of SMI, or there is a non-temporary change in the status of the child's parent as working or attending a job training or educational program) or those that enable the Lead Agency to contact the family or pay providers;
              (ii) Not require an office visit in order to fulfill notification requirements; and
              (iii) Offer a range of notification options (e.g., phone, email, online forms, extended submission hours) to accommodate the needs of parents;
              (3) During a period of graduated phase-out, the Lead Agency may require additional reporting on changes in family income in order to gradually adjust family co-payments, if desired, as described in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
              (4) Lead Agencies must allow families the option to voluntarily report changes on an ongoing basis.
              (i) Lead Agencies are required to act on this information provided by the family if it would reduce the family's co-payment or increase the family's subsidy.
              (ii) Lead Agencies are prohibited from acting on information that would reduce the family's subsidy unless the information provided indicates the family's income exceeds 85 percent of SMI for a family of the same size, taking into account irregular income fluctuations, or, at the option of the Lead Agency, the family has experienced a non-temporary change in the work, training, or educational status.
              (f) Lead Agencies must take into consideration children's development and learning and promote continuity of care when authorizing child care services.
              (g) Lead Agencies are not required to limit authorized child care services strictly based on the work, training, or educational schedule of the parent(s) or the number of hours the parent(s) spend in work, training, or educational activities.
              [81 FR 67579, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Program Operations (Child Care Services)—Parental Rights and Responsibilities
            
              § 98.30
              Parental choice.
              (a) The parent or parents of an eligible child who receives or is offered child care services shall be offered a choice:
              (1) To enroll the child with an eligible child care provider that has a grant or contract for the provision of such services, if such services are available; or
              (2) To receive a child care certificate as defined in § 98.2. Such choice shall be offered any time that child care services are made available to a parent.
              (b) When a parent elects to enroll the child with a provider that has a grant or contract for the provision of child care services, the child will be enrolled with the provider selected by the parent to the maximum extent practicable.
              (c) In cases in which a parent elects to use a child care certificate, such certificate:
              (1) Will be issued directly to the parent;
              (2) Shall be of a value commensurate with the subsidy value of the child care services provided under paragraph (a)(1) of this section;
              (3) May be used as a deposit for child care services if such a deposit is required of other children being cared for by the provider;
              (4) May be used for child care services provided by a sectarian organization or agency, including those that engage in religious activities, if those services are chosen by the parent;

              (5) May be expended by providers for any sectarian purpose or activity that is part of the child care services, including sectarian worship or instruction;
              (6) Shall not be considered a grant or contract to a provider but shall be considered assistance to the parent.
              (d) Child care certificates shall be made available to any parents offered child care services.
              (e)(1) For child care services, certificates under paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall permit parents to choose from a variety of child care categories, including:
              (i) Center-based child care;
              (ii) Family child care; and
              (iii) In-home child care, with limitations, if any, imposed by the Lead Agency and described in its Plan at § 98.16(i)(2). Under each of the above categories, care by a sectarian provider may not be limited or excluded.
              (2) Lead Agencies shall provide information regarding the range of provider options under paragraph (e)(1) of this section, including care by sectarian providers and relatives, to families offered child care services.
              (f) With respect to State and local regulatory requirements under § 98.40, health and safety requirements under § 98.41, and payment rates under § 98.45, CCDF funds will not be available to a Lead Agency if State or local rules, procedures or other requirements promulgated for purposes of the CCDF significantly restrict parental choice by:
              (1) Expressly or effectively excluding:
              (i) Any category of care or type of provider, as defined in § 98.2; or
              (ii) Any type of provider within a category of care; or
              (2) Having the effect of limiting parental access to or choice from among such categories of care or types of providers, as defined in § 98.2, with the exception of in-home care; or
              (3) Excluding a significant number of providers in any category of care or of any type as defined in § 98.2.
              (g) As long as provisions at paragraph (f) of this section are met, parental choice provisions shall not be construed as prohibiting a Lead Agency from establishing policies that require providers of child care services for which assistance is provided under this part to meet higher standards of quality, such as those identified in a quality rating and improvement system or other transparent system of quality indicators.
              (h) Parental choice provisions shall not be construed as prohibiting a Lead Agency from providing parents with information and incentives that encourage the selection of high-quality child care.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67580, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.31
              Parental access.
              The Lead Agency shall have in effect procedures to ensure that providers of child care services for which assistance is provided afford parents unlimited access to their children, and to the providers caring for their children, during normal hours of provider operation and whenever the children are in the care of the provider. The Lead Agency shall provide a detailed description in the Plan of such procedures.
              [81 FR 67581, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.32
              Parental complaints.
              The State shall:
              (a) Establish or designate a hotline or similar reporting process for parents to submit complaints about child care providers;
              (b) Maintain a record of substantiated parent complains;
              (c) Make information regarding such parental complaints available to the public on request; and
              (d) The Lead Agency shall provide a detailed description in the Plan of how:
              (1) Complaints are substantiated and responded to, including whether or not the State uses monitoring as part of its process for responding to complaints for both CCDF and non-CCDF providers; and,
              (2) A record of substantiated complaints is maintained and is made available.
              [81 FR 67581, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.33
              Consumer and provider education.
              The Lead Agency shall:

              (a) Certify that it will collect and disseminate consumer education information to parents of eligible children, the general public, and providers through a consumer-friendly and easily accessible Web site that ensures the widest possible access to services for families who speak languages other than English and persons with disabilities, including:
              (1) Lead Agency processes, including:
              (i) The process for licensing child care providers pursuant to § 98.40;
              (ii) The process for conducting monitoring and inspections of child care providers pursuant to § 98.42;
              (iii) Policies and procedures related to criminal background checks for child care providers pursuant to § 98.43; and
              (iv) The offenses that prevent individuals from serving as child care providers.
              (2) A localized list of all licensed child care providers, and, at the discretion of the Lead Agency, all eligible child care providers (other than an individual who is related to all children for whom child care services are provided), differentiating between licensed and license-exempt providers, searchable by zip code;
              (3) The quality of a provider as determined by the Lead Agency through a quality rating and improvement system or other transparent system of quality indicators, if such information is available for the provider;
              (4) Results of monitoring and inspection reports for all eligible and licensed child care providers (other than an individual who is related to all children for whom child care services are provided), including those required at § 98.42 and those due to major substantiated complaints about failure to comply with provisions at § 98.41 and Lead Agency child care policies. Lead Agencies shall post in a timely manner full monitoring and inspection reports, either in plain language or with a plain language summary, for parents and child care providers to understand, and shall establish a process for correcting inaccuracies in the reports. Such results shall include:
              (i) Information on the date of such inspection;
              (ii) Information on corrective action taken by the State and child care provider, where applicable;
              (iii) Any health and safety violations, including any fatalities and serious injuries occurring at the provider, prominently displayed on the report or summary; and
              (iv) A minimum of 3 years of results where available.
              (5) Aggregate number of deaths and serious injuries (for each provider category and licensing status) and instances of substantiated child abuse that occurred in child care settings each year, for eligible providers.
              (6) Referrals to local child care resource and referral organizations.
              (7) Directions on how parents can contact the Lead Agency or its designee and other programs to help them understand information included on the Web site.
              (b) Certify that it will collect and disseminate, through resource and referral organizations or other means as determined by the State, including, but not limited to, through the Web site described in paragraph (a) of this section, to parents of eligible children and the general public, and where applicable providers, information about:
              (1) The availability of the full diversity of child care services to promote informed parental choice, including information about:
              (i) The availability of child care services under this part and other programs for which families may be eligible, as well as the availability of financial assistance to obtain child care services;
              (ii) Other programs for which families that receive assistance under this part may be eligible, including:

              (A) Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
              (B) Head Start and Early Head Start (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.);

              (C) Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) (42 U.S.C. 8621 et seq.);

              (D) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.);
              (E) Special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children (42 U.S.C. 1786);
              (F) Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) (42 U.S.C. 1766);

              (G) Medicaid and the State children's health insurance programs (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq., 1397aa et seq.);

              (iii) Programs carried out under section 619 and part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) (20 U.S.C. 1419, 1431 et seq.);
              (iv) Research and best practices concerning children's development, meaningful parent and family engagement, and physical health and development, particularly healthy eating and physical activity; and
              (v) State policies regarding social emotional behavioral health of children which may include positive behavioral health intervention and support models for birth to school-age or age-appropriate, and policies to prevent suspension and expulsion of children birth to age five in child care and other early childhood programs, as described in the Plan pursuant to § 98.16(ee), receiving assistance under this part.
              (c) Provide information on developmental screenings to parents as part of the intake process for families receiving assistance under this part, and to providers through training and education, including:

              (1) Information on existing resources and services the State can make available in conducting developmental screenings and providing referrals to services when appropriate for children who receive assistance under this part, including the coordinated use of the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment program (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and developmental screening services available under section 619 and part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1419, 1431 et seq.); and
              (2) A description of how a family or eligible child care provider may utilize the resources and services described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section to obtain developmental screenings for children who receive assistance under this part who may be at risk for cognitive or other developmental delays, which may include social, emotional, physical, or linguistic delays.
              (d) For families that receive assistance under this part, provide specific information about the child care provider selected by the parent, including health and safety requirements met by the provider pursuant to § 98.41, any licensing or regulatory requirements met by the provider, date the provider was last inspected, any history of violations of these requirements, and any voluntary quality standards met by the provider. Information must also describe how CCDF subsidies are designed to promote equal access in accordance with § 98.45, how to submit a complaint through the hotline at § 98.32(a), and how to contact local resource and referral agencies or other community-based supports that assist parents in finding and enrolling in quality child care.
              (e) Provide linkages to databases related to paragraph (a) to HHS for implementing a national Web site and other uses as determined by the Secretary.
              (f) Inform parents who receive TANF benefits about the requirement at section 407(e)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 607(e)(2)) that the TANF agency make an exception to the individual penalties associated with the work requirement for any single custodial parent who has a demonstrated inability to obtain needed child care for a child under six years of age. The information may be provided directly by the Lead Agency, or, pursuant to § 98.11, other entities, and shall include:
              (1) The procedures the TANF agency uses to determine if the parent has a demonstrated inability to obtain needed child care;
              (2) The criteria or definitions applied by the TANF agency to determine whether the parent has a demonstrated inability to obtain needed child care, including:
              (i) “Appropriate child care”;
              (ii) “Reasonable distance”;
              (iii) “Unsuitability of informal child care”;
              (iv) “Affordable child care arrangements”;
              (3) The clarification that assistance received during the time an eligible parent receives the exception referred to in paragraph (f) of this section will count toward the time limit on Federal benefits required at section 408(a)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(a)(7)).
              (g) Include in the triennial Plan the definitions or criteria the TANF agency uses in implementing the exception to the work requirement specified in paragraph (f) of this section.
              [81 FR 67581, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              
              § 98.34
              Parental rights and responsibilities.
              Nothing under this part shall be construed or applied in any manner to infringe on or usurp the moral and legal rights and responsibilities of parents or legal guardians.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Program Operations (Child Care Services)—Lead Agency and Provider Requirements
            
              § 98.40
              Compliance with applicable State and local regulatory requirements.
              (a) Lead Agencies shall:
              (1) Certify that they have in effect licensing requirements applicable to child care services provided within the area served by the Lead Agency;
              (2) Describe in the Plan exemption(s) to licensing requirements, if any, for child care services for which assistance is provided, and a demonstration for how such exemption(s) do not endanger the health, safety, or development of children who receive services from such providers. Lead Agencies must provide the required description and demonstration for any exemptions based on:
              (i) Provider category, type, or setting;
              (ii) Length of day;
              (iii) Providers not subject to licensing because the number of children served falls below a State-defined threshold; and
              (iv) Any other exemption to licensing requirements; and
              (3) Provide a detailed description in the Plan of the requirements under paragraph (a)(1) of this section and of how they are effectively enforced.
              (b)(1) This section does not prohibit a Lead Agency from imposing more stringent standards and licensing or regulatory requirements on child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF than the standards or requirements imposed on other child care providers.
              (2) Any such additional requirements shall be consistent with the safeguards for parental choice in § 98.30(f).
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67582, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.41
              Health and safety requirements.
              (a) Each Lead Agency shall certify that there are in effect, within the State (or other area served by the Lead Agency), under State, local or tribal law, requirements (appropriate to provider setting and age of children served) that are designed, implemented, and enforced to protect the health and safety of children. Such requirements must be applicable to child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under this part. Such requirements, which are subject to monitoring pursuant to § 98.42, shall:
              (1) Include health and safety topics consisting of, at a minimum:
              (i) The prevention and control of infectious diseases (including immunizations); with respect to immunizations, the following provisions apply:
              (A) As part of their health and safety provisions in this area, Lead Agencies shall assure that children receiving services under the CCDF are age-appropriately immunized. Those health and safety provisions shall incorporate (by reference or otherwise) the latest recommendation for childhood immunizations of the respective State, territorial, or tribal public health agency.
              (B) Notwithstanding this paragraph (a)(1)(i), Lead Agencies may exempt:
              (1) Children who are cared for by relatives (defined as grandparents, great grandparents, siblings (if living in a separate residence), aunts, and uncles), provided there are no other unrelated children who are cared for in the same setting.
              (2) Children who receive care in their own homes, provided there are no other unrelated children who are cared for in the home.
              (3) Children whose parents object to immunization on religious grounds.
              (4) Children whose medical condition contraindicates immunization.

              (C) Lead Agencies shall establish a grace period that allows children experiencing homelessness and children in foster care to receive services under this part while providing their families (including foster families) a reasonable time to take any necessary action to comply with immunization and other health and safety requirements.
              
              (1) The length of such grace period shall be established in consultation with the State, Territorial or Tribal health agency.
              (2) Any payment for such child during the grace period shall not be considered an error or improper payment under subpart K of this part.
              (3) The Lead Agency may also, at its option, establish grace periods for other children who are not experiencing homelessness or in foster care.
              (4) Lead Agencies must coordinate with licensing agencies and other relevant State, Territorial, Tribal, and local agencies to provide referrals and support to help families of children receiving services during a grace period comply with immunization and other health and safety requirements;
              (ii) Prevention of sudden infant death syndrome and use of safe sleeping practices;
              (iii) Administration of medication, consistent with standards for parental consent;
              (iv) Prevention and response to emergencies due to food and allergic reactions;
              (v) Building and physical premises safety, including identification of and protection from hazards, bodies of water, and vehicular traffic;
              (vi) Prevention of shaken baby syndrome, abusive head trauma, and child maltreatment;
              (vii) Emergency preparedness and response planning for emergencies resulting from a natural disaster, or a man-caused event (such as violence at a child care facility), within the meaning of those terms under section 602(a)(1) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5195a(a)(1)) that shall include procedures for evacuation, relocation, shelter-in-place and lock down, staff and volunteer emergency preparedness training and practice drills, communication and reunification with families, continuity of operations, and accommodation of infants and toddlers, children with disabilities, and children with chronic medical conditions;
              (viii) Handling and storage of hazardous materials and the appropriate disposal of biocontaminants;
              (ix) Appropriate precautions in transporting children, if applicable;
              (x) Pediatric first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation;
              (xi) Recognition and reporting of child abuse and neglect, in accordance with the requirement in paragraph (e) of this section; and
              (xii) May include requirements relating to:
              (A) Nutrition (including age-appropriate feeding);
              (B) Access to physical activity;
              (C) Caring for children with special needs; or
              (D) Any other subject area determined by the Lead Agency to be necessary to promote child development or to protect children's health and safety.
              (2) Include minimum health and safety training on the topics above, as described in § 98.44.
              (b) Lead Agencies may not set health and safety standards and requirements other than those required in paragraph (a) of this section that are inconsistent with the parental choice safeguards in § 98.30(f).
              (c) The requirements in paragraph (a) of this section shall apply to all providers of child care services for which assistance is provided under this part, within the area served by the Lead Agency, except the relatives specified at § 98.42(c).
              (d) Lead Agencies shall describe in the Plan standards for child care services for which assistance is provided under this part, appropriate to strengthening the adult and child relationship in the type of child care setting involved, to provide for the safety and developmental needs of the children served, that address:
              (1) Group size limits for specific age populations;
              (2) The appropriate ratio between the number of children and the number of caregivers, in terms of age of children in child care; and
              (3) Required qualifications for caregivers in child care settings as described at § 98.44(a)(4).

              (e) Lead Agencies shall certify that caregivers, teachers, and directors of child care providers within the State or service area will comply with the State's, Territory's, or Tribe's child abuse reporting requirements as required by section 106(b)(2)(B)(i) of the Child Abuse and Prevention and Treatment Act (42 U.S.C. 5106a(b)(2)(B)(i)) or other child abuse reporting procedures and laws in the service area.
              [81 FR 67582, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.42
              Enforcement of licensing and health and safety requirements.
              (a) Each Lead Agency shall certify in the Plan that procedures are in effect to ensure that child care providers of services for which assistance is made available in accordance with this part, within the area served by the Lead Agency, comply with all applicable State, local, or tribal health and safety requirements, including those described in § 98.41.
              (b) Each Lead Agency shall certify in the Plan it has monitoring policies and practices applicable to all child care providers and facilities eligible to deliver services for which assistance is provided under this part. The Lead Agency shall:
              (1) Ensure individuals who are hired as licensing inspectors are qualified to inspect those child care providers and facilities and have received training in related health and safety requirements appropriate to provider setting and age of children served. Training shall include, but is not limited to, those requirements described in § 98.41, and all aspects of the State, Territory, or Tribe's licensure requirements;
              (2) Require inspections of child care providers and facilities, performed by licensing inspectors (or qualified inspectors designated by the Lead Agency), as specified below:
              (i) For licensed child care providers and facilities,
              (A) Not less than one pre-licensure inspection for compliance with health, safety, and fire standards, and
              (B) Not less than annually, an unannounced inspection for compliance with all child care licensing standards, which shall include an inspection for compliance with health and safety, (including, but not limited to, those requirements described in § 98.41) and fire standards (inspectors may inspect for compliance with all three standards at the same time); and
              (ii) For license-exempt child care providers and facilities that are eligible to provide services for which assistance is made available in accordance with this part, an annual inspection for compliance with health and safety (including, but not limited to, those requirements described in § 98.41), and fire standards;
              (iii) Coordinate, to the extent practicable, monitoring efforts with other Federal, State, and local agencies that conduct similar inspections.
              (iv) The Lead Agency may, at its option:
              (A) Use differential monitoring or a risk-based approach to design annual inspections, provided that the contents covered during each monitoring visit is representative of the full complement of health and safety requirements;
              (B) Develop alternate monitoring requirements for care provided in the child's home that are appropriate to the setting; and
              (3) Ensure the ratio of licensing inspectors to such child care providers and facilities is maintained at a level sufficient to enable the State, Territory, or Tribe to conduct effective inspections on a timely basis in accordance with the applicable Federal, State, Territory, Tribal, and local law;
              (4) Require child care providers to report to a designated State, Territorial, or Tribal entity any serious injuries or deaths of children occurring in child care.
              (c) For the purposes of this section and § 98.41, Lead Agencies may exclude grandparents, great grandparents, siblings (if such providers live in a separate residence), aunts, or uncles, from the term “child care providers.” If the Lead Agency chooses to exclude these providers, the Lead Agency shall provide a description and justification in the CCDF Plan, pursuant to § 98.16(l), of requirements, if any, that apply to these providers.
              [81 FR 67583, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.43
              Criminal background checks.
              (a)(1) States, Territories, and Tribes, through coordination of the Lead agency with other State, territorial, and tribal agencies, shall have in effect:

              (i) Requirements, policies, and procedures to require and conduct criminal background checks for child care staff members (including prospective child care staff members) of all licensed, regulated, or registered child care providers and all child care providers eligible to deliver services for which assistance is provided under this part as described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section;
              (ii) Licensing, regulation, and registration requirements, as applicable, that prohibit the employment of child care staff members as described in paragraph (c) of this section; and
              (iii) Requirements, policies, and procedures in place to respond as expeditiously as possible to other States', Territories', and Tribes' requests for background check results in order to accommodate the 45 day timeframe required in paragraph (e)(1) of this section.
              (2) In this section:
              (i) Child care provider means a center based child care provider, a family child care provider, or another provider of child care services for compensation and on a regular basis that:
              (A) Is not an individual who is related to all children for whom child care services are provided; and
              (B) Is licensed, regulated, or registered under State law or eligible to receive assistance provided under this subchapter; and
              (ii) Child care staff member means an individual (other than an individual who is related to all children for whom child care services are provided):
              (A) Who is employed by a child care provider for compensation, including contract employees or self-employed individuals;
              (B) Whose activities involve the care or supervision of children for a child care provider or unsupervised access to children who are cared for or supervised by a child care provider; or
              (C) Any individual residing in a family child care home who is age 18 and older.
              (b) A criminal background check for a child care staff member under paragraph (a) of this section shall include:
              (1) A Federal Bureau of Investigation fingerprint check using Next Generation Identification;
              (2) A search of the National Crime Information Center's National Sex Offender Registry; and
              (3) A search of the following registries, repositories, or databases in the State where the child care staff member resides and each State where such staff member resided during the preceding five years:
              (i) State criminal registry or repository, with the use of fingerprints being:
              (A) Required in the State where the staff member resides;
              (B) Optional in other States;
              (ii) State sex offender registry or repository; and
              (iii) State-based child abuse and neglect registry and database.
              (c)(1) A child care staff member shall be ineligible for employment by child care providers of services for which assistance is made available in accordance with this part, if such individual:
              (i) Refuses to consent to the criminal background check described in paragraph (b) of this section;
              (ii) Knowingly makes a materially false statement in connection with such criminal background check;
              (iii) Is registered, or is required to be registered, on a State sex offender registry or repository or the National Sex Offender Registry; or
              (iv) Has been convicted of a felony consisting of:
              (A) Murder, as described in section 1111 of title 18, United States Code;
              (B) Child abuse or neglect;
              (C) A crime against children, including child pornography;
              (D) Spousal abuse;
              (E) A crime involving rape or sexual assault;
              (F) Kidnapping;
              (G) Arson;
              (H) Physical assault or battery; or
              (I) Subject to paragraph (e)(4) of this section, a drug-related offense committed during the preceding 5 years; or
              (v) Has been convicted of a violent misdemeanor committed as an adult against a child, including the following crimes: Child abuse, child endangerment, sexual assault, or of a misdemeanor involving child pornography.

              (2) A child care provider described in paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section shall be ineligible for assistance provided in accordance with this subchapter if the provider employs a staff member who is ineligible for employment under paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
              (d)(1) A child care provider covered by paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section shall submit a request, to the appropriate State, Territorial, or Tribal agency, defined clearly on the State or Territory Web site described in paragraph (g) of this section, for a criminal background check described in paragraph (b) of this section, for each child care staff member (including prospective child care staff members) of the provider.
              (2) Subject to paragraph (d)(3) of this section, the provider shall submit such a request:
              (i) Prior to the date an individual becomes a child care staff member of the provider; and
              (ii) Not less than once during each 5-year period for any existing staff member.
              (3) A child care provider shall not be required to submit a request under paragraph (d)(2) of this section for a child care staff member if:
              (i) The staff member received a background check described in paragraph (b) of this section:
              (A) Within 5 years before the latest date on which such a submission may be made; and
              (B) While employed by or seeking employment by another child care provider within the State;
              (ii) The State provided to the first provider a qualifying background check result, consistent with this subchapter, for the staff member; and
              (iii) The staff member is employed by a child care provider within the State, or has been separated from employment from a child care provider within the State for a period of not more than 180 consecutive days.
              (4) A prospective staff member may begin work for a child care provider described in paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section after completing either the check described at paragraph (b)(1) or (b)(3)(i) of this section in the State where the prospective staff member resides. Pending completion of all background check components in paragraph (b) of this section, the staff member must be supervised at all times by an individual who received a qualifying result on a background check described in paragraph (b) of this section within the past five years.
              (e) Background check results. (1) The State, Territory, or Tribe shall carry out the request of a child care provider for a criminal background check as expeditiously as possible, but not to exceed 45 days after the date on which the provider submitted the request, and shall provide the results of the criminal background check to such provider and to the current or prospective staff member.
              (2) States, Territories, and Tribes shall ensure the privacy of background check results by:
              (i) Providing the results of the criminal background check to the provider in a statement that indicates whether a child care staff member (including a prospective child care staff member) is eligible or ineligible for employment described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, without revealing any disqualifying crime or other related information regarding the individual.
              (ii) If the child care staff member is ineligible for such employment due to the background check, the State, Territory, or Tribe will, when providing the results of the background check, include information related to each disqualifying crime, in a report to the staff member or prospective staff member, along with information on the opportunity to appeal, described in paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
              (iii) No State, Territory, or Tribe shall publicly release or share the results of individual background checks, except States and Tribes may release aggregated data by crime as listed under paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section from background check results, as long as such data is not personally identifiable information.

              (3) States, Territories, and Tribes shall provide for a process by which a child care staff member (including a prospective child care staff member) may appeal the results of a criminal background check conducted under this section to challenge the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in such member's criminal background report. The State, Territory, and Tribe shall ensure that:
              
              (i) Each child care staff member is given notice of the opportunity to appeal;
              (ii) A child care staff member will receive clear instructions about how to complete the appeals process if the child care staff member wishes to challenge the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in such member's criminal background report;
              (iii) If the staff member files an appeal, the State, Territory, or Tribe will attempt to verify the accuracy of the information challenged by the child care staff member, including making an effort to locate any missing disposition information related to the disqualifying crime;
              (iv) The appeals process is completed in a timely manner for each child care staff member; and
              (v) Each child care staff member shall receive written notice of the decision. In the case of a negative determination, the decision should indicate the State's efforts to verify the accuracy of information challenged by the child care staff member, as well as any additional appeals rights available to the child care staff member.

              (4) States, Territories, and Tribes may allow for a review process through which the State, Territory, or Tribe may determine that a child care staff member (including a prospective child care staff member) disqualified for a crime specified in paragraph (c)(1)(iv)(I) of this section is eligible for employment described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, notwithstanding paragraph (c)(2) of this section. The review process shall be consistent with title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.);
              (5) Nothing in this section shall be construed to create a private right of action if a provider has acted in accordance with this section.
              (f) Fees for background checks. Fees that a State, Territory, or Tribe may charge for the costs of processing applications and administering a criminal background check as required by this section shall not exceed the actual costs for the processing and administration.
              (g) Transparency. The State or Territory must ensure that its policies and procedures under this section, including the process by which a child care provider or other State or Territory may submit a background check request, are published in the Web site of the State or Territory as described in § 98.33(a) and the Web site of local lead agencies.
              (h) Disqualification for other crimes. (1) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a State, Territory, or Tribe from disqualifying individuals as child care staff members based on their conviction for crimes not specifically listed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section that bear upon the fitness of an individual to provide care for and have responsibility for the safety and well-being of children.
              (2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or otherwise affect the rights and remedies provided for child care staff members or prospective staff members residing in a State that disqualifies individuals as child care staff members for crimes not specifically provided for under this section.
              [81 FR 67584, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.44
              Training and professional development.
              (a) The Lead Agency must describe in the Plan the State or Territory framework for training, professional development, and postsecondary education for caregivers, teachers, and directors, including those working in school-age care, that:
              (1) Is developed in consultation with the State Advisory Council on Early Childhood Education and Care (designated or established pursuant to section 642B(b)(1)(A)(i) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9837b(b)(1)(A)(i))) or similar coordinating body;
              (2) May engage training and professional development providers, including higher education in aligning training and education opportunities with the State's framework;
              (3) Addresses professional standards and competencies, career pathways, advisory structure, articulation, and workforce information and financing;

              (4) Establishes qualifications in accordance with § 98.41(d)(3) designed to enable child care and school-age care providers that provide services for which assistance is provided in accordance with this part to promote the social, emotional, physical, and cognitive development of children and improve the knowledge and skills of caregivers, teachers and directors in working with children and their families;
              (5) Includes professional development conducted on an ongoing basis, providing a progression of professional development (which may include encouraging the pursuit of postsecondary education);
              (6) Reflects current research and best practices relating to the skills necessary for caregivers, teachers, and directors to meet the developmental needs of participating children and engage families, including culturally and linguistically appropriate practices; and
              (7) Improves the quality, diversity, stability, and retention (including financial incentives and compensation improvements) of caregivers, teachers, and directors.
              (b) The Lead Agency must describe in the Plan its established requirements for pre-service or orientation (to be completed within three months) and ongoing professional development for caregivers, teachers, and directors of child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under the CCDF that, to the extent practicable, align with the State framework:
              (1) Accessible pre-service or orientation training in health and safety standards appropriate to the setting and age of children served that addresses:
              (i) Each of the requirements relating to matters described in § 98.41(a)(1)(i) through (xi) and specifying critical health and safety training that must be completed before caregivers, teachers, and directors are allowed to care for children unsupervised;
              (ii) At the Lead Agency option, matters described in § 98.41(a)(1)(xii); and
              (iii) Child development, including the major domains (cognitive, social, emotional, physical development and approaches to learning);
              (2) Ongoing, accessible professional development, aligned to a progression of professional development, including the minimum annual requirement for hours of training and professional development for eligible caregivers, teachers and directors, appropriate to the setting and age of children served, that:
              (i) Maintains and updates health and safety training standards described in § 98.41(a)(1)(i) through (xi), and at the Lead Agency option, in § 98.41(a)(1)(xii);
              (ii) Incorporates knowledge and application of the State's early learning and developmental guidelines for children birth to kindergarten (where applicable);
              (iii) Incorporates social-emotional behavior intervention models for children birth through school-age, which may include positive behavior intervention and support models including preventing and reducing expulsions and suspensions of preschool-aged and school-aged children;
              (iv) To the extent practicable, are appropriate for a population of children that includes:
              (A) Different age groups;
              (B) English learners;
              (C) Children with developmental delays and disabilities; and
              (D) Native Americans, including Indians, as the term is defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b) (including Alaska Natives within the meaning of that term), and Native Hawaiians (as defined in section 6207 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965);
              (v) To the extent practicable, awards continuing education units or is credit-bearing; and
              (vi) Shall be accessible to caregivers, teachers, and directors supported through Indian tribes or tribal organizations that receive assistance under this subchapter.
              [81 FR 67585, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.45
              Equal access.

              (a) The Lead Agency shall certify that the payment rates for the provision of child care services under this part are sufficient to ensure equal access, for eligible families in the area served by the Lead Agency, to child care services comparable to those provided to families not eligible to receive CCDF assistance or child care assistance under any other Federal, State, or tribal programs.
              
              (b) The Lead Agency shall provide in the Plan a summary of the data and facts relied on to determine that its payment rates ensure equal access. At a minimum, the summary shall include facts showing:
              (1) How a choice of the full range of providers is made available, and the extent to which child care providers participate in the CCDF subsidy system and any barriers to participation including barriers related to payment rates and practices, based on information obtained in accordance with paragraph (d)(2) of this section;
              (2) How payment rates are adequate and have been established based on the most recent market rate survey or alternative methodology conducted in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section;
              (3) How base payment rates enable providers to meet health, safety, quality, and staffing requirements in accordance with paragraphs (f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(2)(ii) of this section;
              (4) How the Lead Agency took the cost of higher quality into account in accordance with paragraph (f)(2)(iii) of this section, including how payment rates for higher-quality care, as defined by the Lead Agency using a quality rating and improvement system or other system of quality indicators, relate to the estimated cost of care at each level of quality;
              (5) How co-payments based on a sliding fee scale are affordable, as stipulated at paragraph (k) of this section; if applicable, a rationale for the Lead Agency's policy on whether child care providers may charge additional amounts to families above the required family co-payment, including a demonstration that the policy promotes affordability and access; analysis of the interaction between any such additional amounts with the required family co-payments, and of the ability of subsidy payment rates to provide access to care without additional fees; and data on the extent to which CCDF providers charge such additional amounts to families (based on information obtained in accordance with paragraph (d)(2) of this section);
              (6) How the Lead Agency's payment practices support equal access to a range of providers by providing stability of funding and encouraging more child care providers to serve children receiving CCDF subsidies, in accordance with paragraph (l) of this section;
              (7) How and on what factors the Lead Agency differentiates payment rates; and
              (8) Any additional facts the Lead Agency considered in determining that its payment rates ensure equal access.
              (c) The Lead Agency shall demonstrate in the Plan that it has developed and conducted, not earlier than two years before the date of the submission of the Plan, either:
              (1) A statistically valid and reliable survey of the market rates for child care services; or
              (2) An alternative methodology, such as a cost estimation model, that has been:
              (i) Proposed by the Lead Agency; and
              (ii) Approved in advance by ACF.
              (d) The Lead Agency must:
              (1) Ensure that the market rate survey or alternative methodology reflects variations by geographic location, category of provider, and age of child;
              (2) Track through the market rate survey or alternative methodology, or through a separate source, information on the extent to which:
              (i) Child care providers are participating in the CCDF subsidy program and any barriers to participation, including barriers related to payment rates and practices; and
              (ii) CCDF child care providers charge amounts to families more than the required family co-payment (under paragraph (k) of this section) in instances where the provider's price exceeds the subsidy payment, including data on the size and frequency of any such amounts.
              (e) Prior to conducting the market rate survey or alternative methodology, the Lead Agency must consult with:

              (1) The State Advisory Council on Early Childhood Education and Care (designated or established pursuant to section 642B(b)(1)(A)(i) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9837b(b)(1)(A)(i)) or similar coordinating body, local child care program administrators, local child care resource and referral agencies, and other appropriate entities; and
              (2) Organizations representing child care caregivers, teachers, and directors.
              (f) After conducting the market rate survey or alternative methodology, the Lead Agency must:
              (1) Prepare a detailed report containing the results, and make the report widely available, including by posting it on the Internet, not later than 30 days after the completion of the report. The report must include:
              (i) The results of the market rate survey or alternative methodology;
              (ii) The estimated cost of care necessary (including any relevant variation by geographic location, category of provider, or age of child) to support:
              (A) Child care providers' implementation of the health, safety, quality, and staffing requirements at §§ 98.41 through 98.44; and
              (B) Higher-quality care, as defined by the Lead Agency using a quality rating and improvement system or other system of quality indicators, at each level of quality; and
              (iii) The Lead Agency's response to stakeholder views and comments.
              (2) Set payment rates for CCDF assistance:
              (i) In accordance with the results of the most recent market rate survey or alternative methodology conducted pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section;
              (ii) With base payment rates established at least at a level sufficient for child care providers to meet health, safety quality, and staffing requirements in accordance with paragraph (f)(1)(ii)(A) of this section;
              (iii) Taking into consideration the cost of providing higher-quality child care services, including consideration of the information at each level of higher quality required by paragraph (f)(1)(ii)(B) of this section;
              (iv) Taking into consideration the views and comments of the public obtained in accordance with paragraph (e) and through other processes determined by the Lead Agency; and
              (v) Without, to the extent practicable, reducing the number of families receiving CCDF assistance.
              (g) A Lead Agency may not establish different payment rates based on a family's eligibility status, such as TANF status.
              (h) Payment rates under paragraph (a) of this section shall be consistent with the parental requirements in § 98.30
              (i) Nothing in this section shall be construed to create a private right of action if the Lead Agency acts in accordance with the Act and this part.
              (j) Nothing in this part shall be construed to prevent a Lead Agency from differentiating payment rates on the basis of such factors as:
              (1) Geographic location of child care providers (such as location in an urban or rural area);
              (2) Age or particular needs of children (such as the needs of children with disabilities, children served by child protective services, and children experiencing homelessness);
              (3) Whether child care providers provide services during the weekend or other non-traditional hours; or
              (4) The Lead Agency's determination that such differential payment rates may enable a parent to choose high-quality child care that best fits the parents' needs.
              (k) Lead Agencies shall establish, and periodically revise, by rule, a sliding fee scale(s) for families that receive CCDF child care services that:
              (1) Helps families afford child care and enables choice of a range of child care options;
              (2) Is based on income and the size of the family and may be based on other factors as appropriate, but may not be based on the cost of care or amount of subsidy payment;
              (3) Provides for affordable family co-payments that are not a barrier to families receiving assistance under this part; and

              (4) At Lead Agency discretion, allows for co-payments to be waived for families whose incomes are at or below the poverty level for a family of the same size, that have children who receive or need to receive protective services, or that meet other criteria established by the Lead Agency.
              
              (l) The Lead Agency shall demonstrate in the Plan that it has established payment practices applicable to all CCDF child care providers that:
              (1) Ensure timeliness of payment by either:
              (i) Paying prospectively prior to the delivery of services; or
              (ii) Paying within no more than 21 calendar days of the receipt of a complete invoice for services.
              (2) To the extent practicable, support the fixed costs of providing child care services by delinking provider payments from a child's occasional absences by:
              (i) Paying based on a child's enrollment rather than attendance;
              (ii) Providing full payment if a child attends at least 85 percent of the authorized time;
              (iii) Providing full payment if a child is absent for five or fewer days in a month; or
              (iv) An alternative approach for which the Lead Agency provides a justification in its Plan.
              (3) Reflect generally-accepted payment practices of child care providers that serve children who do not receive CCDF subsidies, which must include (unless the Lead Agency provides evidence in the Plan that such practices are not generally-accepted in the State or service area):
              (i) Paying on a part-time or full-time basis (rather than paying for hours of service or smaller increments of time); and
              (ii) Paying for reasonable mandatory registration fees that the provider charges to private-paying parents:
              (4) Ensure child care providers receive payment for any services in accordance with a written payment agreement or authorization for services that includes, at a minimum, information regarding provider payment policies, including rates, schedules, any fees charged to providers, and the dispute resolution process required by paragraph (l)(6);
              (5) Ensure child care providers receive prompt notice of changes to a family's eligibility status that may impact payment, and that such notice is sent to providers no later than the day the Lead Agency becomes aware that such a change will occur;
              (6) Include timely appeal and resolution processes for any payment inaccuracies and disputes.
              [81 FR 67586, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.46
              Priority for child care services.
              (a) Lead Agencies shall give priority for services provided under § 98.50(a) to:
              (1) Children of families with very low family income (considering family size);
              (2) Children with special needs, which may include any vulnerable populations as defined by the Lead Agency; and
              (3) Children experiencing homelessness.
              (b) Lead Agencies shall prioritize increasing access to high-quality child care and development services for children of families in areas that have significant concentrations of poverty and unemployment and that do not have a sufficient number of such programs.
              [81 FR 67587, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.47
              List of providers.
              If a Lead Agency does not have a registration process for child care providers who are unlicensed or unregulated under State, local, or tribal law, it is required to maintain a list of the names and addresses of unlicensed or unregulated providers of child care services for which assistance is provided under this part.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998. Redesignated at 81 FR 67584, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.48
              Nondiscrimination in admissions on the basis of religion.
              (a) Child care providers (other than family child care providers, as defined in § 98.2) that receive assistance through grants and contracts under the CCDF shall not discriminate in admissions against any child on the basis of religion.

              (b) Paragraph (a) of this section does not prohibit a child care provider from selecting children for child care slots that are not funded directly (i.e., through grants or contracts to providers) with assistance provided under the CCDF because such children or their family members participate on a regular basis in other activities of the organization that owns or operates such provider.
              (c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this section, if 80 percent or more of the operating budget of a child care provider comes from Federal or State funds, including direct or indirect assistance under the CCDF, the Lead Agency shall assure that before any further CCDF assistance is given to the provider,
              (1) The grant or contract relating to the assistance, or
              (2) The admission policies of the provider specifically provide that no person with responsibilities in the operation of the child care program, project, or activity will discriminate, on the basis of religion, in the admission of any child.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998. Redesignated at 81 FR 67584, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.49
              Nondiscrimination in employment on the basis of religion.
              (a) In general, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, nothing in this part modifies or affects the provision of any other applicable Federal law and regulation relating to discrimination in employment on the basis of religion.
              (1) Child care providers that receive assistance through grants or contracts under the CCDF shall not discriminate, on the basis of religion, in the employment of caregivers as defined in § 98.2.
              (2) If two or more prospective employees are qualified for any position with a child care provider, this section shall not prohibit the provider from employing a prospective employee who is already participating on a regular basis in other activities of the organization that owns or operates the provider.
              (3) Paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to employees of child care providers if such employees were employed with the provider on November 5, 1990.
              (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, a sectarian organization may require that employees adhere to the religious tenets and teachings of such organization and to rules forbidding the use of drugs or alcohol.
              (c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this section, if 80 percent or more of the operating budget of a child care provider comes from Federal and State funds, including direct and indirect assistance under the CCDF, the Lead Agency shall assure that, before any further CCDF assistance is given to the provider,
              (1) The grant or contract relating to the assistance, or
              (2) The employment policies of the provider specifically provide that no person with responsibilities in the operation of the child care program will discriminate, on the basis of religion, in the employment of any individual as a caregiver, as defined in § 98.2.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998. Redesignated at 81 FR 67584, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Use of Child Care and Development Funds
            
              § 98.50
              Child care services.
              (a) Direct child care services shall be provided:
              (1) To eligible children, as described in § 98.20;
              (2) Using a sliding fee scale, as described in § 98.45(k);
              (3) Using funding methods provided for in § 98.30; and
              (4) Based on the priorities in § 98.46.

              (b) Of the aggregate amount of funds expended by a State or Territory (i.e., Discretionary, Mandatory, and Federal and State share of Matching funds):
              (1) No less than seven percent in fiscal years 2016 and 2017, eight percent in fiscal years 2018 and 2019, and nine percent in fiscal year 2020 and each succeeding fiscal year shall be used for activities designed to improve the quality of child care services and increase parental options for, and access to, high-quality child care as described at § 98.53; and
              (2) No less than three percent in fiscal year 2017 and each succeeding fiscal year shall be used to carry out activities at § 98.53(a)(4) as such activities relate to the quality of care for infants and toddlers.
              (3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the State or Territory from reserving a larger percentage of funds to carry out activities described in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section.

              (c) Funds expended from each fiscal year's allotment on quality activities pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section:
              (1) Must be in alignment with an assessment of the Lead Agency's need to carry out such services and care as required at § 98.53(a);
              (2) Must include measurable indicators of progress in accordance with § 98.53(f); and
              (3) May be provided directly by the Lead Agency or through grants or contracts with local child care resource and referral organizations or other appropriate entities.
              (d) Of the aggregate amount of funds expended (i.e., Discretionary, Mandatory, and Federal and State share of Matching Funds), no more than five percent may be used for administrative activities as described at § 98.54.
              (e) Not less than 70 percent of the Mandatory and Federal and State share of Matching Funds shall be used to meet the child care needs of families who:
              (1) Are receiving assistance under a State program under Part A of title IV of the Social Security Act;
              (2) Are attempting through work activities to transition off such assistance program; and
              (3) Are at risk of becoming dependent on such assistance program.
              (f) From Discretionary amounts provided for a fiscal year, the Lead Agency shall:
              (1) Reserve the minimum amount required under paragraph (b) of this section for quality activities, and the funds for administrative costs described at paragraph (d) of this section; and
              (2) From the remainder, use not less than 70 percent to fund direct services (provided by the Lead Agency).
              (g) Of the funds remaining after applying the provisions of paragraphs (a) through (f) of this section, the Lead Agency shall spend a substantial portion of funds to provide direct child care services to low-income families who are working or attending training or education.
              (h) Pursuant to § 98.16(i)(4), the Plan shall specify how the State will meet the child care needs of families described in paragraph (e) of this section.
              [81 FR 67587, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.51
              Services for children experiencing homelessness.
              Lead Agencies shall expend funds on activities that improve access to quality child care services for children experiencing homelessness, including:
              (a) The use of procedures to permit enrollment (after an initial eligibility determination) of children experiencing homelessness while required documentation is obtained;
              (1) If, after full documentation is provided, a family experiencing homelessness is found ineligible,
              (i) The Lead Agency shall pay any amount owed to a child care provider for services provided as a result of the initial eligibility determination; and
              (ii) Any CCDF payment made prior to the final eligibility determination shall not be considered an error or improper payment under subpart K of this part;
              (2) [Reserved]
              (b) Training and technical assistance for providers and appropriate Lead Agency (or designated entity) staff on identifying and serving children experiencing homelessness and their families; and
              (c) Specific outreach to families experiencing homelessness.
              [81 FR 67588, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.52
              Child care resource and referral system.
              (a) A Lead Agency may expend funds to establish or support a system of local or regional child care resource and referral organizations that is coordinated, to the extent determined appropriate by the Lead Agency, by a statewide public or private nonprofit, community-based or regionally based, lead child care resource and referral organization.
              (b) If a Lead Agency uses funds as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the local or regional child care resource and referral organizations supported shall, at the direction of the Lead Agency:

              (1) Provide parents in the State with consumer education information referred to in § 98.33 (except as otherwise provided in that paragraph), concerning the full range of child care options (including faith-based and community-based child care providers), analyzed by provider, including child care provided during nontraditional hours and through emergency child care centers, in their political subdivisions or regions;
              (2) To the extent practicable, work directly with families who receive assistance under this subchapter to offer the families support and assistance, using information described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, to make an informed decision about which child care providers they will use, in an effort to ensure that the families are enrolling their children in the most appropriate child care setting to suit their needs and one that is of high quality (as determined by the Lead Agency);

              (3) Collect data and provide information on the coordination of services and supports, including services under section 619 and part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1431, et seq.), for children with disabilities (as defined in section 602 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1401));
              (4) Collect data and provide information on the supply of and demand for child care services in political subdivisions or regions within the State and submit such information to the State;
              (5) Work to establish partnerships with public agencies and private entities, including faith-based and community-based child care providers, to increase the supply and quality of child care services in the State; and
              (6) As appropriate, coordinate their activities with the activities of the State Lead Agency and local agencies that administer funds made available in accordance with this part.
              [81 FR 67588, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.53
              Activities to improve the quality of child care.
              (a) The Lead Agency must expend funds from each fiscal year's allotment on quality activities pursuant to §§ 98.50(b) and 98.83(g) in accordance with an assessment of need by the Lead Agency. Such funds must be used to carry out at least one of the following quality activities to improve the quality of child care services for all children, regardless of CCDF receipt, in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section:
              (1) Supporting the training, professional development, and postsecondary education of the child care workforce as part of a progression of professional development through activities such as those included at § 98.44, in addition to:
              (i) Offering training, professional development, and postsecondary education opportunities for child care caregivers, teachers and directors that:
              (A) Relate to the use of scientifically based, developmentally-appropriate, culturally-appropriate, and age-appropriate strategies to promote the social, emotional, physical, and cognitive development of children, including those related to nutrition and physical activity; and
              (B) Offer specialized training, professional development, and postsecondary education for caregivers, teachers and directors caring for those populations prioritized at § 98.44(b)(2)(iv), and children with disabilities;
              (ii) Incorporating the effective use of data to guide program improvement and improve opportunities for caregivers, teachers and directors to advance on their progression of training, professional development, and postsecondary education;
              (iii) Including effective, age-appropriate behavior management strategies and training, including positive behavior interventions and support models for birth to school-age, that promote positive social and emotional development and reduce challenging behaviors, including reducing suspensions and expulsions of children under age five for such behaviors;
              (iv) Providing training and outreach on engaging parents and families in culturally and linguistically appropriate ways to expand their knowledge, skills, and capacity to become meaningful partners in supporting their children's positive development;
              (v) Providing training corresponding to the nutritional and physical activity needs of children to promote healthy development;
              (vi) Providing training or professional development for caregivers, teachers and directors regarding the early neurological development of children; and

              (vii) Connecting child care caregivers, teachers, and directors with available Federal and State financial aid that would assist these individuals in pursuing relevant postsecondary education, or delivering financial resources directly through programs that provide scholarships and compensation improvements for education attainment and retention.
              (2) Improving upon the development or implementation of the early learning and development guidelines at § 98.15(a)(9) by providing technical assistance to eligible child care providers in order to enhance the cognitive, physical, social, and emotional development and overall well-being of participating children.
              (3) Developing, implementing, or enhancing a tiered quality rating and improvement system for child care providers and services to meet consumer education requirements at § 98.33, which may:
              (i) Support and assess the quality of child care providers in the State, Territory, or Tribe;
              (ii) Build on licensing standards and other regulatory standards for such providers;
              (iii) Be designed to improve the quality of different types of child care providers and services;
              (iv) Describe the safety of child care facilities;
              (v) Build the capacity of early childhood programs and communities to promote parents' and families' understanding of the early childhood system and the rating of the program in which the child is enrolled;
              (vi) Provide, to the maximum extent practicable, financial incentives and other supports designed to expand the full diversity of child care options and help child care providers improve the quality of services; and
              (vii) Accommodate a variety of distinctive approaches to early childhood education and care, including but not limited to, those practiced in faith-based settings, community-based settings, child centered settings, or similar settings that offer a distinctive approach to early childhood development.
              (4) Improving the supply and quality of child care programs and services for infants and toddlers through activities, which may include:
              (i) Establishing or expanding high-quality community or neighborhood based family and child development centers, which may serve as resources to child care providers in order to improve the quality of early childhood services provided to infants and toddlers from low-income families and to help eligible child care providers improve their capacity to offer high-quality, age-appropriate care to infants and toddlers from low-income families;
              (ii) Establishing or expanding the operation of community or neighborhood-based family child care networks;
              (iii) Promoting and expanding child care providers' ability to provide developmentally appropriate services for infants and toddlers through, but not limited to:
              (A) Training and professional development for caregivers, teachers and directors, including coaching and technical assistance on this age group's unique needs from statewide networks of qualified infant-toddler specialists; and

              (B) Improved coordination with early intervention specialists who provide services for infants and toddlers with disabilities under part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1431. et seq.);
              (iv) If applicable, developing infant and toddler components within the Lead Agency's quality rating and improvement system described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section for child care providers for infants and toddlers, or the development of infant and toddler components in the child care licensing regulations or early learning and development guidelines;
              (v) Improving the ability of parents to access transparent and easy to understand consumer information about high-quality infant and toddler care as described at § 98.33; and

              (vi) Carrying out other activities determined by the Lead Agency to improve the quality of infant and toddler care provided, and for which there is evidence that the activities will lead to improved infant and toddler health and safety, infant and toddler cognitive and physical development, or infant and toddler well-being, including providing health and safety training (including training in safe sleep practices, first aid, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation for providers and caregivers.
              (5) Establishing or expanding a statewide system of child care resource and referral services.
              (6) Facilitating compliance with Lead Agency requirements for inspection, monitoring, training, and health and safety, and with licensing standards.
              (7) Evaluating and assessing the quality and effectiveness of child care programs and services offered, including evaluating how such programs positively impact children.
              (8) Supporting child care providers in the voluntary pursuit of accreditation by a national accrediting body with demonstrated, valid, and reliable program standards of high-quality.
              (9) Supporting Lead Agency or local efforts to develop or adopt high-quality program standards relating to health, mental health, nutrition, physical activity, and physical development.
              (10) Carrying out other activities, including implementing consumer education provisions at § 98.33, determined by the Lead Agency to improve the quality of child care services provided, and for which measurement of outcomes relating to improvement of provider preparedness, child safety, child well-being, or entry to kindergarten is possible.
              (b) Pursuant to § 98.16(j), the Lead Agency shall describe in its Plan the activities it will fund under this section.
              (c) Non-Federal expenditures required by § 98.55(c) (i.e., the maintenance-of effort amount) are not subject to the requirement at paragraph (a) of this section.
              (d) Activities to improve the quality of child care services are not restricted to activities affecting children meeting eligibility requirements under § 98.20 or to child care providers of services for which assistance is provided under this part.
              (e) Unless expressly authorized by law, targeted funds for quality improvement and other set asides that may be included in appropriations law may not be used towards meeting the quality expenditure minimum requirement at § 98.50(b).
              (f) States shall annually prepare and submit reports, including a quality progress report and expenditure report, to the Secretary, which must be made publicly available and shall include:
              (1) An assurance that the State was in compliance with requirements at § 98.50(b) in the preceding fiscal year and information about the amount of funds reserved for that purpose;
              (2) A description of the activities carried out under this section to comply with § 98.50(b);
              (3) The measures the State will use to evaluate its progress in improving the quality of child care programs and services in the State, and data on the extent to which the State had met these measures;
              (4) A report describing any changes to State regulations, enforcement mechanisms, or other State policies addressing health and safety based on an annual review and assessment of serious child injuries and any deaths occurring in child care programs serving children receiving assistance under this part, and in other regulated and unregulated child care centers and family child care homes, to the extent possible; and
              (5) A description of how the Lead Agency responded to complaints submitted through the national hotline and Web site, required in section 658L(b) of the CCDBG Act (42 U.S.C. 9858j(b)).
              [81 FR 67588, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.54
              Administrative costs.
              (a) Not more than five percent of the aggregate funds expended by the Lead Agency from each fiscal year's allotment, including the amounts expended in the State pursuant to § 98.55(b), shall be expended for administrative activities. These activities may include but are not limited to:
              (1) Salaries and related costs of the staff of the Lead Agency or other agencies engaged in the administration and implementation of the program pursuant to § 98.11. Program administration and implementation include the following types of activities:

              (i) Planning, developing, and designing the Child Care and Development Fund program;
              
              (ii) Providing local officials and the public with information about the program, including the conduct of public hearings;
              (iii) Preparing the application and Plan;
              (iv) Developing agreements with administering agencies in order to carry out program activities;
              (v) Monitoring program activities for compliance with program requirements;
              (vi) Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for submission to the Secretary;
              (vii) Maintaining substantiated complaint files in accordance with the requirements of § 98.32;
              (viii) Coordinating the provision of Child Care and Development Fund services with other Federal, State, and local child care, early childhood development programs, and before-and after-school care programs;
              (ix) Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings;
              (x) Evaluating program results; and
              (xi) Managing or supervising persons with responsibilities described in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (x) of this section;
              (2) Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program;
              (3) Administrative services, including such services as accounting services, performed by grantees or subgrantees or under agreements with third parties;
              (4) Audit services as required at § 98.65;
              (5) Other costs for goods and services required for the administration of the program, including rental or purchase of equipment, utilities, and office supplies; and
              (6) Indirect costs as determined by an indirect cost agreement or cost allocation plan pursuant to § 98.57.
              (b) The following activities do not count towards the five percent limitation on administrative expenditures in paragraph (a) of this section:
              (1) Establishment and maintenance of computerized child care information systems;
              (2) Establishing and operating a certificate program;
              (3) Eligibility determination and redetermination;
              (4) Preparation/participation in judicial hearings;
              (5) Child care placement;
              (6) Recruitment, licensing, inspection of child care providers;
              (7) Training for Lead Agency or sub recipient staff on billing and claims processes associated with the subsidy program;
              (8) Reviews and supervision of child care placements;
              (9) Activities associated with payment rate setting;
              (10) Resource and referral services; and
              (11) Training for child care staff.
              (c) The five percent limitation at paragraph (a) of this section applies only to the States and Territories. The amount of the limitation at paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to Tribes or tribal organizations.
              (d) Non-Federal expenditures required by § 98.55(c) (i.e., the maintenance-of-effort amount) are not subject to the five percent limitation at paragraph (a) of this section.
              (e) If a Lead Agency enters into agreements with sub-recipients for operation of the CCDF program, the amount of the contract or grant attributable to administrative activities as described in this section shall be counted towards the five percent limit.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998. Redesignated and amended at 81 FR 67588, 67590, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.55
              Matching fund requirements.
              (a) Federal matching funds are available for expenditures in a State based upon the formula specified at § 98.63(a).
              (b) Expenditures in a State under paragraph (a) of this section will be matched at the Federal medical assistance rate for the applicable fiscal year for allowable activities, as described in the approved State Plan, that meet the goals and purposes of the Act.
              (c) In order to receive Federal matching funds for a fiscal year under paragraph (a) of this section:

              (1) States shall also expend an amount of non-Federal funds for child care activities in the State that is at least equal to the State's share of expenditures for fiscal year 1994 or 1995 (whichever is greater) under sections 402(g) and (i) of the Social Security Act as these sections were in effect before October 1, 1995; and
              (2) The expenditures shall be for allowable services or activities, as described in the approved State Plan if appropriate, that meet the goals and purposes of the Act.
              (3) All Mandatory Funds are obligated in accordance with § 98.60(d)(2)(i).
              (d) The same expenditure may not be used to meet the requirements under both paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section in a fiscal year.
              (e) An expenditure in the State for purposes of this subpart may be:
              (1) Public funds when the funds are:
              (i) Appropriated directly to the Lead Agency specified at § 98.10, or transferred from another public agency to that Lead Agency and under its administrative control, or certified by the contributing public agency as representing expenditures eligible for Federal match;
              (ii) Not used to match other Federal funds; and
              (iii) Not Federal funds, or are Federal funds authorized by Federal law to be used to match other Federal funds; or
              (2) Donated from private sources when the donated funds:
              (i) Are donated without any restriction that would require their use for a specific individual, organization, facility or institution;
              (ii) Do not revert to the donor's facility or use;
              (iii) Are not used to match other Federal funds;
              (iv) Shall be certified both by the Lead Agency and by the donor (if funds are donated directly to the Lead Agency) or the Lead Agency and the entity designated by the State to receive donated funds pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section (if funds are donated directly to the designated entity) as available and representing funds eligible for Federal match; and
              (v) Shall be subject to the audit requirements in § 98.65 of these regulations.
              (f) Donated funds need not be transferred to or under the administrative control of the Lead Agency in order to qualify as an expenditure eligible to receive Federal match under this section. They may be given to the public or private entities designated by the State to implement the child care program in accordance with § 98.11 provided that such entities are identified and designated in the State Plan to receive donated funds in accordance with § 98.16(d)(2).
              (g) The following are not counted as an eligible State expenditure under this part:
              (1) In-kind contributions; and
              (2) Family contributions to the cost of care as required by § 98.45(k).
              (h) Public pre-kindergarten (pre-K) expenditures:
              (1) May be used to meet the maintenance-of-effort requirement only if the State has not reduced its expenditures for full-day/full-year child care services; and
              (2) May be eligible for Federal match if the State includes in its Plan, as provided in § 98.16(w), a description of the efforts it will undertake to ensure that pre-K programs meet the needs of working parents.
              (3) In any fiscal year, a State may use public pre-K funds for up to 20% of the funds serving as maintenance-of-effort under this subsection. In addition, in any fiscal year, a State may use other public pre-K funds as expenditures serving as State matching funds under this subsection; such public pre-K funds used as State expenditures may not exceed 30% of the amount of a State's expenditures required to draw down the State's full allotment of Federal matching funds available under this subsection.
              (4) If applicable, the CCDF Plan shall reflect the State's intent to use public pre-K funds in excess of 10%, but not for more than 20% of its maintenance-of-effort or 30% of its State matching funds in a fiscal year. Also, the Plan shall describe how the State will coordinate its pre-K and child care services to expand the availability of child care.
              (i) Matching funds are subject to the obligation and liquidation requirements at § 98.60(d)(3).
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 72 FR 27979, May 18, 2007. Redesignated and amended at 81 FR 67588, 67590, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              
              § 98.56
              Restrictions on the use of funds.
              (a) General. (1) Funds authorized under section 418 of the Social Security Act and section 658B of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act, and all funds transferred to the Lead Agency pursuant to section 404(d) of the Social Security Act, shall be expended consistent with these regulations. Funds transferred pursuant to section 404(d) of the Social Security Act shall be treated as Discretionary Funds;
              (2) Funds shall be expended in accordance with applicable State and local laws, except as superseded by § 98.3.
              (b) Construction. (1) For State and local agencies and nonsectarian agencies or organizations, no funds shall be expended for the purchase or improvement of land, or for the purchase, construction, or permanent improvement of any building or facility. However, funds may be expended for minor remodeling, and for upgrading child care facilities to assure that providers meet State and local child care standards, including applicable health and safety requirements. Improvements or upgrades to a facility which are not specified under the definitions of construction or major renovation at § 98.2 may be considered minor remodeling and are, therefore, not prohibited.
              (2) For sectarian agencies or organizations, the prohibitions in paragraph (b)(1) of this section apply; however, funds may be expended for minor remodeling only if necessary to bring the facility into compliance with the health and safety requirements established pursuant to § 8.41.
              (3) Tribes and tribal organizations are subject to the requirements at § 98.84 regarding construction and renovation.
              (c) Tuition. Funds may not be expended for students enrolled in grades 1 through 12 for:
              (1) Any service provided to such students during the regular school day;
              (2) Any service for which such students receive academic credit toward graduation; or
              (3) Any instructional services that supplant or duplicate the academic program of any public or private school.
              (d) Sectarian purposes and activities. Funds provided under grants or contracts to providers may not be expended for any sectarian purpose or activity, including sectarian worship or instruction. Assistance provided to parents through certificates is not a grant or contract. Funds provided through child care certificates may be expended for sectarian purposes or activities, including sectarian worship or instruction when provided as part of the child care services.
              (e) Non-Federal share for other Federal programs. The CCDF may not be used as the non-Federal share for other Federal grant programs, unless explicitly authorized by statute.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998. Redesignated and amended at 81 FR 67588, 67590, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.57
              Cost allocation.
              (a) The Lead Agency and subgrantees shall keep on file cost allocation plans or indirect cost agreements, as appropriate, that have been amended to include costs allocated to the CCDF.
              (b) Subgrantees that do not already have a negotiated indirect rate with the Federal government should prepare and keep on file cost allocation plans or indirect cost agreements, as appropriate.
              (c) Approval of the cost allocation plans or indirect cost agreements is not specifically required by these regulations, but these plans and agreements are subject to review.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998. Redesignated at 81 FR 67588, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart G—Financial Management
            
              § 98.60
              Availability of funds.
              (a) The CCDF is available, subject to the availability of appropriations, in accordance with the apportionment of funds from the Office of Management and Budget as follows:
              (1) Discretionary Funds are available to States, Territories, and Tribes,
              (2) Mandatory and Matching Funds are available to States;

              (3) Tribal Mandatory Funds are available to Tribes.
              
              (b) Subject to the availability of appropriations, in accordance with relevant statutory provisions and the apportionment of funds from the Office of Management and Budget, the Secretary:
              (1) May withhold a portion of the CCDF funds made available for a fiscal year for the provision of technical assistance, for research, evaluation, and demonstration, and for a national toll free hotline and Web site;
              (2) Will award the remaining CCDF funds to grantees that have an approved application and Plan.
              (c) The Secretary may make payments in installments, and in advance or by way of reimbursement, with necessary adjustments due to overpayments or underpayments.
              (d) The following obligation and liquidation provisions apply to States and Territories:
              (1) Discretionary Fund allotments shall be obligated in the fiscal year in which funds are awarded or in the succeeding fiscal year. Unliquidated obligations as of the end of the succeeding fiscal year shall be liquidated within one year.
              (2)(i) Mandatory Funds for States requesting Matching Funds per § 98.55 shall be obligated in the fiscal year in which the funds are granted and are available until expended.
              (ii) Mandatory Funds for States that do not request Matching Funds are available until expended.
              (3) Both the Federal and non-Federal share of the Matching Fund shall be obligated in the fiscal year in which the funds are granted and liquidated no later than the end of the succeeding fiscal year.
              (4) Except for paragraph (d)(5) of this section, determination of whether funds have been obligated and liquidated will be based on:
              (i) State or local law; or,
              (ii) If there is no applicable State or local law, the regulation at 45 CFR 75.2, Expenditures and Obligations.
              (5) Obligations may include subgrants or contracts that require the payment of funds to a third party (e.g., subgrantee or contractor). However, the following are not considered third party subgrantees or contractors:
              (i) A local office of the Lead Agency;
              (ii) Another entity at the same level of government as the Lead Agency; or
              (iii) A local office of another entity at the same level of government as the Lead Agency.
              (6) In instances where the Lead Agency issues child care certificates, funds for child care services provided through a child care certificate will be considered obligated when a child care certificate is issued to a family in writing that indicates:
              (i) The amount of funds that will be paid to a child care provider or family, and
              (ii) The specific length of time covered by the certificate, which is limited to the date established for redetermination of the family's eligibility, but shall be no later than the end of the liquidation period.
              (7) In instances where third party agencies issue child care certificates, the obligation of funds occurs upon entering into agreement through a subgrant or contract with such agency, rather than when the third party issues certificates to a family.
              (8) Any funds not obligated during the obligation period specified in paragraph (d) of this section will revert to the Federal government. Any funds not liquidated by the end of the applicable liquidation period specified in paragraph (d) of this section will also revert to the Federal government.
              (e) The following obligation and liquidation provisions apply to Tribal Discretionary and Tribal Mandatory Funds:
              (1) Tribal grantees shall obligate all funds by the end of the fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the grant is awarded. Any funds not obligated during this period will revert to the Federal government.
              (2) Obligations that remain unliquidated at the end of the succeeding fiscal year shall be liquidated within the next fiscal year. Any tribal funds that remain unliquidated by the end of this period will also revert to the Federal government.

              (f) Cash advances shall be limited to the minimum amounts needed and shall be timed to be in accord with the actual, immediate cash requirements of the State Lead Agency, its subgrantee or contractor in carrying out the purpose of the program in accordance with 31 CFR part 205.
              (g) Funds that are returned (e.g., loan repayments, funds deobligated by cancellation of a child care certificate, unused subgrantee funds) as well as program income (e.g., contributions made by families directly to the Lead Agency or subgrantee for the cost of care where the Lead Agency or subgrantee has made a full payment to the child care provider) shall,
              (1) if received by the Lead Agency during the applicable obligation period, described in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, be used for activities specified in the Lead Agency's approved plan and must be obligated by the end of the obligation period; or
              (2) if received after the end of the applicable obligation period described at paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, be returned to the Federal government.
              (h) Repayment of loans made to child care providers as part of a quality improvement activity pursuant to § 98.53, may be made in cash or in services provided in-kind. Payment provided in-kind shall be based on fair market value. All loans shall be fully repaid.
              (i) Lead Agencies shall recover child care payments that are the result of fraud. These payments shall be recovered from the party responsible for committing the fraud.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 3020, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 67591, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.61
              Allotments from the Discretionary Fund.
              (a) To the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico an amount equal to the funds appropriated for the Child Care and Development Block Grant, less amounts reserved for technical assistance, research, and the national hotline and Web site, pursuant to § 98.60(b), and amounts reserved for the Territories and Tribes, pursuant to § 98.60(b) and paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, shall be allotted based upon the formula specified in section 658O(b) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 9858m(b)).
              (b) For the U.S. Territories of Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands of the United States, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands an amount up to one-half of one percent of the amount appropriated for the Child Care and Development Block Grant shall be reserved.
              (1) Funds shall be allotted to these Territories based upon the following factors:
              (i) A Young Child factor—the ratio of the number of children in the Territory under five years of age to the number of such children in all Territories; and
              (ii) An Allotment Proportion factor—determined by dividing the per capita income of all individuals in all the Territories by the per capita income of all individuals in the Territory.
              (A) Per capita income shall be:
              (1) Equal to the average of the annual per capita incomes for the most recent period of three consecutive years for which satisfactory data are available at the time such determination is made; and
              (2) Determined every two years.
              (B) Per capita income determined, pursuant to paragraph (b)(1)(ii)(A) of this section, will be applied in establishing the allotment for the fiscal year for which it is determined and for the following fiscal year.
              (C) If the Allotment Proportion factor determined at paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section:
              (1) Exceeds 1.2, then the Allotment Proportion factor of the Territory shall be considered to be 1.2; or
              (2) Is less than 0.8, then the Allotment Proportion factor of the Territory shall be considered to be 0.8.

              (2)(i) The formula used in calculating a Territory's allotment is as follows:
              
              
                ER24JY98.000
              
              

              (ii) For purposes of the formula specified at paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, the term “YCFt” means the Territory's Young Child factor as defined at paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.

              (iii) For purposes of the formula specified at paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, the term “APFt” means the Territory's Allotment Proportion factor as defined at paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section.
              

              (c) For Indian Tribes and tribal organizations, including any Alaskan Native Village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) not less than two percent of the amount appropriated for the Child Care and Development Block Grant shall be reserved.
              (1) Except as specified in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, grants to individual tribal grantees will be equal to the sum of:
              (i) A base amount as set by the Secretary; and
              (ii) An additional amount per Indian child under age 13 (or such similar age as determined by the Secretary from the best available data), which is determined by dividing the amount of funds available, less amounts set aside for eligible Tribes, pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, by the number of all Indian children living on or near tribal reservations or other appropriate area served by the tribal grantee, pursuant to § 98.80(e).
              (2) Grants to Tribes with fewer than 50 Indian children that apply as part of a consortium, pursuant to § 98.80(b)(1), are equal to the sum of:
              (i) A portion of the base amount, pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, that bears the same ratio as the number of Indian children in the Tribe living on or near the reservation, or other appropriate area served by the tribal grantee, pursuant to § 98.80(e), does to 50; and
              (ii) An additional amount per Indian child, pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section.
              (3) Tribal consortia will receive grants that are equal to the sum of the individual grants of their members.
              (d) All funds reserved for Territories at paragraph (b) of this section will be allotted to Territories, and all funds reserved for Tribes at paragraph (c) of this section will be allotted to tribal grantees. Any funds that are returned by the Territories after they have been allotted will revert to the Federal government.

              (e) For other organizations, up to $2,000,000 may be reserved from the tribal funds reserved at paragraph (c) of this section. From this amount the Secretary may award a grant to a Native Hawaiian Organization, as defined in section 4009(4) of the Augustus F. Hawkins-Robert T. Stafford Elementary and Secondary School Improvement Amendments of 1988 (20 U.S.C. 4909(4)) and to a private non-profit organization established for the purpose of serving youth who are Indians or Native Hawaiians. The Secretary will establish selection criteria and procedures for the award of grants under this subsection by notice in the Federal Register.
              
              (f) Lead Agencies shall expend any funds that may be set-aside for targeted activities pursuant to annual appropriations law as directed by the Secretary.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67591, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.62
              Allotments from the Mandatory Fund.
              (a) Each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia will be allocated from the funds appropriated under section 418(a)(3) of the Social Security Act, less the amounts reserved for technical assistance pursuant to § 98.60(b)(1) and the amount reserved for Tribes pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section, an amount of funds equal to the greater of:
              (1) the Federal share of its child care expenditures under subsections (g) and (i) of section 402 of the Social Security Act (as in effect before October 1, 1995) for fiscal year 1994 or 1995 (whichever is greater); or
              (2) the average of the Federal share of its child care expenditures under the subsections referred to in subparagraph (a)(1) of this section for fiscal years 1992 through 1994.
              (b) For Indian Tribes and tribal organizations up to 2 percent of the amount appropriated under section 418(a)(3) of the Social Security Act shall be allocated according to the formula at paragraph (c) of this section. In Alaska, only the following 13 entities shall receive allocations under this subpart, in accordance with the formula at paragraph (c) of this section:
              (1) The Metlakatla Indian Community of the Annette Islands Reserve:
              (2) Arctic Slope Native Association;
              (3) Kawerak, Inc.;
              
              (4) Maniilaq Association;
              (5) Association of Village Council Presidents;
              (6) Tanana Chiefs Conference;
              (7) Cook Inlet Tribal Council;
              (8) Bristol Bay Native Association;
              (9) Aleutian and Pribilof Islands Association;
              (10) Chugachmuit;
              (11) Tlingit and Haida Central Council;
              (12) Kodiak Area Native Association; and
              (13) Copper River Native Association.
              (c)(1) Grants to individual Tribes with 50 or more Indian children, and to Tribes with fewer than 50 Indian children that apply as part of a consortium pursuant to § 98.80(b)(1), will be equal to an amount per Indian child under age 13 (or such similar age as determined by the Secretary from the best available data), which is determined by dividing the amount of funds available, by the number of Indian children in each Tribe's service area pursuant to § 98.80(e).
              (2) Tribal consortia will receive grants that are equal to the sum of the individual grants of their members.
            
            
              § 98.63
              Allotments from the Matching Fund.
              (a) To each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia there is allocated an amount equal to its share of the total available under section 418(a)(3) of the Social Security Act. That amount is based on the same ratio as the number of children under age 13 residing in the State bears to the national total of children under age 13. The number of children under 13 is derived from the best data available to the Secretary for the second preceding fiscal year.
              (b) For purposes of this section, the amounts available under section 418(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 618(a)(3)) excludes the amounts reserved and allocated under § 98.60(b)(1) for technical assistance, research and evaluation, and the national toll-free hotline and Web site and under § 98.62(a) and (b) for the Mandatory Fund.
              (c) Amounts under this section are available pursuant to the requirements at § 98.55(c).
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67591, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.64
              Reallotment and redistribution of funds.
              (a) According to the provisions of this section State and Tribal Discretionary Funds are subject to reallotment, and State Matching Funds are subject to redistribution. State funds are reallotted or redistributed only to States as defined for the original allocation. Tribal funds are reallotted only to Tribes. Funds granted to the Territories are not subject to reallotment. Any funds granted to the Territories that are returned after they have been allotted will revert to the Federal government.
              (b) Any portion of a State's Discretionary Fund allotment that is not required to carry out its Plan, in the period for which the allotment is made available, shall be reallotted to other States in proportion to the original allotments. For purposes of this paragraph the term “State” means the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The other Territories and the Tribes may not receive reallotted State Discretionary Funds.
              (1) Each year, the State shall report to the Secretary either the dollar amount from the previous year's grant that it will be unable to obligate by the end of the obligation period or that all funds will be obligated during such time. Such report shall be postmarked by April 1st.
              (2) Based upon the reallotment reports submitted by States, the Secretary will reallot funds.
              (i) If the total amount available for reallotment is $25,000 or more, funds will be reallotted to States in proportion to each State's allotment for the applicable fiscal year's funds, pursuant to § 98.61(a).
              (ii) If the amount available for reallotment is less than $25,000, the Secretary will not reallot any funds, and such funds will revert to the Federal government.

              (iii) If an individual reallotment amount to a State is less than $500, the Secretary will not issue the award, and such funds will revert to the Federal government.
              (3) If a State does not submit a reallotment report by the deadline for report submittal, either:
              (i) The Secretary will determine that the State does not have any funds available for reallotment; or
              (ii) In the case of a report postmarked after April 1st, any funds reported to be available for reallotment shall revert to the Federal government.
              (4) States receiving reallotted funds shall obligate and expend these funds in accordance with § 98.60. The reallotment of funds does not extend the obligation period or the program period for expenditure of such funds.
              (c)(1) Any portion of the Matching Fund granted to a State that is not obligated in the period for which the grant is made shall be redistributed. Funds, if any, will be redistributed on the request of, and only to, those other States that have met the requirements of § 98.55(c) in the period for which the grant was first made. For purposes of this paragraph (c)(1), the term “State” means the 50 States and the District of Columbia. Territorial and tribal grantees may not receive redistributed Matching Funds.
              (2) Matching Funds allotted to a State under § 98.63(a), but not granted, shall also be redistributed in the manner described in paragraph (1) of this section.
              (3) The amount of Matching Funds granted to a State that will be made available for redistribution will be based on the State's financial report to ACF for the Child Care and Development Fund (ACF-696) and is subject to the monetary limits at paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
              (4) A State eligible to receive redistributed Matching Funds shall also use the ACF-696 to request its share of the redistributed funds, if any.
              (5) A State's share of redistributed Matching Funds is based on the same ratio as the number of children under 13 residing in the State to the number of children residing in all States eligible to receive and that request the redistributed Matching Funds.
              (6) Redistributed funds are considered part of the grant for the fiscal year in which the redistribution occurs.
              (d) Any portion of a Tribe's allotment of Discretionary Funds that is not required to carry out its Plan, in the period for which the allotment is made available, shall be reallotted to other tribal grantees in proportion to their original allotments. States and Territories may not receive reallotted tribal funds.
              (1) Each year, the Tribe shall report to the Secretary either the dollar amount from the previous year's grant that it will be unable to obligate by the end of the obligation period or that all funds will be obligated during such time. Such report shall be postmarked by a deadline established by the Secretary.
              (2) Based upon the reallotment reports submitted by Tribes, the Secretary will reallot Tribal Discretionary Funds among the other Tribes.
              (i) If the total amount available for reallotment is $25,000 or more, funds will be reallotted to other tribal grantees in proportion to each Tribe's original allotment for the applicable fiscal year pursuant to § 98.62(c).
              (ii) If the total amount available for reallotment is less than $25,000, the Secretary will not reallot any funds, and such funds will revert to the Federal government.
              (iii) If an individual reallotment amount to an applicant Tribe is less than $500, the Secretary will not issue the award, and such funds will revert to the Federal government.
              (3) If a Tribe does not submit a reallotment report by the deadline for report submittal, either:
              (i) The Secretary will determine that Tribe does not have any funds available for reallotment; or
              (ii) In the case of a report received after the deadline established by the Secretary, any funds reported to be available for reallotment shall revert to the Federal government.

              (4) Tribes receiving reallotted funds shall obligate and expend these funds in accordance with § 98.60. The reallotment of funds does not extend the obligation period or the program period for expenditure of such funds.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67591, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.65
              Audits and financial reporting.
              (a) Each Lead Agency shall have an audit conducted after the close of each program period in accordance with 45 CFR part 75, subpart F, and the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996.
              (b) Lead Agencies are responsible for ensuring that subgrantees are audited in accordance with appropriate audit requirements.
              (c) Not later than 30 days after the completion of the audit, Lead Agencies shall submit a copy of their audit report to the legislature of the State or, if applicable, to the Tribal Council(s). Lead Agencies shall also submit a copy of their audit report to the HHS Inspector General for Audit Services, as well as to their cognizant agency, if applicable.
              (d) Any amounts determined through an audit not to have been expended in accordance with these statutory or regulatory provisions, or with the Plan, and that are subsequently disallowed by the Department shall be repaid to the Federal government, or the Secretary will offset such amounts against any other CCDF funds to which the Lead Agency is or may be entitled.
              (e) Lead Agencies shall provide access to appropriate books, documents, papers and records to allow the Secretary to verify that CCDF funds have been expended in accordance with the statutory and regulatory requirements of the program, and with the Plan.
              (f) The audit required in paragraph (a) of this section shall be conducted by an agency that is independent of the State, Territory or Tribe as defined by generally accepted government auditing standards issued by the Comptroller General, or a public accountant who meets such independent standards.
              (g) Lead Agencies shall submit financial reports, in a manner specified by ACF, quarterly for each fiscal year until funds are expended.
              (h) At a minimum, a State or territorial Lead Agency's quarterly report shall include the following information on expenditures under CCDF grant funds, including Discretionary (which includes realloted funding and any funds transferred from the TANF block grant), Mandatory, and Matching Funds (which includes redistributed funding); and State Matching and Maintenance-of-Effort (MOE) Funds:
              (1) Child care administration;
              (2) Quality activities, including any sub-categories of quality activities as required by ACF;
              (3) Direct services;
              (4) Non-direct services, including:
              (i) Establishment and maintenance of computerized child care information systems;
              (ii) Certificate program cost/eligibility determination;
              (iii) All other non-direct services; and
              (5) Such other information as specified by the Secretary.
              (i) Tribal Lead Agencies shall submit financial reports annually in a manner specified by ACF.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67591, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.66
              Disallowance procedures.
              (a) Any expenditures not made in accordance with the Act, the implementing regulations, or the approved Plan, will be subject to disallowance.
              (b) If the Department, as the result of an audit or a review, finds that expenditures should be disallowed, the Department will notify the Lead Agency of this decision in writing.
              (c)(1) If the Lead Agency agrees with the finding that amounts were not expended in accordance with the Act, these regulations, or the Plan, the Lead Agency shall fulfill the provisions of the disallowance notice and repay any amounts improperly expended; or
              (2) The Lead Agency may appeal the finding:
              (i) By requesting reconsideration from the Assistant Secretary, pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section; or
              (ii) By following the procedure in paragraph (d) of this section.

              (d) A Lead Agency may appeal the disallowance decision to the Departmental Appeals Board in accordance with 45 CFR part 16.
              
              (e) The Lead Agency may appeal a disallowance of costs that the Department has determined to be unallowable under an award. A grantee may not appeal the determination of award amounts or disposition of unobligated balances.
              (f) The Lead Agency's request for reconsideration in (c)(2)(i) of this section shall be postmarked no later than 30 days after the receipt of the disallowance notice. A Lead Agency may request an extension within the 30-day time frame. The request for reconsideration, pursuant to (c)(2)(i) of this section, need not follow any prescribed form, but it shall contain:
              (1) The amount of the disallowance;
              (2) The Lead Agency's reasons for believing that the disallowance was improper; and
              (3) A copy of the disallowance decision issued pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.
              (g)(1) Upon receipt of a request for reconsideration, pursuant to (c)(2)(i) of this section, the Assistant Secretary or the Assistant Secretary's designee will inform the Lead Agency that the request is under review.
              (2) The Assistant Secretary or the designee will review any material submitted by the Lead Agency and any other necessary materials.
              (3) If the reconsideration decision is adverse to the Lead Agency's position, the response will include a notification of the Lead Agency's right to appeal to the Departmental Appeals Board, pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section.
              (h) If a Lead Agency refuses to repay amounts after a final decision has been made, the amounts will be offset against future payments to the Lead Agency.
              (i) The appeals process in this section is not applicable if the disallowance is part of a compliance review, pursuant to § 98.90, the findings of which have been appealed by the Lead Agency.
              (j) Disallowances under the CCDF program are subject to interest regulations at 45 CFR part 30. Interest will begin to accrue from the date of notification.
            
            
              § 98.67
              Fiscal requirements.
              (a) Lead Agencies shall expend and account for CCDF funds in accordance with their own laws and procedures for expending and accounting for their own funds.
              (b) Unless otherwise specified in this part, contracts that entail the expenditure of CCDF funds shall comply with the laws and procedures generally applicable to expenditures by the contracting agency of its own funds.
              (c) Fiscal control and accounting procedures shall be sufficient to permit:
              (1) Preparation of reports required by the Secretary under this subpart and under subpart H; and
              (2) The tracing of funds to a level of expenditure adequate to establish that such funds have not been used in violation of the provisions of this part.
            
            
              § 98.68
              Program integrity.
              (a) Lead Agencies are required to describe in their Plan effective internal controls that are in place to ensure integrity and accountability, while maintaining continuity of services, in the CCDF program. These shall include:
              (1) Processes to ensure sound fiscal management;
              (2) Processes to identify areas of risk;
              (3) Processes to train child care providers and staff of the Lead Agency and other agencies engaged in the administration of CCDF about program requirements and integrity; and
              (4) Regular evaluation of internal control activities.
              (b) Lead Agencies are required to describe in their Plan the processes that are in place to:
              (1) Identify fraud or other program violations, which may include, but are not limited to the following:
              (i) Record matching and database linkages;
              (ii) Review of attendance and billing records;
              (iii) Quality control or quality assurance reviews; and
              (iv) Staff training on monitoring and audit processes.
              (2) Investigate and recover fraudulent payments and to impose sanctions on clients or providers in response to fraud.

              (c) Lead Agencies must describe in their Plan the procedures that are in place for documenting and verifying that children receiving assistance under this part meet eligibility criteria at the time of eligibility determination and redetermination. Because a child meeting eligibility requirements at the most recent eligibility determination or redetermination is considered eligible during the period between redeterminations as described in § 98.21(a)(1):
              (1) The Lead Agency shall pay any amount owed to a child care provider for services provided for such a child during this period under a payment agreement or authorization for services; and
              (2) Any CCDF payment made for such a child during this period shall not be considered an error or improper payment under subpart K of this part due to a change in the family's circumstances, as set forth at § 98.21(a).
              [81 FR 67591, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart H—Program Reporting Requirements
            
              § 98.70
              Reporting requirements.
              (a) Quarterly Case-level Report—
              (1) State and territorial Lead Agencies that receive assistance under the CCDF shall prepare and submit to the Department, in a manner specified by the Secretary, a quarterly case-level report of monthly family case-level data. Data shall be collected monthly and submitted quarterly. States may submit the data monthly if they choose to do so.
              (2) The information shall be reported for the three-month federal fiscal period preceding the required report. The first report shall be submitted no later than August 31, 1998, and quarterly thereafter. The first report shall include data from the third quarter of FFY 1998 (April 1998 through June 1998). States and Territorial Lead Agencies which choose to submit case-level data monthly must submit their report for April 1998 no later than July 30, 1998. Following reports must be submitted every thirty days thereafter.
              (3) State and territorial Lead Agencies choosing to submit data based on a sample shall submit a sampling plan to ACF for approval 60 days prior to the submission of the first quarterly report. States are not prohibited from submitting case-level data for the entire population receiving CCDF services.
              (4) Quarterly family case-level reports to the Secretary shall include the information listed in § 98.71(a).
              (b) Annual Report—
              (1) State and territorial Lead Agencies that receive assistance under CCDF shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an annual report. The report shall be submitted, in a manner specified by the Secretary, by December 31 of each year and shall cover the most recent federal fiscal year (October through September).
              (2) The first annual aggregate report shall be submitted no later than December 31, 1997, and every twelve months thereafter.
              (3) Biennial reports to Congress by the Secretary shall include the information listed in § 98.71(b).
              (c) Tribal Annual Report—
              (1) Tribal Lead Agencies that receive assistance under CCDF shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an annual aggregate report.
              (2) The report shall be submitted in the manner specified by the Secretary by December 31 of each year and shall cover services for children and families served with CCDF funds during the preceding Federal Fiscal Year.
              (3) Biennial reports to Congress by the Secretary shall include the information listed in § 98.71(c).
              (d) State and territorial Lead Agencies shall make the following reports publicly available on a Web site in a timely manner:
              (1) Annual administrative data reports under paragraph (b) of this section;
              (2) Quarterly financial reports under § 98.65(g); and
              (3) Annual quality progress reports under § 98.53(f).
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67592, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.71
              Content of report.

              (a) At a minimum, a State or territorial Lead Agency's quarterly case-level report to the Secretary, as required in § 98.70, shall include the following information on services provided under CCDF grant funds, including Federal Discretionary (which includes any funds transferred from the TANF Block Grant), Mandatory, and Matching Funds; and State Matching and Maintenance-of-Effort (MOE) Funds:
              (1) The total monthly family income and family size used for determining eligibility;
              (2) Zip code of residence of the family and zip code of the location of the child care provider;
              (3) Gender and month/year of birth of children;
              (4) Ethnicity and race of children;
              (5) Whether the head of the family is a single parent
              (6) The sources of family income and assistance from employment (including self-employment), cash or other assistance under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program under Part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 609(a)(7)), cash or other assistance under a State program for which State spending is counted toward the maintenance of effort requirement under section 409(a)(7) of the Social Security Act, housing assistance, assistance under the Food Stamp Act of 1977, and other assistance programs;
              (7) The month/year child care assistance to the family started;
              (8) The type(s) of child care in which the child was enrolled (such as family child care, in-home care, or center-based child care;
              (9) Whether the child care provider was a relative;
              (10) The total monthly child care copayment by the family;
              (11) If applicable, any amount charged by the provider to the family more than the required copayment in instances where the provider's price exceeds the subsidy payment;
              (12) The total expected dollar amount per month to be received by the provider for each child;
              (13) The total hours per month of such care;
              (14) Unique identifier of the head of the family unit receiving child care assistance, and of the child care provider;
              (15) Reasons for receiving care;
              (16) Whether the family is experiencing homelessness;
              (17) Whether the parent(s) are in the military service;
              (18) Whether the child has a disability;
              (19) Primary language spoken at home;
              (20) Date of the child care provider's most recent health, safety and fire inspection meeting the requirements of § 98.42(b)(2);
              (21) Indicator of the quality of the child care provider; and
              (22) Any additional information that the Secretary shall require.
              (b) At a minimum, a State or territorial Lead Agency's annual aggregate report to the Secretary, as required in § 98.70(b), shall include the following information on services provided through all CCDF grant funds, including Federal Discretionary (which includes any funds transferred from the TANF Block Grant), Mandatory, and Matching Funds; and State Matching and MOE Funds:
              (1) The number of child care providers that received funding under CCDF as separately identified based on the types of providers listed in section 658P(5) of the amended Child Care and Development Block Grant Act;
              (2) The number of children served by payments through certificates or vouchers, contracts or grants, and cash under public benefit programs, listed by the primary type of child care services provided during the last month of the report period (or the last month of service for those children leaving the program before the end of the report period);
              (3) The manner in which consumer education information was provided to parents and the number of parents to whom such information was provided;
              (4) The total number (without duplication) of children and families served under CCDF;
              (5) The number of child fatalities by type of care; and
              (6) Any additional information that the Secretary shall require.
              (c) A Tribal Lead Agency's annual report as required in § 98.70(c), shall include such information as the Secretary shall require.
              [81 FR 67592, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            
            Subpart I—Indian Tribes
            
              § 98.80
              General procedures and requirements.
              An Indian Tribe or tribal organization (as described in subpart G of these regulations) may be awarded grants to plan and carry out programs for the purpose of increasing the availability, affordability, and quality of child care and childhood development programs subject to the following conditions:
              (a) An Indian Tribe applying for or receiving CCDF funds shall be subject to the requirements under this part as specified in this section based on the size of the awarded funds. The Secretary shall establish thresholds for Tribes' total CCDF allotments pursuant to §§ 98.61(c) and 98.62(b) to be divided into three categories:
              (1) Large allocations;
              (2) Medium allocations; and
              (3) Small allocations.
              (b) An Indian Tribe applying for or receiving CCDF funds shall:
              (1) Have at least 50 children under 13 years of age (or such similar age, as determined by the Secretary from the best available data) in order to be eligible to operate a CCDF program. This limitation does not preclude an Indian Tribe with fewer than 50 children under 13 years of age from participating in a consortium that receives CCDF funds; and
              (2) Demonstrate its current service delivery capability, including skills, personnel, resources, community support, and other necessary components to satisfactorily carry out the proposed program.
              (c) A consortium representing more than one Indian Tribe may be eligible to receive CCDF funds on behalf of a particular Tribe if:
              (1) The consortium adequately demonstrates that each participating Tribe authorizes the consortium to receive CCDF funds on behalf of each Tribe or tribal organization in the consortium;
              (2) The consortium consists of Tribes that each meet the eligibility requirements for the CCDF program as defined in this part, or that would otherwise meet the eligibility requirements if the Tribe or tribal organization had at least 50 children under 13 years of age;
              (3) All the participating consortium members are in geographic proximity to one another (including operation in a multi-State area) or have an existing consortium arrangement; and
              (4) The consortium demonstrates that it has the managerial, technical and administrative staff with the ability to administer government funds, manage a CCDF program and comply with the provisions of the Act and of this part.
              (d) The awarding of a grant under this section shall not affect the eligibility of any Indian child to receive CCDF services provided by the State or States in which the Indian Tribe is located.
              (e) For purposes of the CCDF, the determination of the number of children in the Tribe, pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section, shall include Indian children living on or near reservations, with the exception of Tribes in Alaska, California and Oklahoma.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67592, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.81
              Application and Plan procedures.
              (a) In order to receive CCDF funds, a Tribal Lead Agency shall apply for funds pursuant to § 98.13, except that the requirement at § 98.13(b)(2) does not apply.
              (b) Tribal Lead Agencies with large and medium allocations shall submit a CCDF Plan, as described at § 98.16, with the following additions and exceptions:
              (1) The Plan shall include the basis for determining family eligibility.
              (i) If the Tribe's median income is below a certain level established by the Secretary, then, at the Tribe's option, any Indian child in the Tribe's service area shall be considered eligible to receive CCDF funds, regardless of the family's income, work, or training status, provided that provision for services still goes to those with the highest need.
              (ii) If the Tribe's median income is above the level established by the Secretary, then a tribal program must determine eligibility for services pursuant to § 98.20(a)(2). A tribal program, as specified in its Plan, may use either:

              (A) 85 percent of the State median income for a family of the same size; or
              
              (B) 85 percent of the median income for a family of the same size residing in the area served by the Tribal Lead Agency.
              (2) For purposes of determining eligibility, the following terms shall also be defined:
              (i) Indian child; and
              (ii) Indian reservation or tribal service area.
              (3) The Tribal Lead Agency shall also assure that:
              (i) The applicant shall coordinate, to the maximum extent feasible, with the Lead Agency in the State in which the applicant shall carry out CCDF programs or activities, pursuant to § 98.82; and
              (ii) In the case of an applicant located in a State other than Alaska, California, or Oklahoma, CCDF programs and activities shall be carried out on an Indian reservation for the benefit of Indian children, pursuant to § 98.83(b).
              (4) The Plan shall include any information, as prescribed by the Secretary, necessary for determining the number of children in accordance with §§ 98.61(c), 98.62(c), and 98.80(b)(1).
              (5) The Plan shall include a description of the Tribe's payment rates, how they are established, and how they support quality including, where applicable, cultural and linguistic appropriateness.
              (6) The Plan is not subject to the following requirements:
              (i) The early learning and developmental guidelines requirement at § 98.15(a)(9);
              (ii) The certification to develop the CCDF Plan in consultation with the State Advisory Council at § 98.15(b)(1);
              (iii) The licensing requirements applicable to child care services at § 98.15(b)(6) and § 98.16(u);
              (iv) The identification of the public or private entities designated to receive private funds at § 98.16(d)(2);
              (v) A definition of very low income at § 98.16(g)(8);
              (vi) A description at § 98.16(i)(4) of how the Lead Agency will meet the needs of certain families specified at § 98.50(e);
              (vii) The description of the market rate survey or alternative methodology at § 98.16(r);
              (viii) The description relating to Matching Funds at § 98.16(w); and
              (ix) The description of how the Lead Agency prioritizes increasing access to high-quality child care in areas with high concentration of poverty at § 98.16(y).
              (7) In its initial Plan, an Indian Tribe shall describe its current service delivery capability pursuant to § 98.80(b)(2).
              (8) A consortium shall also provide the following:
              (i) A list of participating or constituent members, including demonstrations from these members pursuant to § 98.80(c)(1);
              (ii) A description of how the consortium is coordinating services on behalf of its members, pursuant to § 98.83(c)(1); and
              (iii) As part of its initial Plan, the additional information required at § 98.80(c)(4).
              (9) Plans for Tribal Lead Agencies with medium allocations are not subject to the following requirements unless the Tribe chooses to include such services, and, therefore, the associated requirements, in its program:
              (i) The assurance at § 98.15(a)(2) regarding options for services;
              (ii) A description of any limits established for the provision of in-home care at § 98.16(i)(2), or
              (iii) A description of the child care certificate payment system(s) at § 98.16(q).
              (c) Tribal Lead Agencies with small allocations shall submit an abbreviated CCDF Plan, as described by the Secretary.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67593, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.82
              Coordination.
              Tribal applicants shall coordinate the development of the Plan and the provision of services, to the extent practicable, as required by §§ 98.12 and 98.14 and:
              (a) To the maximum extent feasible, with the Lead Agency in the State or States in which the applicant will carry out the CCDF program; and
              (b) With other Federal, State, local, and tribal child care and childhood development programs.
              [81 FR 67593, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              
              § 98.83
              Requirements for tribal programs.
              (a) The grantee shall designate an agency, department, or unit to act as the Tribal Lead Agency to administer the CCDF program.
              (b) With the exception of Alaska, California, and Oklahoma, programs and activities for the benefit of Indian children shall be carried out on or near an Indian reservation.
              (c) In the case of a tribal grantee that is a consortium:
              (1) A brief description of the direct child care services funded by CCDF for each of their participating Tribes shall be provided by the consortium in their three-year CCDF Plan; and
              (2) Variations in CCDF programs or requirements and in child care licensing, regulatory and health and safety requirements shall be specified in written agreements between the consortium and the Tribe.

              (3) If a Tribe elects to participate in a consortium arrangement to receive one part of the CCDF (e.g., Discretionary Funds), it may not join another consortium or apply as a direct grantee to receive the other part of the CCDF (e.g., Tribal Mandatory Funds).
              (4) If a Tribe relinquishes its membership in a consortium at any time during the fiscal year, CCDF funds awarded on behalf of the member Tribe will remain with the tribal consortium to provide direct child care services to other consortium members for that fiscal year.
              (d)(1) Tribal Lead Agencies shall not be subject to:
              (i) The requirement to produce a consumer education Web site at § 98.33(a). Tribal Lead Agencies still must collect and disseminate the provider-specific consumer education information described at § 98.33(a) through (d), but may do so using methods other than a Web site;
              (ii) The requirement to have licensing applicable to child care services at § 98.40;
              (iii) The requirement for a training and professional development framework at § 98.44(a);
              (iv) The market rate survey or alternative methodology described at § 98.45(b)(2) and the related requirements at § 98.45(c), (d), (e), and (f);
              (v) The requirement that Lead Agencies shall give priority for services to children of families with very low family income at § 98.46(a)(1);
              (vi) The requirement that Lead Agencies shall prioritize increasing access to high-quality child care in areas with significant concentrations of poverty and unemployment at § 98.46(b);
              (vii) The requirements about Mandatory and Matching Funds at § 98.50(e);
              (viii) The requirement to complete the quality progress report at § 98.53(f);
              (ix) The requirement that Lead Agencies shall expend no more than five percent from each year's allotment on administrative costs at § 98.54(a); and
              (x) The Matching Fund requirements at §§ 98.55 and 98.63.
              (2) Tribal Lead Agencies with large, medium, and small allocations shall be subject to the provision at § 98.42(b)(2) to require inspections of child care providers and facilities, unless a Tribal Lead Agency describes an alternative monitoring approach in its Plan and provides adequate justification for the approach.
              (3) Tribal Lead Agencies with large, medium, and small allocations shall be subject to the requirement at § 98.43 to conduct comprehensive criminal background checks, unless the Tribal Lead Agency describes an alternative background check approach in its Plan and provides adequate justification for the approach.
              (e) Tribal Lead Agencies with medium and small allocations shall not be subject to the requirement for certificates at § 98.30(a) and (d).
              (f) Tribal Lead Agencies with small allocations must spend their CCDF funds in alignment with the goals and purposes described in § 98.1. These Tribes shall have flexibility in how they spend their CCDF funds and shall be subject to the following requirements:
              (1) The health and safety requirements described in § 98.41;
              (2) The monitoring requirements at §§ 98.42 and 98.83(d)(2); and
              (3) The background checks requirements described in §§ 98.43 and 98.83(d)(3);

              (4) The requirements to spend funds on activities to improve the quality of child care described in §§ 98.83(g) and 98.53;
              (5) The use of funds requirements at § 98.56 and cost allocation requirement at § 98.57;
              (6) The financial management requirements at subpart G of this part that are applicable to Tribes;
              (7) The reporting requirements at subpart H of this part that are applicable to Tribes;
              (8) The eligibility definitions at § 98.81(b)(2);
              (9) The 15 percent limitation on administrative activities at § 98.83(i);
              (10) The monitoring, non-compliance, and complaint provisions at subpart J of this part; and
              (11) Any other requirement established by the Secretary.
              (g) Of the aggregated amount of funds expanded (i.e., Discretionary and Mandatory Funds),
              (1) For Tribal Lead Agencies with large, medium and small allocations, no less than four percent in fiscal years 2017, seven percent in fiscal years 2018 and 2019, eight percent in fiscal years 2020 and 2021, and nine percent in fiscal years 2022 and each succeeding fiscal year shall be used for activities designed to improve the quality of child care services and increase parental options for, and access to high-quality child care as described at § 98.53; and
              (2) For Tribal Lead Agencies with large and medium allocations no less than three percent in fiscal year 2019 and each succeeding fiscal year shall be used to carry out activities at § 98.53(a)(4) as such activities relate to the quality of care for infants and toddler.
              (3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the Tribal Lead Agencies from reserving a larger percentage of funds to carry out activities described in paragraph (g)(1) and (2) of this section.
              (h) The base amount of any tribal grant is not subject to the administrative cost limitation at paragraph (i) of this section, the direct services requirement at § 98.50(f)(2), or the quality expenditure requirement at § 98.53(a). The base amount may be expended for any costs consistent with the purposes and requirements of the CCDF.
              (i) Not more than 15 percent of the aggregate CCDF funds expended by the Tribal Lead Agency from each fiscal year's (including amounts used for construction and renovation in accordance with § 98.84, but not including the base amount provided under paragraph (h) of this section) shall be expended for administrative activities. Amounts used for construction and major renovation in accordance with § 98.84 are not considered administrative costs.
              (j)(1) CCDF funds are available for costs incurred by the Tribal Lead Agency only after the funds are made available by Congress for Federal obligation unless costs are incurred for planning activities related to the submission of an initial CCDF Plan.
              (2) Federal obligation of funds for planning costs, pursuant to paragraph (i)(1) of this section is subject to the actual availability of the appropriation.
              [81 FR 67593, Sept. 30, 2016, as amended at 82 FR 3186, Jan. 11, 2017]
            
            
              § 98.84
              Construction and renovation of child care facilities.
              (a) Upon requesting and receiving approval from the Secretary, Tribal Lead Agencies may use amounts provided under §§ 98.61(c) and 98.62(b) to make payments for construction or major renovation of child care facilities (including paying the cost of amortizing the principal and paying interest on loans).
              (b) To be approved by the Secretary, a request shall be made in accordance with uniform procedures established by program instruction and, in addition, shall demonstrate that:
              (1) Adequate facilities are not otherwise available to enable the Tribal Lead Agency to carry out child care programs;
              (2) The lack of such facilities will inhibit the operation of child care programs in the future; and

              (3) The use of funds for construction or major renovation will not result in a decrease in the level of child care services provided by the Tribal Lead Agency as compared to the level of services provided by the Tribal Lead Agency in the preceding fiscal year. The Secretary shall waive this requirement if:
              
              (i) The Secretary determines that the decrease in the level of child care services provided by the Indian tribe or tribal organization is temporary; and
              (ii) The Indian tribe or tribal organization submits to the Secretary a plan that demonstrates that after the date on which the construction or renovation is completed:
              (A) The level of direct child care services will increase; or
              (B) The quality of child care services will improve.
              (c)(1) Tribal Lead Agency may use CCDF funds for reasonable and necessary planning costs associated with assessing the need for construction or renovation or for preparing a request, in accordance with the uniform procedures established by program instruction, to spend CCDF funds on construction or major renovation.
              (2) A Tribal Lead Agency may only use CCDF funds to pay for the costs of an architect, engineer, or other consultant for a project that is subsequently approved by the Secretary. If the project later fails to gain the Secretary's approval, the Tribal Lead Agency must pay for the architectural, engineering or consultant costs using non-CCDF funds.
              (d) Tribal Lead Agencies that receive approval from the Secretary to use CCDF funds for construction or major renovation shall comply with the following:
              (1) Federal share requirements and use of property requirements at 45 CFR 75.318;
              (2) Transfer and disposition of property requirements at 45 CFR 75.318(c);
              (3) Title requirements at 45 CFR 75.318(a);
              (4) Cost principles and allowable cost requirements at subpart E of this part;
              (5) Program income requirements at 45 CFR 75.307;
              (6) Procurement procedures at 45 CFR 92.36; 75.326 through 75.335; and
              (7) Any additional requirements established by program instruction, including requirements concerning:
              (i) The recording of a Notice of Federal Interest in the property;
              (ii) Rights and responsibilities in the event of a grantee's default on a mortgage;
              (iii) Insurance and maintenance;
              (iv) Submission of plans, specifications, inspection reports, and other legal documents; and
              (v) Modular units.
              (e) In lieu of obligation and liquidation requirements at § 98.60(e), Tribal Lead Agencies shall liquidate CCDF funds used for construction or major renovation by the end of the second fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the grant is awarded.
              (f) Tribal Lead Agencies may expend funds, without requesting approval pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, for minor renovation.
              (g) A new tribal grantee (i.e., one that did not receive CCDF funds the preceding fiscal year) may spend no more than an amount equivalent to its Tribal Mandatory allocation on construction and renovation. A new tribal grantee must spend an amount equivalent to its Discretionary allocation on activities other than construction or renovation (i.e., direct services, quality activities, or administrative costs).
              (h) A construction or renovation project that requires and receives approval by the Secretary must include as part of the construction and renovation costs:
              (1) planning costs as allowed at § 98.84(c);
              (2) labor, materials and services necessary for the functioning of the facility; and
              (3) initial equipment for the facility. Equipment means items which are tangible, nonexpendable personal property having a useful life of more than five years.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 3020, Jan. 20, 2016; 81 FR 67594, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart J—Monitoring, Non-compliance and Complaints
            
              § 98.90
              Monitoring.
              (a) The Secretary will monitor programs funded under the CCDF for compliance with:
              (1) The Act;
              (2) The provisions of this part; and
              (3) The provisions and requirements set forth in the CCDF Plan approved under § 98.18;

              (b) If a review or investigation reveals evidence that the Lead Agency, or an entity providing services under contract or agreement with the Lead Agency, has failed to substantially comply with the Plan or with one or more provisions of the Act or implementing regulations, the Secretary will issue a preliminary notice to the Lead Agency of possible non-compliance. The Secretary shall consider comments received from the Lead Agency within 60 days (or such longer period as may be agreed upon between the Lead Agency and the Secretary).
              (c) Pursuant to an investigation conducted under paragraph (a) of this section, a Lead Agency shall make appropriate books, documents, papers, manuals, instructions, and records available to the Secretary, or any duly authorized representatives, for examination or copying on or off the premises of the appropriate entity, including subgrantees and contractors, upon reasonable request.
              (d)(1) Lead Agencies and subgrantees shall retain all CCDF records, as specified in paragraph (c) of this section, and any other records of Lead Agencies and subgrantees that are needed to substantiate compliance with CCDF requirements, for the period of time specified in paragraph (e) of this section.
              (2) Lead Agencies and subgrantees shall provide through an appropriate provision in their contracts that their contractors will retain and permit access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the contractor that are directly pertinent to that specific contract.
              (e) Length of retention period. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, records specified in paragraph (c) of this section shall be retained for three years from the day the Lead Agency or subgrantee submits the Financial Reports required by the Secretary, pursuant to § 98.65(g), for the program period.
              (2) If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, disallowance action, or other action involving the records has been started before the expiration of the three-year retention period, the records shall be retained until completion of the action and resolution of all issues that arise from it, or until the end of the regular three-year period, whichever is later.
            
            
              § 98.91
              Non-compliance.
              (a) If after reasonable notice to a Lead Agency, pursuant to § 98.90 or § 98.93, a final determination is made that:
              (1) There has been a failure by the Lead Agency, or by an entity providing services under contract or agreement with the Lead Agency, to comply substantially with any provision or requirement set forth in the Plan approved under § 98.16; or
              (2) If in the operation of any program for which funding is provided under the CCDF, there is a failure by the Lead Agency, or by an entity providing services under contract or agreement with the Lead Agency, to comply substantially with any provision of the Act or this part, the Secretary will provide to the Lead Agency a written notice of a finding of non-compliance. This notice will be issued within 60 days of the preliminary notification in § 98.90(b), or within 60 days of the receipt of additional comments from the Lead Agency, whichever is later, and will provide the opportunity for a hearing, pursuant to part 99.
              (b) The notice in paragraph (a) of this section will include all relevant findings, as well as any penalties or sanctions to be applied, pursuant to § 98.92.
              (c) Issues subject to review at the hearing include the finding of non-compliance, as well as any penalties or sanctions to be imposed pursuant to § 98.92.
            
            
              § 98.92
              Penalties and sanctions.
              (a) Upon a final determination that the Lead Agency has failed to substantially comply with the Act, the implementing regulations, or the Plan, one of the following penalties will be applied:
              (1) The Secretary will disallow any improperly expended funds;
              (2) An amount equal to or less than the improperly expended funds will be deducted from the administrative portion of the State allotment for the following fiscal year; or
              (3) A combination of the above options will be applied.

              (b) In addition to imposing the penalties described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary may impose other appropriate sanctions, including:
              
              (1) Disqualification of the Lead Agency from the receipt of further funding under the CCDF; or
              (2)(i) A penalty of not more than four percent of the funds allotted under § 98.61 (i.e., the Discretionary Funds) for a Fiscal Year shall be withheld if the Secretary determines that the Lead Agency has failed to implement a provision of the Act, these regulations, or the Plan required under § 98.16;
              (ii) This penalty will be withheld no earlier than the second full quarter following the quarter in which the Lead Agency was notified of the proposed penalty;
              (iii) This penalty will not be applied if the Lead Agency corrects the failure or violation before the penalty is to be applied or if it submits a plan for corrective action that is acceptable to the Secretary; or
              (iv) The Lead Agency may show cause to the Secretary why the amount of the penalty, if applied, should be reduced.

              (3)(i) A penalty of five percent of the funds allotted under § 98.61 (i.e., the Discretionary Funds) for a Fiscal Year shall be withheld for any For Fiscal Year the Secretary determines that the Lead Agency has failed to give priority for service in accordance with § 98.46(a);
              (ii) This penalty will be withheld no earlier than the first full Fiscal Year following the determination to apply the penalty;
              (iii) This penalty will not be applied if the Lead Agency corrects its failure to comply and amends its CCDF Plan within six months of being notified of the failure; and
              (iv) The Secretary may waive a penalty for one year in the event of extraordinary circumstances, such as a natural disaster.

              (4)(i) A penalty of five percent of the funds allotted under § 98.61 (i.e., the Discretionary Funds) for a Fiscal Year shall be withheld for any Fiscal Year that the Secretary determines that the State, Territory, or Tribe has failed to comply substantially with the criminal background check requirements at § 98.43;
              (ii) This penalty will be withheld no earlier than the first full Fiscal Year following the determination to apply the penalty; and
              (iii) This penalty will not be applied if the State, Territory, or Tribe corrects the failure before the penalty is to be applied or if it submits a plan for corrective action that is acceptable to the Secretary.
              (c) If a Lead Agency is subject to additional sanctions as provided under paragraph (b) of this section, specific identification of any additional sanctions being imposed will be provided in the notice provided pursuant to § 98.91.
              (d) Nothing in this section, or in § 98.90 or § 98.91, will preclude the Lead Agency and the Department from informally resolving a possible compliance issue without following all of the steps described in §§ 98.90, 98.91 and 98.92. Penalties and/or sanctions, as described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, may nevertheless be applied, even though the issue is resolved informally.
              (e) It is at the Secretary's sole discretion to choose the penalty to be imposed under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
              [63 FR 39981, July 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67594, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.93
              Complaints.
              (a) This section applies to any complaint (other than a complaint alleging violation of the nondiscrimination provisions) that a Lead Agency has failed to use its allotment in accordance with the terms of the Act, the implementing regulations, or the Plan. The Secretary is not required to consider a complaint unless it is submitted as required by this section. Complaints with respect to discrimination should be referred to the Office of Civil Rights of the Department.
              (b) Complaints with respect to the CCDF shall be submitted in writing to the Assistant Secretary for Children and Families. The complaint shall identify the provision of the Plan, the Act, or this part that was allegedly violated, specify the basis for alleging the violation(s), and include all relevant information known to the person submitting it.

              (c) The Department shall promptly furnish a copy of any complaint to the affected Lead Agency. Any comments received from the Lead Agency within 60 days (or such longer period as may be agreed upon between the Lead Agency and Department) shall be considered by the Department in responding to the complaint. The Department will conduct an investigation of complaints, where appropriate.
              (d) The Department will provide a written response to complaints within 180 days after receipt. If a final resolution cannot be provided at that time, the response will state the reasons why additional time is necessary.
              (e) Complaints that are not satisfactorily resolved through communication with the Lead Agency will be pursued through the process described in § 98.90.
              [63 FR 39981, Sept. 24, 1998, as amended at 81 FR 67595, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
          
            Subpart K—Error Rate Reporting
            
              Source:
              72 FR 50898, Sept. 5, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 98.100
              Error Rate Report.
              (a) Applicability—The requirements of this subpart apply to the fifty States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.
              (b) Generally—States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico shall calculate, prepare and submit to the Department, a report of errors occurring in the administration of CCDF grant funds, at times and in a manner specified by the Secretary in instructions. States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico must use this report to calculate their error rates, which is defined as the percentage of cases with an error (expressed as the total number of cases with an error compared to the total number of cases); the percentage of cases with an improper payment (expressed as the total number of cases with an improper payment compared to the total number of cases); the percentage of improper payments (expressed as the total amount of improper payments in the sample compared to the total dollar amount of payments made in the sample); the average amount of improper payment; and the estimated annual amount of improper payments. The report also will provide strategies for reducing their error rates and allow States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico to set target error rates for the next cycle.
              (c) Error Defined—For purposes of this subpart, an “error” shall mean any violation or misapplication of statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements governing the administration of CCDF grant funds, regardless of whether such violation results in an improper payment.
              (d) Improper Payment Defined—For purposes of this subpart, “improper payment.”
              (1) Means any payment of CCDF grant funds that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount (including overpayments and underpayments) under statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements governing the administration of CCDF grant funds; and
              (2) Includes any payment of CCDF grant funds to an ineligible recipient, any payment of CCDF grant funds for an ineligible service, any duplicate payment of CCDF grant funds and payments of CCDF grant funds for services not received. Because a child meeting eligibility requirements at the most recent eligibility determination or redetermination is considered eligible between redeterminations as described in § 98.21(a)(1), any payment for such a child shall not be considered an error or improper payment due to a change in the family's circumstances, as set forth at § 98.21(a) and (b).
              (e) Costs of Preparing the Error Rate Report—Provided the error rate calculations and reports focus on client eligibility, expenses incurred by the States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico in complying with this rule, including preparation of required reports, shall be considered a cost of direct service related to eligibility determination and therefore is not subject to the five percent limitation on CCDF administrative costs pursuant to § 98.54(a).
              [72 FR 50898, Sept. 5, 2007, as amended at 81 FR 67595, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
            
              § 98.101
              Case Review Methodology.
              (a) Case Reviews and Sampling—In preparing the error reports required by this subpart, States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico shall conduct comprehensive reviews of case records using a methodology established by the Secretary. For purposes of the case reviews, States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico shall select a random sample of case records which is estimated to achieve the calculation of an estimated annual amount of improper payments with a 90 percent confidence interval of ±5.0 percent.
              (b) Methodology and Forms—States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico must prepare and submit forms issued by the Secretary, following the accompanying instructions setting forth the methodology to be used in conducting case reviews and calculating the error rates.
              (c) Reporting Frequency and Cycle—States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico shall conduct case reviews and submit error rate reports to the Department according to a staggered three-year cycle established by the Secretary such that each State, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico will be selected once, and only once, in every three years.
              (d) Access to Federal Staff—States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico must provide access to Federal staff to participate and provide oversight in case reviews and error rate calculations, including access to forms related to determining error rates.
              (e) Record Retention—Records pertinent to the case reviews and submission of error rate reports shall be retained for a period of five years from the date of submission of the applicable error rate report or, if the error rate report was revised, from the date of submission of the revision. Records must be made available to Federal staff upon request.
            
            
              § 98.102
              Content of Error Rate Reports.
              (a) Baseline Submission Report—At a minimum, States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico shall submit an initial error rate report to the Department, as required in § 98.100, which includes the following information on errors and resulting improper payments occurring in the administration of CCDF grant funds, including Federal Discretionary Funds (which includes any funds transferred from the TANF Block Grant), Mandatory and Matching Funds and State Matching and Maintenance-of-Effort (MOE Funds):
              (1) Percentage of cases with an error (regardless of whether such error resulted in an over or under payment), expressed as the total number of cases in the sample with an error compared to the total number of cases in the sample;
              (2) Percentage of cases with an improper payment (both over and under payments), expressed as the total number of cases in the sample with an improper payment compared to the total number of cases in the sample;
              (3) Percentage of improper payments (both over and under payments), expressed as the total dollar amount of improper payments in the sample compared to the total dollar amount of payments made in the sample;
              (4) Average amount of improper payments (gross over and under payments, divided by the total number of cases in the sample that had an improper payment (both over and under payments));
              (5) Estimated annual amount of improper payments (which is a projection of the results from the sample to the universe of cases statewide during the 12-month review period) calculated by multiplying the percentage of improper payments by the total dollar amount of child care payments that the State, the District of Columbia or Puerto Rico paid during the 12-month review period;
              (6) For each category of data listed above, targets for errors and improper payments in the next reporting cycle;
              (7) Summary of methodology used to arrive at estimate, including fieldwork preparation, sample generation, record review and error rate computation processes;
              (8) Discussion of the causes of improper payments identified and actions that will be taken to correct those causes in order to reduce the error rates;

              (9) Description of the information systems and other infrastructure that assist the State, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico in identifying and reducing improper payments, or if the State, the District of Columbia or Puerto Rico does not have these tools, a description of actions that will be taken to acquire the necessary information systems and other infrastructure; and
              (10) Such other information as specified by the Secretary.
              (b) Standard Report—At a minimum, the State, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico shall submit an error rate report to the Department, as required in § 98.100, made subsequent to the baseline submission report as set forth in § 98.102(a) which includes the following information on errors and resulting improper payments occurring in the administration of CCDF grant funds, including Federal Discretionary Funds (which includes any funds transferred from the TANF Block Grant), Mandatory and Matching Funds and State Matching and Maintenance-of-Effort (MOE Funds):
              (1) All the information reported in the baseline submission, as set forth in § 98.102(a), updated for the current cycle;
              (2) For each category of data listed in § 98.102(a)(1) through (5), States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico must include data and targets from the prior cycle in addition to data from the current cycle and targets for the next cycle;
              (3) Description of whether the State, the District of Columbia or Puerto Rico met error rate targets set in the prior cycle and, if not, an explanation of why not;
              (4) Discussion of the causes of improper payments identified in the prior cycle and actions that were taken to correct those causes, in addition to a discussion on the causes of improper payments identified in the current cycle and actions that will be taken to correct those causes in order to reduce the error rates; and
              (5) Such other information as specified by the Secretary.
              (c) Any Lead Agency with an improper payment rate that exceeds a threshold established by the Secretary must submit to the Assistant Secretary for approval a comprehensive corrective action plan, as well as subsequent reports describing progress in implementing the plan.
              (1) The corrective action plan must be submitted within 60 days of the deadline for submitting the Lead Agency's standard error rate report required by paragraph (b) of this section.
              (2) The corrective action plan must include the following:
              (i) Identification of a senior accountable official;
              (ii) Milestones that clearly identify actions to be taken to reduce improper payments and the individual responsible for completing each action;
              (iii) A timeline for completing each action within 1 year of the Assistant Secretary's approval of the plan, and for reducing the improper payment rate below the threshold established by the Secretary; and
              (iv) Targets for future improper payment rates.
              (3) Subsequent progress reports must be submitted as requested by the Assistant Secretary.
              (4) Failure to carry out actions described in the approved corrective action plan will be grounds for a penalty or sanction under § 98.92.
              [72 FR 50898, Sept. 5, 2007, as amended at 81 FR 67595, Sept. 30, 2016]
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 99
          PART 99—PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS FOR THE CHILD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT FUND
          
            
              Subpart A—General
              Sec.
              99.1
              Scope of rules.
              99.2
              Presiding officer.
              99.3
              Records to be public.
              99.4
              Suspension of rules.
              99.5
              Filing and service of papers.
            
            
              Subpart B—Preliminary Matters—Notice and Parties
              99.11
              Notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing.
              99.12
              Time of hearing.
              99.13
              Place.
              99.14
              Issues at hearing.
              99.15
              Request to participate in hearing.
            
            
              Subpart C—Hearing Procedures
              99.21
              Authority of presiding officer.
              99.22
              Rights of parties.
              99.23
              Discovery.
              99.24
              Evidentiary purpose.
              99.25
              Evidence.
              99.26
              Unsponsored written material.
              
              99.27
              Official transcript.
              99.28
              Record for decision.
            
            
              Subpart D—Posthearing Procedures, Decisions
              99.31
              Posthearing briefs.
              99.32
              Decisions following hearing.
              99.33
              Effective date of Assistant Secretary's decision.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 618, 9858.
          
          
            Source:
            57 FR 34428, Aug. 4, 1992, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Editorial Note:
            Nomenclature changes to part 99 appear at 63 FR 39998, July 24, 1998.
          
          
            Subpart A—General
            
              § 99.1
              Scope of rules.
              (a) The rules of procedure in this section govern the practice for hearings afforded by the Department to Lead Agencies pursuant to § 98.18(c) or § 98.91, and the practice relating to the decisions of such hearings.
              (b) Nothing in this part is intended to preclude or limit negotiations between the Department and the Lead Agency, whether before, during, or after the hearing, to resolve the issues which are, or otherwise would be, considered at the hearing. Such negotiations and resolution of issues are not part of the hearing and are not governed by the rules in this part, except as expressly provided herein.
            
            
              § 99.2
              Presiding officer.
              (a) (1) The presiding officer at a hearing shall be the Assistant Secretary or the Assistant Secretary's designee.
              (2) The designation of the presiding officer shall be in writing. A copy of the designation shall be served on all parties.
              (b) The presiding officer, for all hearings, shall be bound by all applicable laws and regulations.
            
            
              § 99.3
              Records to be public.
              All pleadings, correspondence, exhibits, transcripts of testimony, exceptions, briefs, decisions, and other documents filed in the docket in any proceeding may be inspected and copied in the office of the Assistant Secretary. Inquiries may be made at the Administration for Children and Families, 370 L'Enfant Promenade SW., Washington, DC 20447.
            
            
              § 99.4
              Suspension of rules.
              With notice to all parties, the Assistant Secretary for Children and Families or the presiding officer, with respect to pending matters, may modify or waive any rule in this part upon determination that no party will be unduly prejudiced and the ends of justice will thereby be served.
            
            
              § 99.5
              Filing and service of papers.
              (a) An original and two copies of all papers in the proceedings shall be filed with the presiding officer. For exhibits and transcripts of testimony, only the originals need be filed.
              (b) All papers in the proceedings shall be served on all parties by personal delivery or by certified mail. Service on the party's designated attorney will be deemed service on the party.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Preliminary Matters—Notice and Parties
            
              § 99.11
              Notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing.

              Proceedings commence when the Assistant Secretary mails a notice of hearing or opportunity for hearing to the Lead Agency. The notice shall state the time and place for the hearing, and the issues which will be considered. A copy of the notice shall be published in the Federal Register.
              
            
            
              § 99.12
              Time of hearing.
              The hearing shall be scheduled not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days after the date of the notice of the hearing furnished to the applicant or Lead Agency, unless otherwise agreed to, in writing, by the parties.
            
            
              § 99.13
              Place.
              The hearing shall be held in the city in which the regional office of the Department responsible for oversight of the Lead Agency is located or in such other place as the Assistant Secretary determines, considering both the circumstances of the case and the convenience and necessity of the parties or their representatives.
            
            
              
              § 99.14
              Issues at hearing.

              (a) The Assistant Secretary may, prior to a hearing under § 98.91 of this part, notify the Lead Agency in writing of additional issues which will be considered at the hearing. Such notice shall be published in the Federal Register. If such notice is received by the Lead Agency less than 20 days before the date of the hearing, a postponement of the hearing shall be granted at the request of the Lead Agency or any other party. The hearing shall be held on a date 20 days after such notice was received, or on such later date as agreed to by the Assistant Secretary.

              (b) If, as a result of negotiations between the Department and the Lead Agency, the submittal of a Plan amendment, a change in the Lead Agency program, or other action by the Lead Agency, any issue is resolved in whole or in part, but new or modified issues are presented, as specified by the Assistant Secretary, the hearing shall proceed on such new or modified issues. A notice of such new or modified issues shall be published in the Federal Register. If such notice is received by the Lead Agency less than 20 days before the date of the hearing, a postponement of the hearing shall be granted at the request of the Lead Agency or any other party. The hearing shall be held on a date 20 days after such notice was received, or on such later date as agreed to by the Assistant Secretary.
              (c)(1) If, at any time, the Assistant Secretary finds that the Lead Agency has come into compliance with Federal statutes and regulations on any issue, in whole or in part, the Assistant Secretary shall remove such issue from the proceedings, in whole or in part, as may be appropriate. If all issues are removed, the Assistant Secretary shall terminate the hearing.
              (2) Prior to the removal of any issue from the hearing, in whole or in part, the Assistant Secretary shall provide all parties other than the Department and the Lead Agency (see § 99.15(b)) with written notice of the intention, and the reasons for it. Such notice shall include a copy of the proposed CCDF Plan provision on which the Lead Agency and Assistant Secretary have settled. The parties shall have 15 days from the receipt of such notice to file their views or any information on the merits of the proposed Plan provision and the merits of the Assistant Secretary's reasons for removing the issue from the hearing.
              (d) The issues considered at the hearing shall be limited to those issues of which the Lead Agency is notified, as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, and new or modified issues described in paragraph (b) of this section; they shall not include issues or parts of issues removed from the proceedings pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section.
            
            
              § 99.15
              Request to participate in hearing.
              (a) The Department and the Lead Agency are parties to the hearing without making a specific request to participate.
              (b)(1) Other individuals or groups may be recognized as parties, if the issues to be considered at the hearing have directly caused them injury and their interest is immediately within the zone of interests to be protected by the governing Federal statute and regulations.

              (2) Any individual or group wishing to participate as a party shall file a petition with the presiding officer within 15 days after notice of the hearing has been published in the Federal Register and shall serve a copy on each party of record at that time, in accordance with § 99.5(b). Such petition shall concisely state:
              (i) Petitioner's interest in the proceeding;
              (ii) Who will appear for petitioner;
              (iii) The issues on which petitioner wishes to participate; and
              (iv) Whether petitioner intends to present witnesses.
              (3) Any party may, within 5 days of receipt of such petition, file comments on it.

              (4) The presiding officer shall promptly determine whether each petitioner has the requisite interest in the proceedings and shall permit or deny participation accordingly. Where petitions to participate as parties are made by individuals or groups with common interests, at the presiding officer's discretion, the presiding officer may request that all such petitioners designate a single representative or may recognize one or more of such petitioners to represent all such petitioners. The presiding officer shall give each petitioner written notice of the decision on the petition, and if the petition is denied, the presiding officer shall briefly state the grounds for denial. If the petition is denied, the presiding officer may recognize the petitioner as an amicus curiae.
              (c)(1) Any interested person or organization wishing to participate as an amicus curiae shall file a petition with the presiding officer before the commencement of the hearing. Such petition shall concisely state:
              (i) The petitioner's interest in the hearing;
              (ii) Who will represent the petitioner; and
              (iii) The issues on which petitioner intends to present argument.
              An amicus curiae is not a party but may participate as provided in this paragraph.
              (2) The presiding officer may grant the petition upon finding that the petitioner has a legitimate interest in the proceedings, that such participation will not unduly delay the outcome, and it may contribute materially to the proper disposition of the issues.
              (3) An amicus curiae may present a brief oral statement at the hearing, at the point in the proceedings specified by the presiding officer. The amicus curiae may submit a written statement of position to the presiding officer prior to the beginning of a hearing and shall serve a copy on each party. The amicus curiae may also submit a brief or written statement at such time as the parties submit briefs and shall serve a copy on each party.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Hearing Procedures
            
              § 99.21
              Authority of presiding officer.
              (a) The presiding officer shall have the duty to conduct a fair hearing, to avoid delay, maintain order, and make a record of the proceedings. The presiding officer shall have all powers necessary to accomplish these ends, including, but not limited to, the power to:
              (1) Change the date, time, and place of the hearing, upon due notice to the parties. This authority includes the power to continue the hearing in whole or in part;
              (2) Hold conferences to settle or simplify the issues in a proceeding, or to consider other matters that may aid in the expeditious disposition of the proceeding;
              (3) Regulate participation of parties and amici curiae and require parties and amici curiae to state their position with respect to the various issues in the proceeding;
              (4) Administer oaths and affirmations;
              (5) Rule on all pending motions and other procedural items including issuance of protective orders or other relief to a party against whom discovery is sought;
              (6) Regulate the course of the hearing and conduct of counsel therein;
              (7) Examine witnesses;
              (8) Receive, rule on, exclude or limit evidence or discovery;
              (9) Fix the time for filing motions, petitions, briefs, or other items in matters pending;
              (10) If the presiding officer is the Assistant Secretary, make a final decision;
              (11) If the presiding officer is not the Assistant Secretary, certify the entire record including the recommended findings and proposed decision to the Assistant Secretary; and
              (12) Take any action authorized by the rules in this part or in conformance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551 through 559.
              (b) The presiding officer does not have authority to compel by subpoena the production of witnesses, papers, or other evidence.
            
            
              § 99.22
              Rights of parties.
              All parties may:
              (a) Appear by counsel or other authorized representative, in all hearing proceedings;

              (b) Participate in any prehearing conference held by the presiding officer;
              
              (c) Agree to stipulations as to facts which will be made a part of the record;
              (d) Make opening statements at the hearing;
              (e) Present relevant evidence on the issues at the hearing;
              (f) Present witnesses who then must be available for cross-examination by all other parties;
              (g) Present oral arguments at the hearing; and
              (h) Submit written briefs, proposed findings of fact, and proposed conclusions of law, after the hearing.
            
            
              § 99.23
              Discovery.
              The Department, the Lead Agency, and any individuals or groups recognized as parties shall have the right to conduct discovery (including depositions) against opposing parties. Rules 26-37 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply to such proceedings; there will be no fixed rule on priority of discovery. Upon written motion, the presiding officer shall promptly rule upon any objection to such discovery action initiated pursuant to this section. The presiding officer shall also have the power to grant a protective order or relief to any party against whom discovery is sought and to restrict or control discovery so as to prevent undue delay in the conduct of the hearing. Upon the failure of any party to make discovery, the presiding officer may, at the presiding officer's discretion, issue any order and impose any sanction (other than contempt orders) authorized by rule 37 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
            
            
              § 99.24
              Evidentiary purpose.
              The purpose of the hearing is to receive factual evidence and expert opinion testimony related to the issues in the proceeding. Argument will not be received in evidence; rather, it should be presented in statements, memoranda, or briefs, as determined by the presiding officer. Brief opening statements, which shall be limited to statement of the party's position and what the party intends to prove, may be made at hearings.
            
            
              § 99.25
              Evidence.
              (a) Testimony. Testimony shall be given orally under oath or affirmation by witnesses at the hearing. Witnesses shall be available at the hearing for cross-examination by all parties.
              (b) Stipulations and exhibits. Two or more parties may agree to stipulations of fact. Such stipulations, or any exhibit proposed by any party, shall be exchanged at the prehearing conference or otherwise prior to the hearing if the presiding officer so requires.
              (c) Rules of evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted pursuant to this part, but rules or principles designed to assure production of the most credible evidence available and to subject testimony to test by cross-examination shall be applied where reasonably necessary by the presiding officer. A witness may be cross-examined on any matter material to the proceeding without regard to the scope of direct examination. The presiding officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. All documents and other evidence offered or taken for the record shall be open to examination by the parties, and opportunity shall be given to refute facts and arguments advanced on either side of the issues.
            
            
              § 99.26
              Unsponsored written material.
              Letters expressing views or urging action and other unsponsored written material regarding matters at issue in a hearing will be placed in the correspondence section of the docket of the proceeding. These data are not deemed part of the evidence or record in the hearing.
            
            
              § 99.27
              Official transcript.

              The Department will designate the official reporter for all hearings. The official transcripts of testimony taken, together with any stipulations, exhibits, briefs, or memoranda of law filed therewith shall be filed with the Department. Transcripts of testimony in hearings may be obtained from the official reporter by the parties and the public at rates not to exceed the maximum rates fixed by the contract between the Department and the reporter. Upon notice to all parties, the presiding officer may authorize corrections to the transcript which involve matters of substance.
            
            
              § 99.28
              Record for decision.
              The transcript of testimony, exhibits, and all papers and requests filed in the proceedings, except the correspondence section of the docket, including rulings and any recommended or initial decision, shall constitute the exclusive record for decision.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Posthearing Procedures, Decisions
            
              § 99.31
              Posthearing briefs.
              The presiding officer shall fix the time for filing posthearing briefs, which may contain proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. The presiding officer shall also fix the time for reply briefs, if permitted.
            
            
              § 99.32
              Decisions following hearing.
              (a) If the Assistant Secretary is the presiding officer, the Assistant Secretary shall issue the decision within 60 days after the time for submission of posthearing briefs has expired.
              (b)(1) If the presiding officer is not the Assistant Secretary, the presiding officer shall certify the entire record, including the recommended findings and proposed decision, to the Assistant Secretary within 60 days after the time for submission of posthearing briefs has expired. The Assistant Secretary shall serve a copy of the recommended findings and proposed decision upon all parties, and amici, if any.
              (2) Any party may, within 20 days of receipt of the recommended findings and proposed decision, file exceptions and a supporting brief or statement with the Assistant Secretary.
              (3) The Assistant Secretary shall thereupon review the recommended decision and, within 45 days after the receipt of the exceptions to the recommended findings and proposed decision, issue the decision.
              (c) The decision of the Assistant Secretary under this section shall be the final decision of the Secretary and shall constitute “final agency action” within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 704. The Assistant Secretary's decision shall be promptly served on all parties, and amici, if any.
            
            
              § 99.33
              Effective date of Assistant Secretary's decision.
              If, in the case of a hearing pursuant to § 98.18(b) of this chapter, the Assistant Secretary concludes that a Plan amendment does not comply with the Federal statutes and regulations, the decision that further payments will not be made to the Lead Agency, or payments will be limited to categories under other parts of the CCDF Plan not affected, shall specify the effective date for the withholding of Federal funds.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 100
          PART 100—INTERGOVERNMENTAL REVIEW OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES
          
            Sec.
            100.1
            What is the purpose of these regulations?
            100.2
            What definitions apply to these regulations?
            100.3
            What programs and activities of the Department are subject to these regulations?
            100.4
            [Reserved]
            100.5
            What is the Secretary's obligation with respect to Federal interagency coordination?
            100.6
            What procedures apply to the selection of programs and activities under these regulations?
            100.7
            How does the Secretary communicate with state and local officials concerning the Department's programs and activities?
            100.8
            How does the Secretary provide states an opportunity to comment on proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development?
            100.9
            How does the Secretary receive and respond to comments?
            100.10
            How does the Secretary make efforts to accommodate intergovernmental concerns?
            100.11
            What are the Secretary's obligations in interstate situations?
            100.12
            How may a state simplify, consolidate, or substitute federally required state plans?
            100.13
            May the Secretary waive any provision of these regulations?
          
          
            Authority:

            Executive Order 12372, July 14, 1982 (47 FR 30959), as amended April 8, 1983 (48 FR 15887): sec. 401, Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968, as amended (31 U.S.C. 6506); sec. 204, Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act of 1966, as amended (42 U.S.C. 3334).
          
          
            Source:
            48 FR 29200, June 24, 1983, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 100.1
            What is the purpose of these regulations?
            (a) The regulations in this part implement Executive Order 12372, “Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs,” issued July 14, 1982 and amended on April 8, 1983. These regulations also implement applicable provisions of section 401 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 and section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act of 1966.
            (b) These regulations are intended to foster an intergovernmental partnership and a strengthened Federalism by relying on state processes and on state, areawide, regional and local coordination for review of proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development.
            (c) These regulations are intended to aid the internal management of the Department, and are not intended to create any right or benefit enforceable at law by a party against the Department or its officers.
          
          
            § 100.2
            What definitions apply to these regulations?
            
              Department means the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
            
              Order means Executive Order 12372, issued July 14, 1982, and amended April 8, 1983 and titled “Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs.”
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of HHS or an official or employee of the Department acting for the Secretary under a delegation of authority.
            
              State means any of the 50 states, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
          
          
            § 100.3
            What programs and activities of the Department are subject to these regulations?
            The Secretary publishes in the Federal Register a list of the Department's programs and activities that are subject to these regulations and identifies which of these are subject to the requirements of section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act.
          
          
            § 100.4
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 100.5
            What is the Secretary's obligation with respect to Federal interagency coordination?
            The Secretary, to the extent practicable, consults with and seeks advice from all other substantially affected Federal departments and agencies in an effort to assure full coordination between such agencies and the Department regarding programs and activities covered under these regulations.
          
          
            § 100.6
            What procedures apply to the selection of programs and activities under these regulations?

            (a) A state may select any program or activity published in the Federal Register in accordance with § 100.3 of this part for intergovernmental review under these regulations. Each state, before selecting programs and activities, shall consult with local elected officials.
            (b) Each state that adopts a process shall notify the Secretary of the Department's programs and activities selected for that process.
            (c) A state may notify the Secretary of changes in its selections at any time. For each change, the state shall submit to the Secretary an assurance that the state has consulted with local elected officials regarding the change. The Department may establish deadlines by which states are required to inform the Secretary of changes in their program selections.
            (d) The Secretary uses a state's process as soon as feasible, depending on individual programs and activities, after the Secretary is notified of its selections.
          
          
            § 100.7
            How does the Secretary communicate with state and local officials concerning the Department's programs and activities?

            (a) For those programs and activities selected by a state process under § 100.6, the Secretary, to the extent permitted by law:
            
            (1) Uses the state process to determine views of state and local elected officials; and,
            (2) Communicates with state and local elected officials, through the state process, as early in a program planning cycle as is reasonably feasible to explain specific plans and actions.
            (b) The Secretary provides notice to directly affected state, areawide, regional, and local entities in a state of proposed Federal finanical assistance or direct Federal development if:
            (1) The state has not adopted a process under the Order; or
            (2) The assistance or development invovles a program or activity not selected for the state process.
            This notice may be made by publication in the Federal Register or other appropriate means, which the Department in its discretion deems appropriate.
          
          
            § 100.8
            How does the Secretary provide states an opportunity to comment on proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development?
            (a) Except in unusal circumstances, the Secretary gives state processes or directly affected state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities:
            (1) At least 30 days from the date established by the Secretary to comment on proposed direct Federal development or Federal financial assistance in the form of noncompeting continuation awards; and
            (2) At least 60 days from the date established by the Secretary to comment on proposed direct Federal development or Federal financial assistance other than noncompeting continuation awards.
            (b) This section also applies to comments in cases in which the review, coordination, and communication with the Department have been delegated.
            (c) Applicants for programs and activities subject to section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Act shall allow areawide agencies a 60-day opportunity for review and comment.
          
          
            § 100.9
            How does the Secretary receive and respond to comments?
            (a) The Secretary follows the procedures in § 100.10 if:
            (1) A state office or official is designated to act as a single point of contact between a state process and all Federal agencies, and
            (2) That office or official transmits a state process recommendation for a program selected under § 100.6.
            (b)(1) The single point of contract is not obligated to transmit comments from state, areawide, regional or local officials and entities where there is no state process recommendation.
            (2) If a state process recommendation is transmitted by a single point of contact, all comments from state, areawide, regional, and local officials and entities that differ from it must also be transmitted.
            (c) If a state has not established a process, or is unable to submit a state process recommendation, state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities may submit comments either to the applicant or to the Department.
            (d) If a program or activity is not selected for review under a state process, state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities may submit comments either to the applicant or to the Department. In addition, if a state process recommendation for a nonselected program or activity is transmitted to the Department by the single point of contact, the Secretary follows the procedures of § 100.10 of this part.
            (e) The Secretary considers comments which do not constitute a state process recommendation submitted under these regulations and for which the Secretary is not required to apply the procedures of § 100.10 of this part, when such comments are provided by a single point of contact, by the applicant, or directly to the Department by a commenting party.
            (f) If an applicant receives comments under § 100.9(a)(2), (c) or (d) of this part, it must forward such comments to the Department with its application materials.
          
          
            
            § 100.10
            How does the Secretary make efforts to accommodate intergovernmental concerns?
            (a) If a state process provides a state process recommendation to the Department through its single point of contact, the Secretary either:
            (1) Accepts the recommendation;
            (2) Reaches a mutually agreeable solution with the state process; or
            (3) Provides the single point of contact with such written explanation of the decision as the Secretary in this or her discretion deems appropriate. The Secretary may also supplement the written explanation by providing the explanation to the single point of contact by telephone, other telecommunication, or other means.
            (b) In any explanation under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the Secretary informs the single point of contact that:
            (1) The Department will not implement its decision for at least ten days after the single point of contact receives the explanation; or
            (2) The Secretary has reviewed the decision and determined that, because of unsual circumstances, the waiting period of at least ten days is not feasible.
            (c) For purposes of computing the waiting period under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, a single point of contact is presumed to have received written explanation 5 days after the date such notification is dated.
          
          
            § 100.11
            What are the Secretary's obligations in interstate situations?
            (a) The Secretary is responsible for:
            (1) Identifying proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development that have an impact on interstate areas;
            (2) Notifying appropriate officials and entities in states which have adopted a process and which select the Department's program or activity.
            (3) Making efforts to identify and notify the affected state, areawide, regional, and local officials and entities in those states that have not adopted a process under the Order or do not select the Department's program or activity;
            (4) Responding pursuant to § 100.10 of this part if the Secretary receives a recommendation from a designated areawide agency transmitted by a single point of contact, in cases in which the review, coordination, and communication with the Department have been delegated.
            (b) The Secretary uses the procedures in § 100.10 if a state process provides a state process recommendation to the Department through a single point of contact.
          
          
            § 100.12
            How may a state simplify, consolidate, or substitute federally required state plans?
            (a) As used in this section:
            (1) Simplify means that a state may develop its own format, choose its own submission date, and select the planning period for a state plan.
            (2) Consolidate means that a state may meet statutory and regulatory requirements by combining two or more plans into one document and that the state can select the format, submission date, and planning period for the consolidated plan.
            (3) Substitute means that a state may use a plan or other document that it has developed for its own purposes to meet Federal requirements.
            (b) If not inconsistent with law, a state may decide to try to simplify, consolidate, or substitute federally required state plans without prior approval by the Secretary.
            (c) The Secretary reviews each state plan that a state has simplified, consolidated, or substituted and accepts the plan only if its contents meet Federal requirements.
          
          
            § 100.13
            May the Secretary waive any provision of these regulations?
            In an emergency, the Secretary may waive any provision of these regulations.
          
        
        
          Pt. 101
          PART 101—DESCRIBING AGENCY NEEDS
          
            
              Subpart A—Health Resources Priorities and Allocations System
              
                General
                Sec.
                101.1
                Purpose.
                101.2
                Priorities and allocations authority.
                101.3
                Program eligibility.
              
            
            
              
              Subpart B—Definitions
              101.20
              Definitions.
            
            
              Subpart C—Placement of Rated Orders
              101.30
              Delegations of authority.
              101.31
              Priority ratings.
              101.32
              Elements of a rated order.
              101.33
              Acceptance and rejection of rated orders.
              101.34
              Preferential scheduling.
              101.35
              Extension of priority ratings.
              101.36
              Changes or cancellations of priority ratings and rated orders.
              101.37
              Use of rated orders.
              101.38
              Limitations on placing rated orders.
            
            
              Subpart D—Special Priorities Assistance
              101.40
              General provisions.
              101.41
              Requests for priority rating authority.
              101.42
              Examples of assistance.
              101.43
              Criteria for assistance.
              101.44
              Instances where assistance may not be provided.
            
            
              Subpart E—Allocation Actions
              101.50
              Policy.
              101.51
              General procedures.
              101.52
              Controlling the general distribution of a material in the civilian market.
              101.53
              Types of allocation orders.
              101.54
              Elements of an allocation order.
              101.55
              Mandatory acceptance of an allocation order.
              101.56
              Changes or cancellations of an allocation order.
            
            
              Subpart F—Official Actions
              101.60
              General provisions.
              101.61
              Rating Authorizations.
              101.62
              Directives.
              101.63
              Letters and Memoranda of Understanding.
            
            
              Subpart G—Compliance
              101.70
              General provisions.
              101.71
              Audits and investigations.
              101.72
              Compulsory process.
              101.73
              Notification of failure to comply.
              101.74
              Violations, penalties, and remedies.
              101.75
              Compliance conflicts.
            
            
              Subpart H—Adjustments, Exceptions, and Appeals
              101.80
              Adjustments or exceptions.
              101.81
              Appeals.
            
            
              Subpart I—Miscellaneous Provisions
              101.90
              Protection against claims.
              101.91
              Records and reports.
              101.92
              Applicability of this part and official actions.
              101.93
              Communications.
            
          
          
            Authority:
            50 U.S.C. App. 2061-2171;
          
          
            Source:
            80 FR 42413, July 17, 2015, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            Subpart A—Health Resources Priorities and Allocations System
            
              General
              
                § 101.1
                Purpose.
                This section provides guidance and procedures for use of Defense Production Act (DPA) of 1950 Section 101(a) priorities and allocations authority with respect to all forms of health resources necessary or appropriate to promote the national defense. The guidance and procedures in this part are consistent with the guidance and procedures provided in other regulations that, as a whole, form the Federal Priorities and Allocations System. Guidance and procedures for use of the DPA priorities and allocations authority with respect to other types of resources are provided for: food resources, food resource facilities, and the domestic distribution of farm equipment and commercial fertilizer in7 CFR part 700; energy supplies in 10 CFR part 217; all forms of civil transportation in 49 CFR part 33; water resources in 32 CFR part 555; and all other materials, services, and facilities, including construction materials in the Defense Priorities and Allocations System (DPAS) regulation (15 CFR part 700).
              
              
                § 101.2
                Priorities and allocations authority.

                (a) Section 201 of E.O. 13603, delegates the President's authority under Section 101 of the DPA. DPA Section 101 provides the President with authority to require acceptance and priority performance of contracts and orders (other than contracts of employment) to promote the national defense over performance of any other contracts or orders, and to allocate materials, services, and facilities as deemed necessary or appropriate to promote the national defense to a number of agencies. Section 201 of E.O. 13603 delegates the President's authority to specific agencies as follows:
                (1) The Secretary of Agriculture with respect to food resources, food resource facilities, livestock resources, veterinary resources, plant health resources, and the domestic distribution of farm equipment and commercial fertilizer;
                (2) The Secretary of Energy with respect to all forms of energy;
                (3) The Secretary of Health and Human Services with respect to health resources;
                (4) The Secretary of Transportation with respect to all forms of civil transportation;
                (5) The Secretary of Defense with respect to water resources; and
                (6) The Secretary of Commerce for all other materials, services, and facilities, including construction materials.
                (b) Section 202(a) of E.O. 13603 states that the priorities and allocations authority delegated in Section 201 of that Executive Order may be used only to support programs that have been determined in writing as necessary or appropriate to promote the national defense:
                (1) By the Secretary of Defense with respect to military production and construction, military assistance to foreign nations, military use of civil transportation, stockpiles managed by the Department of Defense, space, and directly related activities;
                (2) By the Secretary of Energy with respect to energy production and construction, distribution and use, and directly related activities; and
                (3) By the Secretary of Homeland Security with respect to all other national defense programs, including civil defense and continuity of Government.
                (c) Section 201(e) of E.O. 13603 provides that each department that is delegated priorities and allocations authority under Section 201(a) of E.O. 13603 may use this authority with respect to control of the general distribution of any material (including applicable services) in the civilian market only after:
                (1) Making the finding required under Section 101(b) of the DPA; and
                (2) The finding has been approved by the President.
                (d) Priorities authorities (and other authorities delegated to the Secretary in E.O. 13603 but not covered by this regulation) have been re-delegated by the Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (the “ASPR”). The Secretary retains the authority for allocations.
              
              
                § 101.3
                Program eligibility.

                Certain programs to promote the national defense are eligible for priorities and allocations support. These include programs for military and energy production or construction, military or critical infrastructure assistance to any foreign nation, deployment and sustainment of military forces, homeland security, stockpiling, space, and any directly related activity. Other eligible programs include emergency preparedness activities conducted pursuant to Title VI of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act [42 U.S.C. 5195 et seq.] and critical infrastructure protection and restoration.
              
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Definitions
            
              § 101.20
              Definitions.
              The following definitions pertain to all sections of this part:
              
                Allocation means the control of the distribution of materials, services, or facilities for a purpose deemed necessary or appropriate to promote the national defense.
              
                Allocation order means an official action to control the distribution of materials, services, or facilities for a purpose deemed necessary or appropriate to promote the national defense.
              
                Allotment means an official action that specifies the maximum quantity or use of a material, service, or facility authorized for a specific use to promote the national defense.
              
                Approved program means a program determined by the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, or the Secretary of Homeland Security to be necessary or appropriate to promote the national defense, in accordance with Section 202 of E.O. 13603.
              
                Construction means the erection, addition, extension, or alteration of any building, structure, or project, using materials or products which are to be an integral and permanent part of the building, structure, or project. Construction does not include maintenance and repair.
              
                Critical infrastructure means any systems and assets, whether physical or cyber-based, so vital to the United States that the degradation or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on national security, including, but not limited to, national economic security and national public health or safety.
              
                Defense Production Act or DPA means the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2061 et seq.).
              
                Delegate agency means a Federal government agency authorized by delegation from HHS to place priority ratings on contracts or orders needed to support approved programs.
              
                Directive means an official action that requires a person to take or refrain from taking certain actions in accordance with its provisions.
              
                Emergency preparedness means all those activities and measures designed or undertaken to prepare for or minimize the effects of a hazard upon the civilian population, to deal with the immediate emergency conditions which would be created by the hazard, and to effectuate emergency repairs to, or the emergency restoration of, vital utilities and facilities destroyed or damaged by the hazard. “Emergency Preparedness” includes the following:
              (1) Measures to be undertaken in preparation for anticipated hazards (including the establishment of appropriate organizations, operational plans, and supporting agreements, the recruitment and training of personnel, the conduct of research, the procurement and stockpiling of necessary materials and supplies, the provision of suitable warning systems, the construction or preparation of shelters, shelter areas, and control centers, and, when appropriate, the nonmilitary evacuation of the civilian population).
              (2) Measures to be undertaken during a hazard (including the enforcement of passive defense regulations prescribed by duly established military or civil authorities, the evacuation of personnel to shelter areas, the control of traffic and panic, and the control and use of lighting and civil communications).
              (3) Measures to be undertaken following a hazard (including activities for firefighting; rescue; emergency medical, health and sanitation services; monitoring for specific dangers of special weapons; unexploded bomb reconnaissance; essential debris clearance; emergency welfare measures; and immediately essential emergency repair or restoration of damaged vital facilities).
              
                Facilities includes all types of buildings, structures, or other improvements to real property (but excluding farms, churches or other places of worship, and private dwelling houses), and services relating to the use of any such building, structure, or other improvement.
              
                Farm equipment means equipment, machinery, and repair parts manufactured for use on farms in connection with the production or preparation for market use of Food resources.
              
                Fertilizer means any product or combination of products that contain one or more of the elements—nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium—for use as a plant nutrient.
              
                Food resource facilities means plants, machinery, vehicles (including on-farm), and other facilities required for the production, processing, distribution, and storage (including cold storage) of food resources, and for the domestic distribution of farm equipment and fertilizer (excluding transportation thereof).
              
                Food resources means all commodities and products, (simple, mixed, or compound), or complements to such commodities or products, that are capable of being ingested by either human beings or animals, irrespective of other uses to which such commodities or products may be put, at all stages of processing from the raw commodity to the products thereof in vendible form for human or animal consumption. “Food Resources” also means potable water packaged in commercially marketable containers, all starches, sugars, vegetable and animal or marine fats and oils, seed, cotton, hemp, and flax fiber, but does not mean any such material after it loses its identity as an agricultural commodity or agricultural product.
              
              
                Hazard means an emergency or disaster resulting from:
              (1) A natural disaster; or
              (2) An accidental or human-caused event.
              
                Health resources means drugs, biological products, medical devices, materials, facilities, health supplies, services and equipment required to diagnose, mitigate or prevent the impairment of, improve, treat, cure, or restore the physical or mental health conditions of the population.
              
                Homeland Security includes efforts—
              (1) To prevent terrorist attacks within the United States;
              (2) To reduce the vulnerability of the United States to terrorism;
              (3) To minimize damage from a terrorist attack in the United States; and
              (4) To recover from a terrorist attack in the United States.
              
                Industrial Resource means all materials, services, and facilities, including construction materials, but not including: Food resources, food resource facilities, and the domestic distribution of farm equipment and commercial fertilizer; all forms of health resources; all forms of civil transportation; and water resources.
              
                Item means any raw, in process, or manufactured material, article, commodity, supply, equipment, component, accessory, part, assembly, or product of any kind, technical information, process, or service.
              
                Maintenance and Repair and Operating Supplies (MRO) includes the following—
              (1) “Maintenance” is the upkeep necessary to continue any plant, facility, or equipment in working condition.
              (2) “Repair” is the restoration of any plant, facility, or equipment to working condition when it has been rendered unsafe or unfit for service by wear and tear, damage, or failure of parts.
              (3) “Operating Supplies” are any resources carried as operating supplies according to a person's established accounting practice. “Operating Supplies” may include hand tools and expendable tools, jigs, dies, fixtures used on production equipment, lubricants, cleaners, chemicals and other expendable items.
              (4) MRO does not include items produced or obtained for sale to other persons or for installation upon or attachment to the property of another person, or items required for the production of such items; items needed for the replacement of any plant, facility, or equipment; or items for the improvement of any plant, facility, or equipment by replacing items which are still in working condition with items of a new or different kind, quality, or design.
              
                Materials includes—
              (1) Any raw materials (including minerals, metals, and advanced processed materials), commodities, articles, components (including critical components), products, and items of supply;
              (2) Any technical information or services ancillary to the use of any such materials, commodities, articles, components, products, or items; and
              (3) Natural resources such as oil and gas.
              
                National defense means programs for military and health resources production or construction, military or critical infrastructure assistance to any foreign nation, homeland security, stockpiling, space, and any directly related activity. Such term includes emergency preparedness activities conducted pursuant to title VI of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5195, et seq.) and critical infrastructure protection and restoration.
              
                Official action means an action taken by the Department of Health and Human Services or another resource agency under the authority of the Defense Production Act, E.O.13603, and this part or another regulation under the Federal Priorities and Allocations System. Such actions include the issuance of Rating Authorizations, Directives, Set Asides, Allotments, Letters of Understanding, Memoranda of Understanding, and Demands for Information, Inspection Authorizations, and Administrative Subpoenas.
              
                Person includes an individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other organized group of persons, or legal successor or representative thereof, or any State or local government or agency thereof.
              
                Rated order means a prime contract, a subcontract, or a purchase order in support of an approved program issued in accordance with the provisions of this part.
              
                Resource agency means any agency delegated priorities and allocations authority as specified in § 101.2.
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
              
                Services includes any effort that is needed for or incidental to—
              (1) The development, production, processing, distribution, delivery, or use of an industrial resource or a critical technology item;
              (2) The construction of facilities;
              (3) The movement of individuals and property by all modes of civil transportation; or
              (4) Other national defense programs and activities.
              
                Set-aside means an official action that requires a person to reserve materials, services, or facilities capacity in anticipation of the receipt of rated orders.
              
                Stafford Act means title VI (Emergency Preparedness) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5195-5197h).
              
                Water resources means all usable water, from all sources, within the jurisdiction of the United States, that can be managed, controlled, and allocated to meet emergency requirements, except “water resources does not include usable water that qualifies as “food resources”.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Placement of Rated Orders
            
              § 101.30
              Delegations of authority.
              The priorities and allocations authorities of the President under Title I of the DPA with respect to all forms of health resources have been delegated to the Secretary under E.O. 13603. The Secretary may re-delegate the Secretary's priority rating activities under the DPA though the allocations authority provided to the Secretary is not subject to delegation per Section 201(e) of E.O. 13603.
            
            
              § 101.31
              Priority ratings.
              (a) Levels of priority. (1) There are two levels of priority established by Federal Priorities and Allocations System regulations, identified by the rating symbols “DO” and “DX”.
              (2) All DO-rated orders have equal priority with each other and take precedence over unrated orders. All DX-rated orders have equal priority with each other and take precedence over DO-rated orders and unrated orders. (For resolution of conflicts among rated orders of equal priority, see § 101.34(c).)
              (3) In addition, a Directive regarding priority treatment for a given item issued by the Department of Health and Human Services for that item takes precedence over any DX-rated order, DO-rated order, or unrated order, as stipulated in the Directive. (For a full discussion of Directives, see § 101. 62.
              (b) Program identification symbols. Program identification symbols, such as “DO-HR”, or “DX-HR”, indicate which approved program is being supported by a rated order. Programs may be approved under the procedures of E.O. 13603 Section 202 at any time. Program identification symbols do not connote any priority.
              (c) Priority ratings. A priority rating consists of the rating symbol—DO or DX—and the program identification symbol, such as DO-HR or DX-HR.
            
            
              § 101.32
              Elements of a rated order.
              Each rated order must include:
              (a) The appropriate priority rating (e.g. DO-HR or DX-HR);

              (b) A required delivery date or dates. The words “immediately” or “as soon as possible” do not constitute a delivery date. A “requirements contract”, “basic ordering agreement”, “prime vendor contract”, or similar procurement document bearing a priority rating may contain no specific delivery date or dates and may provide for the furnishing of items or service from time-to-time or within a stated period against specific purchase orders, such as “calls”, “requisitions”, and “delivery orders”. These purchase orders must specify a required delivery date or dates and are to be considered as rated as of the date of their receipt by the supplier and not as of the date of the original procurement document;
              
              (c) The written signature on a manually placed order, or the digital signature or name on an electronically placed order, of an individual authorized to sign rated orders for the person placing the order. The signature or use of the name certifies that the rated order is authorized under this part and that the requirements of this part are being followed; and
              (d)(1) A statement that reads in substance:
              
              
                This is a rated order certified for national defense use, and you are required to follow all the provisions of the Health Resources Priorities and Allocations System regulation at 45 CFR part 101.
              
              
              (2) If the rated order is placed in support of emergency preparedness requirements and expedited action is necessary and appropriate to meet these requirements, the following sentences should be added following the statement set forth in paragraph (d)(1) of this section:
              (i) This rated order is placed for the purpose of emergency preparedness. It must be accepted or rejected within two (2) days after receipt of the order if:
              (A) The order is issued in response to a hazard that has occurred; or
              (B) If the order is issued to prepare for an imminent hazard, as specified in HRPAS § 101.33(e).
              (ii) [Reserved]
            
            
              § 101.33
              Acceptance and rejection of rated orders.
              (a) Mandatory acceptance. (1) Except as otherwise specified in this section, a person shall accept every rated order received and must fill such orders regardless of any other rated or unrated orders that have been accepted.
              (2) A person shall not discriminate against rated orders in any manner such as by charging higher prices or by imposing different terms and conditions than for comparable unrated orders.
              (b) Mandatory rejection. Unless otherwise directed by HHS for a rated order involving all forms of health resources:
              (1) A person shall not accept a rated order for delivery on a specific date if unable to fill the order by that date. However, the person must inform the customer of the earliest date on which delivery can be made and offer to accept the order on the basis of that date. Scheduling conflicts with previously accepted lower rated or unrated orders are not sufficient reason for rejection under this section.
              (2) A person shall not accept a DO-rated order for delivery on a date which would interfere with delivery of any previously accepted DO- or DX-rated orders. However, the person must offer to accept the order based on the earliest delivery date otherwise possible.
              (3) A person shall not accept a DX-rated order for delivery on a date which would interfere with delivery of any previously accepted DX-rated orders, but must offer to accept the order based on the earliest delivery date otherwise possible.
              (4) If a person is unable to fill all of the rated orders of equal priority status received on the same day, the person must accept, based upon the earliest delivery dates, only those orders which can be filled, and reject the other orders. For example, a person must accept order A requiring delivery on December 15 before accepting order B requiring delivery on December 31. However, the person must offer to accept the rejected orders based on the earliest delivery dates otherwise possible.
              (c) Optional rejection. Unless otherwise directed by HHS for a rated order involving all forms of health resources, rated orders may be rejected in any of the following cases as long as a supplier does not discriminate among customers:
              (1) If the person placing the order is unwilling or unable to meet regularly established terms of sale or payment;
              (2) If the order is for an item not supplied or for a service not capable of being performed;

              (3) If the order is for an item or service produced, acquired, or provided only for the supplier's own use for which no orders have been filled for two years prior to the date of receipt of the rated order. If, however, a supplier has sold some of these items or provided similar services, the supplier is obligated to accept rated orders up to that quantity or portion of production or service, whichever is greater, sold or provided within the past two years;
              (4) If the person placing the rated order, other than the U.S. Government, makes the item or performs the service being ordered;
              (5) If acceptance of a rated order or performance against a rated order would violate any other regulation, official action, or order of the HHS issued under the authority of the DPA or another relevant statute.
              (d) Customer notification requirements. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a person must accept or reject a rated order in writing or electronically within fifteen (15) working days after receipt of a DO-rated order and within ten (10) working days after receipt of a DX-rated order. If the order is rejected, the person must give reasons in writing or electronically for the rejection.
              (2) If a person has accepted a rated order and subsequently finds that shipment or performance will be delayed, the person must notify the customer immediately, give the reasons for the delay, and advise of a new shipment or performance date. If notification is given verbally, written or electronic confirmation must be provided within five (5) working days.
              (e) Exception for emergency response conditions. If the rated order is placed for the purpose of emergency preparedness, a person must accept or reject a rated order and transmit the acceptance or rejection in writing or in an electronic format within two (2) days after receipt of the order if:
              (1) The order is issued in response to a hazard that has occurred; or
              (2) The order is issued to prepare for an imminent hazard.
            
            
              § 101.34
              Preferential scheduling.
              (a) A person must schedule operations, including the acquisition of all needed production items or services, in a timely manner to satisfy the delivery requirements of each rated order. Modifying production or delivery schedules is necessary only when required delivery dates for rated orders cannot otherwise be met.
              (b) DO-rated orders must be given production preference over unrated orders, if necessary to meet required delivery dates, even if this requires the diversion of items being processed or ready for delivery or services being performed against unrated orders. Similarly, DX-rated orders must be given preference over DO-rated orders and unrated orders. (Examples: If a person receives a DO-rated order with a delivery date of June 3 and if meeting that date would mean delaying production or delivery of an item for an unrated order, the unrated order must be delayed. If a DX-rated order is received calling for delivery on July 15 and a person has a DO-rated order requiring delivery on June 2 and operations can be scheduled to meet both deliveries, there is no need to alter production schedules to give any additional preference to the DX-rated order.)
              (c) Conflicting rated orders. (1) If a person finds that delivery or performance against any accepted rated orders conflicts with the delivery or performance against other accepted rated orders of equal priority status, the person shall give precedence to the conflicting orders in the sequence in which they are to be delivered or performed (not to the receipt dates). If the conflicting orders are scheduled to be delivered or performed on the same day, the person shall give precedence to those orders that have the earliest receipt dates.
              (2) If a person is unable to resolve rated order delivery or performance conflicts under this section, the person should promptly seek special priorities assistance as provided in §§ 101.40 through 101.44. If the person's customer objects to the rescheduling of delivery or performance of a rated order, the customer should promptly seek special priorities assistance as provided in §§ 101.40 through 101.44. For any rated order against which delivery or performance will be delayed, the person must notify the customer as provided in § 101.33(d)(2).
              (d) If a person is unable to purchase needed production items in time to fill a rated order by its required delivery date, the person must fill the rated order by using inventoried production items. A person who uses inventoried items to fill a rated order may replace those items with the use of a rated order as provided in § 101.37(b).
            
            
              
              § 101.35
              Extension of priority ratings.
              (a) A person must use rated orders with suppliers to obtain items or services needed to fill a rated order. The person must use the priority rating indicated on the customer's rated order, except as otherwise provided in this part or as directed by the Department of Health and Human Services.
              (b) The priority rating must be included on each successive order placed to obtain items or services needed to fill a customer's rated order. This continues from contractor to subcontractor to supplier throughout the entire procurement chain.
            
            
              § 101.36
              Changes or cancellations of priority ratings and rated orders.
              (a) The priority rating on a rated order may be changed or canceled by:
              (1) An official action of HHS; or
              (2) Written notification from the originating agency that placed the rated order.
              (b) If an unrated order is amended so as to make it a rated order, or a DO rating is changed to a DX rating, the supplier must give the appropriate preferential treatment to the order as of the date the change is received by the supplier.
              (c) An amendment to a rated order that significantly alters a supplier's original production or delivery schedule shall constitute a new rated order as of the date of its receipt. The supplier must accept or reject the amended order according to the provisions of § 101.33.
              (d) The following amendments do not constitute a new rated order: a change in shipping destination; a reduction in the total amount of the order; an increase in the total amount of the order which has negligible impact upon deliveries; a minor variation in size or design; or a change which is agreed upon between the supplier and the customer.
              (e) If a person no longer needs items or services to fill a rated order, any rated orders placed with suppliers for the items or services, or the priority rating on those orders, must be canceled.
              (f) When a priority rating is added to an unrated order, or is changed or canceled, all suppliers must be promptly notified in writing.
            
            
              § 101.37
              Use of rated orders.
              (a) A person must use rated orders to obtain:
              (1) Items which will be physically incorporated into other items to fill rated orders, including that portion of such items normally consumed or converted into scrap or by-products in the course of processing;
              (2) Containers or other packaging materials required to make delivery of the finished items against rated orders;
              (3) Services, other than contracts of employment, needed to fill rated orders; and
              (4) MRO needed to produce the finished items to fill rated orders.
              (b) A person may use a rated order to replace inventoried items (including finished items) if such items were used to fill rated orders, as follows:
              (1) The order must be placed within 90 days of the date of use of the inventory.
              (2) A DO rating and the program identification symbol indicated on the customer's rated order must be used on the order. A DX rating may not be used even if the inventory was used to fill a DX-rated order.

              (3) If the priority ratings on rated orders from one customer or several customers contain different program identification symbols, the rated orders may be combined. In this case, the program identification symbol “H1” must be used (i.e., DO-H1).

              (c) A person may combine DX- and DO-rated orders from one customer or several customers if the items or services covered by each level of priority are identified separately and clearly. If different program identification symbols are indicated on those rated orders of equal priority, the person must use the program identification symbol “H1” (i.e., DO-H1 or DX-H1).
              (d) Combining rated and unrated orders. (1) A person may combine rated and unrated order quantities on one purchase order provided that:
              (i) The rated quantities are separately and clearly identified; and

              (ii) The four elements of a rated order, as required by § 101.32, are included on the order with the statement required in § 101.32(d) modified to read in substance:
              
              
                
                This purchase order contains rated order quantities certified for national defense use, and you are required to follow all applicable provisions of the Health Resources Priorities and Allocations System regulations at 45 CFR part 101, subpart A, only as it pertains to the rated quantities.
              
              
              (2) A supplier must accept or reject the rated portion of the purchase order as provided in § 101.33 and give preferential treatment only to the rated quantities as required by this part. This part may not be used to require preferential treatment for the unrated portion of the order.
              (3) Any supplier who believes that rated and unrated orders are being combined in a manner contrary to the intent of this part or in a fashion that causes undue or exceptional hardship may submit a request for adjustment or exception under § 101.80.
              (e) A person may place a rated order for the minimum commercially procurable quantity even if the quantity needed to fill a rated order is less than that minimum. However, a person must combine rated orders as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, if possible, to obtain minimum procurable quantities.
              (f) A person is not required to place a priority rating on an order for less than one-half of the Simplified Acquisition Threshold (as established in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) (see 48 CFR 2.101) or in other authorized acquisition regulatory or management systems) whichever amount is greater, provided that delivery can be obtained in a timely fashion without the use of the priority rating.
            
            
              § 101.38
              Limitations on placing rated orders.
              (a) General limitations. (1) A person may not place a DO- or DX-rated order unless entitled to do so under this part.
              (2) Rated orders may not be used to obtain:
              (i) Delivery on a date earlier than needed;
              (ii) A greater quantity of the item or services than needed, except to obtain a minimum procurable quantity. Separate rated orders may not be placed solely for the purpose of obtaining minimum procurable quantities on each order;
              (iii) Items or services in advance of the receipt of a rated order, except as specifically authorized by HHS (see § 101.41(c) for information on obtaining authorization for a priority rating in advance of a rated order);
              (iv) Items that are not needed to fill a rated order, except as specifically authorized by HHS, or as otherwise permitted by this part; or
              (v) Any of the following items unless specific priority rating authority has been obtained from HHS, a Delegate Agency, or the Department of Commerce, as appropriate:
              (A) Items for plant improvement, expansion, or construction, unless they will be physically incorporated into a construction project covered by a rated order; and
              (B) Production or construction equipment or items to be used for the manufacture of production equipment. [For information on requesting priority rating authority, see § 101.41.]
              (vi) Any items related to the development of chemical or biological warfare capabilities or the production of chemical or biological weapons, unless such development or production has been authorized by the President or the Secretary of Defense. This provision does not however prohibit the use of the priority and allocations authority to acquire or produce qualified countermeasures that are necessary to treat, identify, or prevent harm from any biological or chemical agent that may cause a public health emergency affecting national security.
              (b) Jurisdictional limitations. Unless authorized by the resource agency with jurisdiction, the provisions of this part are not applicable to the following resources:
              (1) Food resources, food resource facilities, and the domestic distribution of farm equipment and commercial fertilizer (Resource agency with jurisdiction—Department of Agriculture);
              (2) Energy supplies (Resource agency with jurisdiction—Department of Energy);

              (3) All forms of civil transportation (Resource agency with jurisdiction—Department of Transportation);
              
              (4) Water resources (Resource agency with jurisdiction—Department of Defense/U.S. Army Corps of Engineers); and
              (5) Communications services (Resource agency with jurisdiction— National Communications System under E.O. 12472 of April 3, 1984).
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Special Priorities Assistance
            
              § 101.40
              General provisions.
              (a) The six regulations that comprise the Federal Priorities and Allocations System are designed to be largely self-executing. However, from time-to-time production or delivery problems will arise in connection with rated orders for health resources as covered under this part. In this event, a person should immediately contact the Secretary for guidance, as specified in § 101.93. If the HHS is unable to resolve the problem or to authorize the use of a priority rating and believes additional assistance is warranted, HHS may forward the request to another agency with resource jurisdiction, or the Department of Commerce, as appropriate, for action. Special priorities assistance is provided to alleviate problems that do arise.
              (b) Special priorities assistance is available for any reason consistent with this part. Generally, special priorities assistance is provided to expedite deliveries, resolve delivery conflicts, place rated orders, locate suppliers, or to verify information supplied by customers and vendors. Special priorities assistance may also be used to request rating authority for items that are not normally eligible for priority treatment.
              (c) A request for special priorities assistance or priority rating authority must be submitted to the Secretary, as specified in § 101.93.
            
            
              § 101.41
              Requests for priority rating authority.
              (a) If a rated order is likely to be delayed because a person is unable to obtain items or services not normally rated under this part, the person may request the authority to use a priority rating in ordering the needed items or services.
              (b) Rating authority for production or construction equipment. (1) A request for priority rating authority for production or construction equipment must be submitted to the U.S. Department of Commerce on Form BIS-999.
              (2) When the use of a priority rating is authorized for the procurement of production or construction equipment, a rated order may be used either to purchase or to lease such equipment. However, in the latter case, the equipment may be leased only from a person engaged in the business of leasing such equipment or from a person willing to lease rather than sell.
              (c) Rating authority in advance of a rated prime contract. (1) In certain cases and upon specific request, the Department of Health and Human Services, in order to promote the national defense, may authorize a person to place a priority rating on an order to a supplier in advance of the issuance of a rated prime contract. In these instances, the person requesting advance-rating authority must obtain sponsorship of the request from the Department of Health and Human Services or the appropriate Delegate Agency. The person shall also assume any business risk associated with the placing of rated orders in the event the rated prime contract is not issued.

              (2) The person must state the following in the request:
              
              
                It is understood that the authorization of a priority rating in advance of our receiving a rated prime contract from the Department of Health and Human Services and our use of that priority rating with our suppliers in no way commits the Department of Health and Human Services or any other government agency to enter into a contract or order or to expend funds. Further, we understand that the Federal Government shall not be liable for any cancellation charges, termination costs, or other damages that may accrue if a rated prime contract is not eventually placed and, as a result, we must subsequently cancel orders placed with the use of the priority rating authorized as a result of this request.
              
              
              (3) In reviewing requests for rating authority in advance of a rated prime contract, HHS will consider, among other things, the following criteria:

              (i) The probability that the prime contract will be awarded;
              
              (ii) The impact of the resulting rated orders on suppliers and on other authorized programs;
              (iii) Whether the contractor is the sole source;
              (iv) Whether the item being produced has a long lead time;
              (v) The time period for which the rating is being requested.
              (4) The HHS may require periodic reports on the use of the rating authority granted under paragraph (c) of this section.
              (5) If a rated prime contract is not issued, the person shall promptly notify all suppliers who have received rated orders pursuant to the advanced rating authority that the priority rating on those orders is cancelled.
            
            
              § 101.42
              Examples of assistance.
              (a) While special priorities assistance may be provided for any reason in support of this part, it is usually provided in situations where:
              (1) A person is experiencing difficulty in obtaining delivery against a rated order by the required delivery date; or
              (2) A person cannot locate a supplier for an item or service needed to fill a rated order.
              (b) Other examples of special priorities assistance include:
              (1) Ensuring that rated orders receive preferential treatment by suppliers;
              (2) Resolving production or delivery conflicts between various rated orders;
              (3) Assisting in placing rated orders with suppliers;
              (4) Verifying the urgency of rated orders; and
              (5) Determining the validity of rated orders.
            
            
              § 101.43
              Criteria for assistance.

              Requests for special priorities assistance should be timely, i.e., the request has been submitted promptly and enough time exists for HHS, or the agencies to which HHS has delegated its authority to issue rated orders (the “Delegate Agency”), or the Department of Commerce for industrial resources to effect a meaningful resolution to the problem, and must establish that:
              (a) There is an urgent need for the item; and
              (b) The applicant has made a reasonable effort to resolve the problem.
            
            
              § 101.44
              Instances where assistance may not be provided.
              Special priorities assistance is provided at the discretion of HHS or the Delegate Agency when it is determined that such assistance is warranted to meet the objectives of this part. Examples where assistance may not be provided include situations when a person is attempting to:
              (a) Secure a price advantage;
              (b) Obtain delivery prior to the time required to fill a rated order;
              (c) Gain competitive advantage;
              (d) Disrupt an industry apportionment program in a manner designed to provide a person with an unwarranted share of scarce items; or
              (e) Overcome a supplier's regularly established terms of sale or conditions of doing business.
            
          
          
            Subpart E—Allocation Actions
            
              § 101.50
              Policy.
              (a) It is the policy of the Federal Government that the allocations authority under title I of the Defense Production Act may:
              (1) Only be used when there is insufficient supply of a material, service, or facility to satisfy national defense supply requirements through the use of the priorities authority or when the use of the priorities authority would cause a severe and prolonged disruption in the supply of materials, services, or facilities available to support normal U.S. economic activities; and
              (2) Not be used to ration materials or services at the retail level.
              (b) Allocation orders, when used, will be distributed equitably among the suppliers of the materials, services, or facilities being allocated and not require any person to relinquish a disproportionate share of the civilian market.
            
            
              § 101.51
              General procedures.

              When HHS plans to execute its allocations authority to address a supply problem within its resource jurisdiction, the Department shall develop a plan that includes the following information:
              
              (a) A copy of the Secretary's finding for Presidential approval made, in accordance with Section 201(e) of E.O. 13603, that the material or materials at issue are scarce and critical materials essential to the national defense and that the requirements for national defense for such material(s) cannot otherwise be met without creating a significant dislocation of the normal distribution of such material(s) in to such a degree as to create appreciable hardship.
              (b) A detailed description of the situation to include any unusual events or circumstances that have created the requirement for an allocation action;
              (c) A statement of the specific objective(s) of the allocation action;
              (d) A list of the materials, services, or facilities to be allocated;
              (e) A list of the sources of the materials, services, or facilities that will be subject to the allocation action;

              (f) A detailed description of the provisions that will be included in the allocation orders, including the type(s) of allocation orders, the percentages or quantity of capacity or output to be allocated for each purpose, and the duration of the allocation action (i.e., anticipated start and end dates);
              (g) An evaluation of the impact of the proposed allocation action on the civilian market; and
              (h) Proposed actions, if any, to mitigate disruptions to civilian market operations.
            
            
              § 101.52
              Controlling the general distribution of a material in the civilian market.
              (a) No allocation action taken by HHS may be used to control the general distribution of a material in the civilian market, unless the Secretary has:
              (1) Made a written finding that:
              (i) Such material is a scarce and critical material essential to the national defense, and
              (ii) The requirements of the national defense for such material cannot otherwise be met without creating a significant dislocation of the normal distribution of such material in the civilian market to such a degree as to create appreciable hardship;
              (2) Submitted the finding for the President's approval through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs; and
              (3) The President has approved the finding.
              (b) The requirements of this section may not delegated by the Secretary (See E.O. 13603, Section 201(e)).
            
            
              § 101.53
              Types of allocation orders.
              There are three types of allocation orders available for communicating allocation actions. These are:
              (a) Set-aside. An official action that requires a person to reserve materials, services, or facilities capacity in anticipation of the receipt of rated orders;
              (b) Directive. An official action that requires a person to take or refrain from taking certain actions in accordance with its provisions. A directive can require a person to: Stop or reduce production of an item; prohibit the use of selected materials, services, or facilities; or divert the use of materials, services, or facilities from one purpose to another; and
              (c) Allotment. An official action that specifies the maximum quantity of a material, service, or facility authorized for a specific use.
            
            
              § 101.54
              Elements of an allocation order.
              Each allocation order must include:
              (a) A detailed description of the required allocation action(s);
              (b) Specific start and end calendar dates for each required allocation action;
              (c) The written signature on a manually placed order, or the digital signature or name on an electronically placed order, of the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The signature or use of the name certifies that the order is authorized under this part and that the requirements of this part are being followed;
              (d) A statement that reads in substance:
              
              
                This is an allocation order certified for national defense use. [Insert the legal name of the person receiving the order] is required to comply with this order, in accordance with the provisions of the Health Resources Priorities and Allocations System regulation (45 CFR part 101, subpart A), which is part of the Federal Priorities and Allocations System; and
              
              
              
              (e) A current copy of the Health Resources Priorities and Allocations System regulation (subpart A of this part).
            
            
              § 101.55
              Mandatory acceptance of an allocation order.
              (a) Except as otherwise specified in this section (see paragraph (c) of this section), a person shall accept and comply with every allocation order received.
              (b) A person shall not discriminate against an allocation order in any manner such as by charging higher prices for materials, services, or facilities covered by the order or by imposing terms and conditions for contracts and orders involving allocated materials, services, or facilities that differ from the person's terms and conditions for contracts and orders for the materials, services, or facilities prior to receiving the allocation order.
              (c) If a person is unable to comply fully with the required action(s) specified in an allocation order, the person must notify the Secretary, as specified in § 101.93, immediately, explain the extent to which compliance is possible, and give the reasons why full compliance is not possible. If notification is given verbally, written or electronic confirmation must be provided within five (5) working days. Such notification does not release the person from complying with the order to the fullest extent possible, until the person is notified by the Department of Health and Human Services that the order has been changed or cancelled.
            
            
              § 101.56
              Changes or cancellations of an allocation order.
              An allocation order may be changed or canceled by an official action of the Department of Health and Human Services.
            
          
          
            Subpart F—Official Actions
            
              § 101.60
              General provisions.
              (a) HHS may take specific official actions to implement the provisions of this subpart.

              (b) These official actions include, but are limited to, Rating Authorizations, Directives, and Memoranda of Understanding (See § 101.20.)
            
            
              § 101.61
              Rating Authorizations.
              (a) A Rating Authorization is an official action granting specific priority rating authority that:
              (1) Permits a person to place a priority rating on an order for an item or service not normally ratable under this part; or
              (2) Authorizes a person to modify a priority rating on a specific order or series of contracts or orders.
              (b) To request priority rating authority, see § 101.41.
            
            
              § 101.62
              Directives.
              (a) A Directive is an official action that requires a person to take or refrain from taking certain actions in accordance with its provisions.
              (b) A person must comply with each Directive issued. However, a person may not use or extend a Directive to obtain any items from a supplier, unless expressly authorized to do so in the Directive.
              (c) A Priorities Directive takes precedence over all DX-rated orders, DO-rated orders, and unrated orders previously or subsequently received, unless a contrary instruction appears in the Directive.
              (d) An Allocations Directive takes precedence over all Priorities Directives, DX-rated orders, DO-rated orders, and unrated orders previously or subsequently received, unless a contrary instruction appears in the Directive.
            
            
              § 101.63
              Letters and Memoranda of Understanding.
              (a) A Letter or Memorandum of Understanding is an official action that may be issued in resolving special priorities assistance cases to reflect an agreement reached by all parties including HHS, the Department of Commerce (if applicable), a Delegate Agency (if applicable), the supplier, and the customer).

              (b) A Letter or Memorandum of Understanding is not used to alter scheduling between rated orders, to authorize the use of priority ratings, to impose restrictions under this part. Rather, Letters or Memoranda of Understanding are used to confirm production or shipping schedules that do not require modifications to other rated orders.
            
          
          
            Subpart G—Compliance
            
              § 101.70
              General provisions.
              (a) HHS may take specific official actions for any reason necessary or appropriate to the enforcement or the administration of the Defense Production Act and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action. Such actions include Administrative Subpoenas, Demands for Information, and Inspection Authorizations.
              (b) Any person who places or receives a rated order or an allocation order must comply with the provisions of this part.
              (c) Willful violation of the provisions of title I or section 705 of the Defense Production Act and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action of the Department of Health and Human Services is a criminal act, punishable as provided in the Defense Production Act and other applicable statutes, and as set forth in § 101.74.
            
            
              § 101.71
              Audits and investigations.
              (a) Audits and investigations are official examinations of books, records, documents, other writings and information to ensure that the provisions of the Defense Production Act and other applicable statutes, this part, and official actions have been properly followed. An audit or investigation may also include interviews and a systems evaluation to detect problems or failures in the implementation of this part.
              (b) When undertaking an audit or investigation, HHS shall:
              (1) Define the scope and purpose in the official action given to the person under investigation; and
              (2) Have ascertained that the information sought or other adequate and authoritative data are not available from any Federal or other responsible agency.
              (c) In administering this part, HHS may issue the following documents that constitute official actions:
              (1) Administrative Subpoenas. An Administrative Subpoena requires a person to appear as a witness before an official designated by HHS to testify under oath on matters of which that person has knowledge relating to the enforcement or the administration of the Defense Production Act and other applicable statutes, this part, or official actions. An Administrative Subpoena may also require the production of books, papers, records, documents and physical objects or property.
              (2) Demands for Information. A Demand for Information requires a person to furnish to a duly authorized representative of HHS any information necessary or appropriate to the enforcement or the administration of the Defense Production Act and other applicable statutes, this part, or official actions.
              (3) Inspection Authorizations. An Inspection Authorization requires a person to permit a duly authorized representative of HHS to interview the person's employees or agents, to inspect books, records, documents, other writings, and information, including electronically-stored information, in the person's possession or control at the place where that person usually keeps them or otherwise, and to inspect a person's property when such interviews and inspections are necessary or appropriate to the enforcement or the administration of the Defense Production Act and related statutes, this part, or official actions.
              (d) The production of books, records, documents, other writings, and information will not be required at any place other than where they are usually kept, if, prior to the return date specified in the Administrative Subpoena or Demand for Information, a duly authorized official of HHS is furnished with copies of such material that are certified under oath to be true copies. As an alternative, a duly authorized representative of HHS may enter into a stipulation with a person as to the content of the material.

              (e) An Administrative Subpoena, Demand for Information, or Inspection Authorization, shall include the name, title, or official position of the person to be served, the evidence sought to be adduced, and its general relevance to the scope and purpose of the audit, investigation, or other inquiry. If employees or agents are to be interviewed; if books, records, documents, other writings, or information are to be produced; or if property is to be inspected; the Administrative Subpoena, Demand for Information, or Inspection Authorization will describe them with particularity.
              (f) Service of documents shall be made in the following manner:
              (1) Service of a Demand for Information or Inspection Authorization shall be made personally, or by Certified Mail-Return Receipt Requested at the person's last known address. Service of an Administrative Subpoena shall be made personally. Personal service may also be made by leaving a copy of the document with someone at least 18 years old at the person's last known dwelling or place of business.
              (2) Service upon other than an individual may be made by serving a partner, corporate officer, or a managing or general agent authorized by appointment or by law to accept service of process. If an agent is served, a copy of the document shall be mailed to the person named in the document.
              (3) Any individual 18 years of age or over may serve an Administrative Subpoena, Demand for Information, or Inspection Authorization. When personal service is made, the individual making the service shall prepare an affidavit as to the manner in which service was made and the identity of the person served, and return the affidavit, and in the case of subpoenas, the original document, to the issuing officer. In case of failure to make service, the reasons for the failure shall be stated on the original document.
            
            
              § 101.72
              Compulsory process.
              (a) If a person refuses to permit a duly authorized representative of the Department of Health and Human Services to have access to any premises or to the source of information necessary to the administration or the enforcement of the Defense Production Act and other applicable statutes, this part, or official actions, HHS, through its authorized representative may seek compulsory process. Compulsory process means the institution of appropriate legal action, including ex parte application for an inspection warrant or its equivalent, in any forum of appropriate jurisdiction.
              (b) Compulsory process may be sought in advance of an audit, investigation, or other inquiry, if, in the judgment of the Secretary there is reason to believe that a person will refuse to permit an audit, investigation, or other inquiry, or that other circumstances exist which make such process desirable or necessary.
            
            
              § 101.73
              Notification of failure to comply.
              (a) At the conclusion of an audit, investigation, or other inquiry, or at any other time, HHS may inform the person in writing of HHS's position regarding that person's non-compliance with the requirements of the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action.
              (b) In cases where HHS determines that failure to comply with the provisions of the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action was inadvertent, the person may be informed in writing of the particulars involved and the corrective action to be taken. Failure to take corrective action may then be construed as a willful violation of DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action.
            
            
              § 101.74
              Violations, penalties, and remedies.
              (a) Willful violation of the provisions of the DPA, the priorities provisions of the Selective Service Act and related statutes (when applicable), this part, or an official action, is a crime and upon conviction, a person may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both. The maximum penalties provided by the DPA are a $10,000 fine, or one year in prison, or both. The maximum penalties provided by the Selective Service Act and related statutes are a $50,000 fine, or three years in prison, or both.
              (b) The Government may also seek an injunction from a court of appropriate jurisdiction to prohibit the continuance of any violation of, or to enforce compliance with, the DPA, this part, or an official action.

              (c) In order to secure the effective enforcement of the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, and official actions, the following are prohibited:
              
              (1) No person may solicit, influence or permit another person to perform any act prohibited by, or to omit any act required by, the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action.
              (2) No person may conspire or act in concert with any other person to perform any act prohibited by, or to omit any act required by, the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action.
              (3) No person shall deliver any item if the person knows or has reason to believe that the item will be accepted, redelivered, held, or used in violation of the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action. In such instances, the person must immediately notify HHS that, in accordance with this provision, delivery has not been made.
            
            
              § 101.75
              Compliance conflicts.
              If compliance with any provision of the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action would prevent a person from filling a rated order or from complying with another provision of the DPA and other applicable statutes, this part, or an official action, the person must immediately notify the Secretary, as specified in § 101.93, for resolution of the conflict.
            
          
          
            Subpart H—Adjustments, Exceptions, and Appeals
            
              § 101.80
              Adjustments or exceptions.
              (a) A person may submit a request to the Secretary for an adjustment or exception on the ground that:
              (1) A provision of this part or an official action results in an undue or exceptional hardship on that person not suffered generally by others in similar situations and circumstances; or
              (2) The consequences of following a provision of this part or an official action are contrary to the intent of the DPA and other applicable statutes, or this part.
              (b) Each request for adjustment or exception must be in writing and contain a complete statement of all the facts and circumstances related to the provision of this part or official action from which adjustment is sought and a full and precise statement of the reasons why relief should be provided.
              (c) The submission of a request for adjustment or exception shall not relieve any person from the obligation of complying with the provision of this part or official action in question while the request is being considered unless such interim relief is granted in writing by the Secretary or the Secretary's designated representative.
              (d) A decision of the Secretary or the Secretary's designated representative under this section may be appealed to the Secretary (For information on the appeal procedure, see § 101.81.)
            
            
              § 101.81
              Appeals.
              (a) Any person whose request for adjustment or exception was denied by the Secretary or the Secretary's designated representative under Section. 94a.80, may appeal to the Secretary who, through the Secretary's designated representative, shall review and reconsider the denial.
              (b)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, an appeal must be received by the Secretary no later than 45 days after receipt of a written notice of denial. After this 45 day period, an appeal may be accepted at the discretion of the Secretary.
              (2) For requests for adjustment or exception involving rated orders placed for the purpose of emergency preparedness (see § 101.33(e)), an appeal must be received by the Secretary, no later than 15 days after receipt of a written notice of denial. Contract performance under the order shall not be stayed pending resolution of the appeal.
              (c) Each appeal must be in writing and contain a complete statement of all the facts and circumstances related to the action appealed from and a full and precise statement of the reasons the decision should be modified or reversed.

              (d) In addition to the written materials submitted in support of an appeal, an appellant may request, in writing, an opportunity for an informal hearing. This request may be granted or denied at the discretion of the Secretary or the Secretary's designated representative.
              
              (e) When a hearing is granted, the Secretary may designate an HHS employee to act as the Secretary's representative and hearing officer to conduct the hearing and to prepare a report. The hearing officer shall determine all procedural questions and impose such time or other limitations deemed reasonable. In the event that the hearing officer decides that a printed transcript is necessary, all expenses shall be borne by the appellant.
              (f) When determining an appeal, the Secretary may consider all information submitted during the appeal as well as any recommendations, reports, or other relevant information and documents available to HHS or consult with any other persons or groups.
              (g) The submission of an appeal under this section shall not relieve any person from the obligation of complying with the provision of this part or official action in question while the appeal is being considered unless such relief is granted in writing by the Secretary.
            
          
          
             Subpart I—Miscellaneous Provisions
            
              § 101.90
              Protection against claims.
              A person shall not be held liable for damages or penalties for any act or failure to act resulting directly or indirectly from compliance with any provision of this part, or an official action, notwithstanding that such provision or action shall subsequently be declared invalid by judicial or other competent authority.
            
            
              § 101.91
              Records and reports.
              (a) Persons are required to make and preserve for at least three years, accurate and complete records of any transaction covered by this part or an official action.
              (b) Records must be maintained in sufficient detail to permit the determination, upon examination, of whether each transaction complies with the provisions of this part or any official action. However, this part does not specify any particular method or system to be used.
              (c) Records required to be maintained by this part must be made available for examination on demand by duly authorized representatives of HHS as provided in § 101.71.
              (d) In addition, persons must develop, maintain, and submit any other records and reports to HHS that may be required for the administration of the DPA and other applicable statutes, and this part.
              (e) DPA Section 705(d), as implemented by E.O. 13603, provides that information obtained under this section which the Secretary deems confidential, or with reference to which a request for confidential treatment is made by the person furnishing such information, shall not be published or disclosed unless the Secretary determines that the withholding of this information is contrary to the interest of the national defense. Information required to be submitted to HHS in connection with the enforcement or administration of the DPA, this part, or an official action, is deemed to be confidential under DPA Section 705(d) and shall be handled in accordance with applicable Federal law.
            
            
              § 101.92
              Applicability of this part and official actions.
              (a) This part and all official actions, unless specifically stated otherwise, apply to transactions in any state, territory, or possession of the United States and the District of Columbia.
              (b) This part and all official actions apply not only to deliveries to other persons but also include deliveries to affiliates and subsidiaries of a person and deliveries from one branch, division, or section of a single entity to another branch, division, or section under common ownership or control.
              (c) This part and its schedules shall not be construed to affect any administrative actions taken by HHS, or any outstanding contracts or orders placed pursuant to any of the regulations, orders, schedules or delegations of authority previously issued by HHS pursuant to authority granted to HHS, by the President under the DPA and E.O. 13603. Such actions, contracts, or orders shall continue in full force and effect under this part unless modified or terminated by proper authority.
            
            
              
              § 101.93
              Communications.
              All communications concerning this part, including requests for copies of the part and explanatory information, requests for guidance or clarification, and requests for adjustment or exception shall be addressed to the Secretary, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and Washington, DC.
            
          
        
        
          Pt. 102
          PART 102—ADJUSTMENT OF CIVIL MONETARY PENALTIES FOR INFLATION
          
            Sec.
            102.1
            Applicability.
            102.2
            Applicability date.
            102.3
            Penalty adjustment and table.
          
          
            Authority:
            Public Law 101-410, Sec. 701 of Public Law 114-74, 31 U.S.C. 3801-3812.
          
          
            Source:
            81 FR 61565, Sept. 6, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 102.1
            Applicability.
            This part applies to each statutory provision under the laws administered by the Department of Health and Human Services concerning the civil monetary penalties which may be assessed or enforced by an agency pursuant to Federal law or is assessed or enforced pursuant to civil judicial actions in the Federal courts or administrative proceedings. The regulations cited in this part supersede existing HHS regulations setting forth civil monetary penalty amounts. If applicable, the HHS agencies responsible for specific civil monetary penalties will amend their regulations to reflect the adjusted amounts and/or a cross-reference to 45 CFR part 102 in separate actions as soon as practicable.
          
          
            § 102.2
            Applicability date.
            The increased penalty amounts set forth in the right-most column of the table in Section 102.3, “Maximum Adjusted Penalty ($)”, apply to all civil monetary penalties which are assessed after August 1, 2016, including those penalties whose associated violations occurred after November 2, 2015.
          
          
            § 102.3
            Penalty adjustment and table.

            The adjusted statutory penalty provisions and their applicable amounts are set out in the following table. The right-most column in the table, “Maximum Adjusted Penalty ($)”, provides the maximum adjusted civil penalty amounts. The civil monetary penalty amounts are adjusted annually.
            
            
              Civil Monetary Penalty Authorities Administered by HHS Agencies and Penalty Amounts
              [Effective October 11, 2018]
              
                Citation
                U.S.C.
                CFR 1
                
                HHSagency
                
                Description 2
                
                Date of laststatutorily
                  established
                  penalty
                  figure 3
                  
                
                2016Maximum
                  adjusted
                  penalty
                  ($)
                
                2017Maximum
                  adjusted
                  penalty
                  ($) 4
                  
                
                2018Maximum
                  adjusted
                  penalty
                  ($)
                
              
              
                
                  21 U.S.C.
                
              
              
                333(b)(2)(A)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for violations related to drug samples resulting in a conviction of any representative of manufacturer or distributor in any 10-year period
                2016
                98,935
                100,554
                102,606
              
              
                333(b)(2)(B)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for violation related to drug samples resulting in a conviction of any representative of manufacturer or distributor after the second conviction in any 10-yr period
                2016
                1,978,690
                2,011,061
                2,052,107
              
              
                333(b)(3)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for failure to make a report required by 21 U.S.C. 353(d)(3)(E) relating to drug samples
                2016
                197,869
                201,106
                205,211
              
              
                333(f)(1)(A)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for any person who violates a requirement related to devices for each such violation
                2016
                26,723
                27,160
                27,714
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of all violations related to devices in a single proceeding
                2016
                1,781,560
                1,810,706
                1,847,663
              
              
                333(f)(2)(A)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for any individual who introduces or delivers for introduction into interstate commerce food that is adulterated per 21 U.S.C. 342(a)(2)(B) or any individual who does not comply with a recall order under 21 U.S.C. 350l
                2016
                75,123
                76,352
                77,910
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of any other person other than an individual) for such introduction or delivery of adulterated food
                2016
                375,613
                381,758
                389,550
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of all such violations related to adulterated food adjudicated in a single proceeding
                2016
                751,225
                763,515
                779,098
              
              
                333(f)(3)(A)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for all violations adjudicated in a single proceeding for any person who violates 21 U.S.C. 331(jj)(1) by failing to submit the certification required by 42 U.S.C. 282(j)(5)(B) or knowingly submitting a false certification; by failing to submit clinical trial information under 42 U.S.C 282(j); or by submitting clinical trial information under 42 U.S.C. 282(j) that is false or misleading in any particular under 42 U.S.C. 282(j)(5)(D)
                2016
                11,383
                11,569
                11,805
              
              
                333(f)(3)(B)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for each day any above violation is not corrected after a 30-day period following notification until the violation is corrected
                2016
                11,383
                11,569
                11,805
              
              
                
                333(f)(4)(A)(i)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for any responsible person that violates a requirement of 21 U.S.C. 355(o) (post-marketing studies, clinical trials, labeling), 21 U.S.C. 355(p) (risk evaluation and mitigation (REMS)), or 21 U.S.C. 355-1 (REMS)
                2016
                284,583
                289,239
                295,142
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of all such above violations in a single proceeding
                2016
                1,138,330
                1,156,953
                1,180,566
              
              
                333(f)(4)(A)(ii)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for REMS violation that continues after written notice to the responsible person for the first 30-day period (or any portion thereof) the responsible person continues to be in violation
                2016
                284,583
                289,239
                295,142
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for REMS violation that continues after written notice to responsible person doubles for every 30-day period thereafter the violation continues, but may not exceed penalty amount for any 30-day period
                2016
                1,138,330
                1,156,953
                1,180,566
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of all such above violations adjudicated in a single proceeding
                2016
                11,383,300
                11,569,531
                11,805,665
              
              
                333(f)(9)(A)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for any person who violates a requirement which relates to tobacco products for each such violation
                2016
                16,503
                16,773
                17,115
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of all such violations of tobacco product requirement adjudicated in a single proceeding
                2016
                1,100,200
                1,118,199
                1,141,021
              
              
                333(f)(9)(B)(i)(I)
                
                FDA
                Penalty per violation related to violations of tobacco requirements
                2016
                275,050
                279,550
                285,256
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of all such violations of tobacco product requirements adjudicated in a single proceeding
                2016
                1,100,200
                1,118,199
                1,141,021
              
              
                
                333(f)(9)(B)(i)(II)
                
                FDA
                Penalty in the case of a violation of tobacco product requirements that continues after written notice to such person, for the first 30-day period (or any portion thereof) the person continues to be in violation
                2016
                275,050
                279,550
                285,256
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for violation of tobacco product requirements that continues after written notice to such person shall double for every 30-day period thereafter the violation continues, but may not exceed penalty amount for any 30-day period
                2016
                1,100,200
                1,118,199
                1,141,021
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of all such violations related to tobacco product requirements adjudicated in a single proceeding
                2016
                11,002,000
                11,181,993
                11,410,218
              
              
                333(f)(9)(B)(ii)(I)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for any person who either does not conduct post-market surveillance and studies to determine impact of a modified risk tobacco product for which the HHS Secretary has provided them an order to sell, or who does not submit a protocol to the HHS Secretary after being notified of a requirement to conduct post-market surveillance of such tobacco products
                2016
                275,050
                279,550
                285,256
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate of for all such above violations adjudicated in a single proceeding
                2016
                1,100,200
                1,118,199
                1,141,021
              
              
                
                333(f)(9)(B)(ii)(II)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for violation of modified risk tobacco product post-market surveillance that continues after written notice to such person for the first 30-day period (or any portion thereof) that the person continues to be in violation
                2016
                275,050
                279,550
                285,256
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for post-notice violation of modified risk tobacco product post-market surveillance shall double for every 30-day period thereafter that the tobacco product requirement violation continues for any 30-day period, but may not exceed penalty amount for any 30-day period
                2016
                1,100,200
                1,118,199
                1,141,021
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for aggregate above tobacco product requirement violations adjudicated in a single proceeding
                2016
                11,002,000
                11,181,993
                11,410,218
              
              
                333(g)(1)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for any person who disseminates or causes another party to disseminate a direct-to-consumer advertisement that is false or misleading for the first such violation in any 3-year period
                2016
                284,583
                289,239
                295,142
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for each subsequent above violation in any 3-year period
                2016
                569,165
                578,477
                590,284
              
              
                333 note
                
                FDA

                Penalty to be applied for violations of restrictions on the sale or distribution of tobacco products promulgated under 21 U.S.C. 387f(d) (e.g., violations of regulations in 21 CFR Part 1140) with respect to a retailer with an approved training program in the case of a second regulation violation within a 12-month period
                2016
                275
                279
                285
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a third tobacco product regulation violation within a 24-month period
                2016
                550
                559
                570
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a fourth tobacco product regulation violation within a 24-month period
                2016
                2,200
                2,236
                2,282
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a fifth tobacco product regulation violation within a 36-month period
                2016
                5,501
                5,591
                5,705
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a sixth or subsequent tobacco product regulation violation within a 48-month period as determined on a case-by-case basis
                2016
                11,002
                11,182
                11,410
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty to be applied for violations of restrictions on the sale or distribution of tobacco products promulgated under 21 U.S.C. 387f(d) (e.g., violations of regulations in 21 CFR Part 1140) with respect to a retailer that does not have an approved training program in the case of the first regulation violation
                2016
                275
                279
                285
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a second tobacco product regulation violation within a 12-month period
                2016
                550
                559
                570
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a third tobacco product regulation violation within a 24-month period
                2016
                1,100
                1,118
                1,141
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a fourth tobacco product regulation violation within a 24-month period
                2016
                2,200
                2,236
                2,282
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a fifth tobacco product regulation violation within a 36-month period
                2016
                5,501
                5,591
                5,705
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of a sixth or subsequent tobacco product regulation violation within a 48-month period as determined on a case-by-case basis
                2016
                11,002
                11,182
                11,410
              
              
                335b(a)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for each violation for any individual who made a false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact, bribed, destroyed, altered, removed, or secreted, or procured the destruction, alteration, removal, or secretion of, any material document, failed to disclose a material fact, obstructed an investigation, employed a consultant who was debarred, debarred individual provided consultant services
                2016
                419,320
                426,180
                434,878
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty in the case of any other person (other than an individual) per above violation
                2016
                1,677,280
                1,704,720
                1,739,513
              
              
                360pp(b)(1)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for any person who violates any such requirements for electronic products, with each unlawful act or omission constituting a separate violation
                2016
                2,750
                2,795
                2,852
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty imposed for any related series of violations of requirements relating to electronic products
                2016
                937,500
                952,838
                972,285
              
              
                
                  42 U.S.C.
                
              
              
                262(d)
                
                FDA
                Penalty per day for violation of order of recall of biological product presenting imminent or substantial hazard
                2016
                215,628
                219,156
                223,629
              
              
                
                263b(h)(3)
                
                FDA
                Penalty for failure to obtain a mammography certificate as required
                2016
                16,773
                17,047
                17,395
              
              
                300aa-28(b)(1)
                
                FDA
                Penalty per occurrence for any vaccine manufacturer that intentionally destroys, alters, falsifies, or conceals any record or report required
                2016
                215,628
                219,156
                223,629
              
              
                256b(d)(1)(B)(vi)
                
                HRSA
                Penalty for each instance of overcharging a 340B covered entity
                2016
                5,437
                5,526
                5,639
              
              
                299c-3(d)
                
                AHRQ
                Penalty for an establishment or person supplying information obtained in the course of activities for any purpose other than the purpose for which it was supplied
                2016
                14,140
                14,371
                14,664
              
              
                653(l)(2)
                45 CFR 303.21(f)
                ACF
                Penalty for Misuse of Information in the National Directory of New Hires
                2016
                1,450
                1,474
                1,504
              
              
                262a(i)(1)
                42 CFR 1003.910
                OIG
                Penalty for each individual who violates safety and security procedures related to handling dangerous biological agents and toxins
                2016
                327,962
                333,327
                340,130
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for any other person who violates safety and security procedures related to handling dangerous biological agents and toxins
                2016
                655,925
                666,656
                680,262
              
              
                300jj-51
                
                OIG
                Penalty per violation for committing information blocking
                2016
                1,000,000
                1,016,360
                1,037,104
              
              
                
                1320a-7a(a) 5
                
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(1)
                OIG
                Penalty for knowingly presenting or causing to be presented to an officer, employee, or agent of the United States a false claim
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                20,000
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for knowingly presenting or causing to be presented a request for payment which violates the terms of an assignment, agreement, or PPS agreement
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                20,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(2)
                
                Penalty for knowingly giving or causing to be presented to a participating provider or supplier false or misleading information that could reasonably be expected to influence a discharge decision
                2018
                22,537
                22,906
                30,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(3)
                
                Penalty for an excluded party retaining ownership or control interest in a participating entity
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                20,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.1010
                
                Penalty for remuneration offered to induce program beneficiaries to use particular providers, practitioners, or suppliers
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                20,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(4)
                
                Penalty for employing or contracting with an excluded individual
                2018
                14,718
                14,959
                20,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.310(a)(3)
                
                Penalty for knowing and willful solicitation, receipt, offer, or payment of remuneration for referring an individual for a service or for purchasing, leasing, or ordering an item to be paid for by a Federal health care program
                2018
                73,588
                74,792
                100,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(1)
                
                Penalty for ordering or prescribing medical or other item or service during a period in which the person was excluded
                2018
                10,874
                11,052
                20,000
              
              
                
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(6)
                
                Penalty for knowingly making or causing to be made a false statement, omission or misrepresentation of a material fact in any application, bid, or contract to participate or enroll as a provider or supplier
                2018
                54,372
                55,262
                100,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(8)
                
                Penalty for knowing of an overpayment and failing to report and return
                2018
                10,874
                11,052
                20,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(7)
                
                Penalty for making or using a false record or statement that is material to a false or fraudulent claim
                2018
                54,372
                55,262
                100,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(9)
                
                Penalty for failure to grant timely access to HHS OIG for audits, investigations, evaluations, and other statutory functions of HHS OIG
                2018
                16,312
                16,579
                30,000
              
              
                1320a-7a(b) 5
                
                
                OIG
                Penalty for payments by a hospital or critical access hospital to induce a physician to reduce or limit services to individuals under direct care of physician or who are entitled to certain medical assistance benefits
                2018
                4,313
                4,384
                5,000
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty for physicians who knowingly receive payments from a hospital or critical access hospital to induce such physician to reduce or limit services to individuals under direct care of physician or who are entitled to certain medical assistance benefits
                2018
                4,313
                4,384
                5,000
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(10)
                
                Penalty for a physician who executes a document that falsely certifies home health needs for Medicare beneficiaries
                2018
                7,512
                7,635
                10,000
              
              
                1320a-7e(b)(6)(A)
                42 CFR 1003.810
                OIG
                Penalty for failure to report any final adverse action taken against a health care provider, supplier, or practitioner
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                1320b-10(b)(1)
                42 CFR 1003.610(a)
                OIG
                Penalty for the misuse of words, symbols, or emblems in communications in a manner in which a person could falsely construe that such item is approved, endorsed, or authorized by HHS
                2016
                9,893
                10,055
                10,260
              
              
                1320b-10(b)(2)
                42 CFR 1003.610(a)
                OIG
                Penalty for the misuse of words, symbols, or emblems in a broadcast or telecast in a manner in which a person could falsely construe that such item is approved, endorsed, or authorized by HHS
                2016
                49,467
                50,276
                51,302
              
              
                1395i-3(b)(3)(B)(ii)(1)
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(11)
                OIG
                Penalty for certification of a false statement in assessment of functional capacity of a Skilled Nursing Facility resident assessment
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                1395i-3(b)(3)(B)(ii)(2)
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(11)
                OIG
                Penalty for causing another to certify or make a false statement in assessment of functional capacity of a Skilled Nursing Facility resident assessment
                2016
                10,314
                10,483
                10,697
              
              
                
                1395i-3(g)(2)(A)
                42 CFR 1003.1310
                OIG
                Penalty for any individual who notifies or causes to be notified a Skilled Nursing Facility of the time or date on which a survey is to be conducted
                2016
                4,126
                4,194
                4,280
              
              
                1395w-27(g)(2)(A)
                42 CFR 1003.410
                OIG
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization that substantially fails to provide medically necessary, required items and services
                2016
                37,561
                38,175
                38,954
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization that charges excessive premiums
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization that improperly expels or refuses to reenroll a beneficiary
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization that engages in practice that would reasonably be expected to have the effect of denying or discouraging enrollment
                2016
                147,177
                149,585
                152,638
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty per individual who does not enroll as a result of a Medicare Advantage organization's practice that would reasonably be expected to have the effect of denying or discouraging enrollment
                2016
                22,077
                22,438
                22,896
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization misrepresenting or falsifying information to Secretary
                2016
                147,177
                149,585
                152,638
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization misrepresenting or falsifying information to individual or other entity
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for Medicare Advantage organization interfering with provider's advice to enrollee and non-MCO affiliated providers that balance bill enrollees
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization that employs or contracts with excluded individual or entity
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization enrolling an individual in without prior written consent
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization transferring an enrollee to another plan without consent or solely for the purpose of earning a commission
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization failing to comply with marketing restrictions or applicable implementing regulations or guidance
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization employing or contracting with an individual or entity who violates 1395w-27(g)(1)(A)-(J)
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                1395w-141(i)(3)
                
                OIG
                Penalty for a prescription drug card sponsor that falsifies or misrepresents marketing materials, overcharges program enrollees, or misuse transitional assistance funds
                2016
                12,856
                13,066
                13,333
              
              
                1395cc(g)
                
                OIG
                Penalty for improper billing by Hospitals, Critical Access Hospitals, or Skilled Nursing Facilities
                2016
                5,000
                5,082
                5,186
              
              
                
                1395dd(d)(1)
                42 CFR 1003.510
                OIG
                Penalty for a hospital or responsible physician dumping patients needing emergency medical care, if the hospital has 100 beds or more
                2016
                103,139
                104,826
                106,965
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a hospital or responsible physician dumping patients needing emergency medical care, if the hospital has less than 100 beds
                2016
                51,570
                52,414
                53,484
              
              
                1395mm(i)(6)(B)(i)
                42 CFR 1003.410
                OIG
                Penalty for a HMO or competitive plan is such plan substantially fails to provide medically necessary, required items or services
                2016
                51,570
                52,414
                53,484
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for HMOs/competitive medical plans that charge premiums in excess of permitted amounts
                2016
                51,570
                52,414
                53,484
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a HMO or competitive medical plan that expels or refuses to reenroll an individual per prescribed conditions
                2016
                51,570
                52,414
                53,484
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a HMO or competitive medical plan that implements practices to discourage enrollment of individuals needing services in future
                2016
                206,278
                209,653
                213,932
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty per individual not enrolled in a plan as a result of a HMO or competitive medical plan that implements practices to discourage enrollment of individuals needing services in the future
                2016
                29,680
                30,166
                30,782
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a HMO or competitive medical plan that misrepresents or falsifies information to the Secretary
                2016
                206,278
                209,653
                213,932
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a HMO or competitive medical plan that misrepresents or falsifies information to an individual or any other entity
                2016
                51,570
                52,414
                53,484
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for failure by HMO or competitive medical plan to assure prompt payment of Medicare risk sharing contracts or incentive plan provisions
                2016
                51,570
                52,414
                53,484
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for HMO that employs or contracts with excluded individual or entity
                2016
                47,340
                48,114
                49,096
              
              
                1395nn(g)(3)
                42 CFR 1003.310
                OIG
                Penalty for submitting or causing to be submitted claims in violation of the Stark Law's restrictions on physician self-referrals
                2016
                23,863
                24,253
                24,748
              
              
                1395nn(g)(4)
                42 CFR 1003.310
                OIG
                Penalty for circumventing Stark Law's restrictions on physician self-referrals
                2016
                159,089
                161,692
                164,992
              
              
                1395ss(d)(1)
                42 CFR 1003.1110
                OIG
                Penalty for a material misrepresentation regarding Medigap compliance policies
                2016
                9,893
                10,055
                10,260
              
              
                1395ss(d)(2)
                42 CFR 1003.1110
                OIG
                Penalty for selling Medigap policy under false pretense
                2016
                9,893
                10,055
                10,260
              
              
                1395ss(d)(3)(A)(ii)
                42 CFR 1003.1110
                OIG
                Penalty for an issuer that sells health insurance policy that duplicates benefits
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for someone other than issuer that sells health insurance that duplicates benefits
                2016
                26,723
                27,160
                27,714
              
              
                
                1395ss(d)(4)(A)
                42 CFR 1003.1110
                OIG
                Penalty for using mail to sell a non-approved Medigap insurance policy
                2016
                9,893
                10,055
                10,260
              
              
                1396b(m)(5)(B)(i)
                42 CFR 1003.410
                OIG
                Penalty for a Medicaid MCO that substantially fails to provide medically necessary, required items or services
                2016
                49,467
                50,276
                51,302
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicaid MCO that charges excessive premiums
                2016
                49,467
                50,276
                51,302
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicaid MCO that improperly expels or refuses to reenroll a beneficiary
                2016
                197,869
                201,106
                205,211
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty per individual who does not enroll as a result of a Medicaid MCO's practice that would reasonably be expected to have the effect of denying or discouraging enrollment
                2016
                29,680
                30,166
                30,782
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicaid MCO misrepresenting or falsifying information to the Secretary
                2016
                197,869
                201,106
                205,211
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicaid MCO misrepresenting or falsifying information to an individual or another entity
                2016
                49,467
                50,276
                51,302
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicaid MCO that fails to comply with contract requirements with respect to physician incentive plans
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                1396r(b)(3)(B)(ii)(I)
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(11)
                OIG
                Penalty for willfully and knowingly certifying a material and false statement in a Skilled Nursing Facility resident assessment
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                
                1396r(b)(3)(B)(ii)(II)
                42 CFR 1003.210(a)(11)
                OIG
                Penalty for willfully and knowingly causing another individual to certify a material and false statement in a Skilled Nursing Facility resident assessment
                2016
                10,314
                10,483
                10,697
              
              
                1396r(g)(2)(A)(i)
                42 CFR 1003.1310
                OIG
                Penalty for notifying or causing to be notified a Skilled Nursing Facility of the time or date on which a survey is to be conducted
                2016
                4,126
                4,194
                4,280
              
              
                1396r-8(b)(3)(B)
                42 CFR 1003.1210
                OIG
                Penalty for the knowing provision of false information or refusing to provide information about charges or prices of a covered outpatient drug
                2016
                178,156
                181,071
                184,767
              
              
                1396r-8(b)(3)(C)(i)
                42 CFR 1003.1210
                OIG
                Penalty per day for failure to timely provide information by drug manufacturer with rebate agreement
                2016
                17,816
                18,107
                18,477
              
              
                1396r-8(b)(3)(C)(ii)
                42 CFR 1003.1210
                OIG
                Penalty for knowing provision of false information by drug manufacturer with rebate agreement
                2016
                178,156
                181,071
                184,767
              
              
                1396t(i)(3)(A)
                42 CFR 1003.1310
                OIG
                Penalty for notifying home and community-based providers or settings of survey
                2016
                3,563
                3,621
                3,695
              
              
                11131(c)
                42 CFR 1003.810
                OIG
                Penalty for failing to report a medical malpractice claim to National Practitioner Data Bank
                2016
                21,563
                21,916
                22,363
              
              
                11137(b)(2)
                42 CFR 1003.810
                OIG
                Penalty for breaching confidentiality of information reported to National Practitioner Data Bank
                2016
                21,563
                21,916
                22,363
              
              
                299b-22(f)(1)
                42 CFR 3.404
                OCR
                Penalty for violation of confidentiality provision of the Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act
                2016
                11,940
                12,135
                12,383
              
              
                1320(d)-5(a)
                45 CFR 160.404(b)(1)(i), (ii)
                OCR
                Penalty for each pre-February 18, 2009 violation of the HIPAA administrative simplification provisions
                2016
                150
                152
                155
              
              
                 
                
                
                Calendar Year Cap
                2016
                37,561
                38,175
                38,954
              
              
                
                 
                45 CFR 160.404(b)(2)(i)(A), (B)
                OCR
                Penalty for each February 18, 2009 or later violation of a HIPAA administrative simplification provision in which it is established that the covered entity or business associate did not know and by exercising reasonable diligence, would not have known that the covered entity or business associate violated such a provision
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                110
                112
                114
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                55,010
                55,910
                57,051
              
              
                 
                
                
                Calendar Year Cap
                2016
                1,650,300
                1,677,299
                1,711,533
              
              
                 
                45 CFR 160.404(b)(2)(ii)(A), (B)
                OCR
                Penalty for each February 18, 2009 or later violation of a HIPAA administrative simplification provision in which it is established that the violation was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                1,100
                1,118
                1,141
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                55,010
                55,910
                57,051
              
              
                 
                
                
                Calendar Year Cap
                2016
                1,650,300
                1,677,299
                1,711,533
              
              
                
                 
                45 CFR 160.404(b)(2)(iii)(A), (B)
                OCR
                Penalty for each February 18, 2009 or later violation of a HIPAA administrative simplification provision in which it is established that the violation was due to willful neglect and was corrected during the 30-day period beginning on the first date the covered entity or business associate knew, or, by exercising reasonable diligence, would have known that the violation occurred
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                11,002
                11,182
                11,410
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                55,010
                55,910
                57,051
              
              
                 
                
                
                Calendar Year Cap
                2016
                1,650,300
                1,677,299
                1,711,533
              
              
                 
                45 CFR 160.404(b)(2)(iv)(A), (B)
                OCR
                Penalty for each February 18, 2009 or later violation of a HIPAA administrative simplification provision in which it is established that the violation was due to willful neglect and was not corrected during the 30-day period beginning on the first date the covered entity or business associate knew, or by exercising reasonable diligence, would have known that the violation occurred
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                55,010
                55,910
                57,051
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                1,650,300
                1,677,299
                1,711,533
              
              
                 
                
                
                Calendar Year Cap
                2016
                1,650,300
                1,677,299
                1,711,533
              
              
                263a(h)(2)(B) & 1395w-2(b)(2)(A)(ii)
                42 CFR 493.1834(d)(2)(i)
                CMS
                Penalty for a clinical laboratory's failure to meet participation and certification requirements and poses immediate jeopardy
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                6,035
                6,134
                6,259
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                19,787
                20,111
                20,521
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 493.1834(d)(2)(ii)
                CMS
                Penalty for a clinical laboratory's failure to meet participation and certification requirements and the failure does not pose immediate jeopardy
                
                
                
                -
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                99
                101
                103
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                5,936
                6,033
                6,156
              
              
                300gg-15(f)
                45 CFR 147.200(e)
                CMS
                Failure to provide the Summary of Benefits and Coverage
                2016
                1,087
                1,105
                1,128
              
              
                300gg-18
                45 CFR 158.606
                CMS
                Penalty for violations of regulations related to the medical loss ratio reporting and rebating
                2016
                109
                111
                113
              
              
                1320a-7h(b)(1)
                42 CFR 402.105(d)(5), 42 CFR 403.912(a) & (c)
                CMS
                Penalty for manufacturer or group purchasing organization failing to report information required under 42 U.S.C. 1320a-7h(a), relating to physician ownership or investment interests
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                1,087
                1,105
                1,128
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                10,874
                11,052
                11,278
              
              
                 
                
                
                Calendar Year Cap
                2016
                163,117
                165,786
                169,170
              
              
                1320a-7h(b)(2)
                42 CFR 402.105(h), 42 CFR 403 912(b) & (c)
                CMS
                Penalty for manufacturer or group purchasing organization knowingly failing to report information required under 42 U.S.C. 1320a-7h(a) , relating to physician ownership or investment interests
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                10,874
                11,052
                11,278
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                108,745
                110,524
                112,780
              
              
                 
                
                
                Calendar Year Cap
                2016
                1,087,450
                1,105,241
                1,127,799
              
              
                1320a-7j(h)(3)(A)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for an administrator of a facility that fails to comply with notice requirements for the closure of a facility
                2016
                108,745
                110,524
                112,780
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.446(a)(1),(2), & (3)
                CMS
                Minimum penalty for the first offense of an administrator who fails to provide notice of facility closure
                2016
                544
                553
                564
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Minimum penalty for the second offense of an administrator who fails to provide notice of facility closure
                2016
                1,631
                1,658
                1,692
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum penalty for the third and subsequent offenses of an administrator who fails to provide notice of facility closure
                2016
                3,262
                3,315
                3,383
              
              
                1320a-8(a)(1)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for an entity knowingly making a false statement or representation of material fact in the determination of the amount of benefits or payments related to old-age, survivors, and disability insurance benefits, special benefits for certain World War II veterans, or supplemental security income for the aged, blind, and disabled
                2016
                7,954
                8,084
                8,249
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for violation of 42 U.S.C. 1320a-8(a)(1) if the violator is a person who receives a fee or other income for services performed in connection with determination of the benefit amount or the person is a physician or other health care provider who submits evidence in connection with such a determination
                2016
                7,500
                7,623
                7,779
              
              
                1320a-8(a)(3)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for a representative payee (under 42 U.S.C. 405(j), 1007, or 1383(a)(2)) converting any part of a received payment from the benefit programs described in the previous civil monetary penalty to a use other than for the benefit of the beneficiary
                2016
                6,229
                6,331
                6,460
              
              
                
                1320b-25(c)(1)(A)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for failure of covered individuals to report to the Secretary and 1 or more law enforcement officials any reasonable suspicion of a crime against a resident, or individual receiving care, from a long-term care facility
                2016
                217,490
                221,048
                225,560
              
              
                1320b-25(c)(2)(A)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for failure of covered individuals to report to the Secretary and 1 or more law enforcement officials any reasonable suspicion of a crime against a resident, or individual receiving care, from a long-term care facility if such failure exacerbates the harm to the victim of the crime or results in the harm to another individual
                2016
                326,235
                331,572
                338,339
              
              
                1320b-25(d)(2)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for a long-term care facility that retaliates against any employee because of lawful acts done by the employee, or files a complaint or report with the State professional disciplinary agency against an employee or nurse for lawful acts done by the employee or nurse
                2016
                217,490
                221,048
                225,560
              
              
                1395b-7(b)(2)(B)
                42 CFR 402.105(g)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person who knowingly and willfully fails to furnish a beneficiary with an itemized statement of items or services within 30 days of the beneficiary's request
                2016
                147
                149
                152
              
              
                
                1395i-3(h)(2)(B)(ii)(I)
                42 CFR 488.408(d)(1)(iii)
                CMS
                Penalty per day for a Skilled Nursing Facility that has a Category 2 violation of certification requirements
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                103
                105
                107
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                6,188
                6,289
                6,417
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.408(d)(1)(iv)
                CMS
                Penalty per instance of Category 2 noncompliance by a Skilled Nursing Facility
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.408(e)(1)(iii)
                CMS
                Penalty per day for a Skilled Nursing Facility that has a Category 3 violation of certification requirements
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                6,291
                6,394
                6,525
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.408(e)(1)(iv)
                CMS
                Penalty per instance of Category 3 noncompliance by a Skilled Nursing Facility
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.408 (e)(2)(ii)
                CMS
                Penalty per day and per instance for a Skilled Nursing Facility that has Category 3 noncompliance with Immediate Jeopardy
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Per Day (Minimum)
                2016
                6,291
                6,394
                6,525
              
              
                 
                
                
                Per Day (Maximum)
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                
                
                Per Instance (Minimum)
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Per Instance (Maximum)
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.438(a)(1)(i)
                CMS
                Penalty per day of a Skilled Nursing Facility that fails to meet certification requirements. These amounts represent the upper range per day
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                6,291
                6,394
                6,524
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.438(a)(1)(ii)
                CMS
                Penalty per day of a Skilled Nursing Facility that fails to meet certification requirements. These amounts represent the lower range per day
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                103
                105
                107
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                6,188
                6,289
                6,418
              
              
                
                 
                42 CFR 488.438(a)(2)
                CMS
                Penalty per instance of a Skilled Nursing Facility that fails to meet certification requirements
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                1395l(h)(5)(D) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.105(d)(2)(i)
                CMS
                Penalty for knowingly, willfully, and repeatedly billing for a clinical diagnostic laboratory test other than on an assignment-related basis. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395l(i)(6)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for knowingly and willfully presenting or causing to be presented a bill or request for payment for an intraocular lens inserted during or after cataract surgery for which the Medicare payment rate includes the cost of acquiring the class of lens involved
                2016
                3,957
                4,022
                4,104
              
              
                1395l(q)(2)(B)(i)
                42 CFR 402.105(a)
                CMS
                Penalty for knowingly and willfully failing to provide information about a referring physician when seeking payment on an unassigned basis
                2016
                3,787
                3,849
                3,928
              
              
                
                1395m(a)(11)(A) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(4), 402.105(d)(2)(ii)
                CMS
                Penalty for any durable medical equipment supplier that knowingly and willfully charges for a covered service that is furnished on a rental basis after the rental payments may no longer be made. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395m(a)(18)(B) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(5), 402.105(d)(2)(iii)
                CMS
                Penalty for any nonparticipating durable medical equipment supplier that knowingly and willfully fails to make a refund to Medicare beneficiaries for a covered service for which payment is precluded due to an unsolicited telephone contact from the supplier. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395m(b)(5)(C) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(6), 402.105(d)(2)(iv)
                CMS
                Penalty for any nonparticipating physician or supplier that knowingly and willfully charges a Medicare beneficiary more than the limiting charge for radiologist services. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                
                1395m(h)(3) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(8), 402.105(d)(2)(vi)
                CMS
                Penalty for any supplier of prosthetic devices, orthotics, and prosthetics that knowing and willfully charges for a covered prosthetic device, orthotic, or prosthetic that is furnished on a rental basis after the rental payment may no longer be made. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(11)(A), that is in the same manner as 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395m(j)(2)(A)(iii)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for any supplier of durable medical equipment including a supplier of prosthetic devices, prosthetics, orthotics, or supplies that knowingly and willfully distributes a certificate of medical necessity in violation of Section 1834(j)(2)(A)(i) of the Act or fails to provide the information required under Section 1834(j)(2)(A)(ii) of the Act
                2016
                1,591
                1,617
                1,650
              
              
                
                1395m(j)(4) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(10), 402.105(d)(2)(vii)
                CMS
                Penalty for any supplier of durable medical equipment, including a supplier of prosthetic devices, prosthetics, orthotics, or supplies that knowingly and willfully fails to make refunds in a timely manner to Medicare beneficiaries for series billed other than on as assignment-related basis under certain conditions. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395m(j)(4) and 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395m(k)(6) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(31), 402.105(d)(3)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person or entity who knowingly and willfully bills or collects for any outpatient therapy services or comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation services on other than an assignment-related basis. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395m(k)(6) and 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395m(l)(6) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(32), 402.105(d)(4)
                CMS
                Penalty for any supplier of ambulance services who knowingly and willfully fills or collects for any services on other than an assignment-related basis. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(18)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                
                1395u(b)(18)(B) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(11), 402.105(d)(2)(viii)
                CMS
                Penalty for any practitioner specified in Section 1842(b)(18)(C) of the Act or other person that knowingly and willfully bills or collects for any services by the practitioners on other than an assignment-related basis. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395u(j)(2)(B) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)
                CMS
                Penalty for any physician who charges more than 125% for a non-participating referral. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395u(k) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(12), 402.105(d)(2)(ix)
                CMS
                Penalty for any physician who knowingly and willfully presents or causes to be presented a claim for bill for an assistant at a cataract surgery performed on or after March 1, 1987, for which payment may not be made because of section 1862(a)(15). (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                
                1395u(l)(3) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(13), 402.105(d)(2)(x)
                CMS
                Penalty for any nonparticipating physician who does not accept payment on an assignment-related basis and who knowingly and willfully fails to refund on a timely basis any amounts collected for services that are not reasonable or medically necessary or are of poor quality under 1842(l)(1)(A). (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395u(m)(3) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(14), 402.105(d)(2)(xi)
                CMS
                Penalty for any nonparticipating physician charging more than $500 who does not accept payment for an elective surgical procedure on an assignment related basis and who knowingly and willfully fails to disclose the required information regarding charges and coinsurance amounts and fails to refund on a timely basis any amount collected for the procedure in excess of the charges recognized and approved by the Medicare program. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                
                1395u(n)(3) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(15), 402.105(d)(2)(xii)
                CMS
                Penalty for any physician who knowingly, willfully, and repeatedly bills one or more beneficiaries for purchased diagnostic tests any amount other than the payment amount specified by the Act. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395u(o)(3)(B) 5
                
                42 CFR 414.707(b)
                CMS
                Penalty for any practitioner specified in Section 1842(b)(18)(C) of the Act or other person that knowingly and willfully bills or collects for any services pertaining to drugs or biologics by the practitioners on other than an assignment-related basis. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(18)(B) and 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395u(p)(3)(A)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for any physician or practitioner who knowingly and willfully fails promptly to provide the appropriate diagnosis codes upon CMS or Medicare administrative contractor request for payment or bill not submitted on an assignment-related basis
                2016
                3,957
                4,022
                4,104
              
              
                
                1395w-3a(d)(4)(A)
                42 CFR 414.806
                CMS
                Penalty for a pharmaceutical manufacturer's misrepresentation of average sales price of a drug, or biologic
                2016
                12,856
                13,066
                13,333
              
              
                1395w-4(g)(1)(B) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(17), 402.105(d)(2)(xiii)
                CMS
                Penalty for any nonparticipating physician, supplier, or other person that furnishes physician services not on an assignment-related basis who either knowingly and willfully bills or collects in excess of the statutorily-defined limiting charge or fails to make a timely refund or adjustment. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395w-4(g)(3)(B) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(18), 402.105(d)(2)(xiv)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that knowingly and willfully bills for statutorily defined State-plan approved physicians' services on any other basis than an assignment-related basis for a Medicare/Medicaid dual eligible beneficiary. (Penalties are assessed in the same manner as 42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(2)(B), which is assessed according to 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395w-27(g)(3)(A); 1857(g)(3)
                42 CFR 422.760(b); 42 CFR 423.760(b)
                CMS
                Penalty for each termination determination the Secretary makes that is the result of actions by a Medicare Advantage organization or Part D sponsor that has adversely affected an individual covered under the organization's contract
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                
                1395w-27(g)(3)(B); 1857(g)(3)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for each week beginning after the initiation of civil money penalty procedures by the Secretary because a Medicare Advantage organization or Part D sponsor has failed to carry out a contract, or has carried out a contract inconsistently with regulations
                2016
                14,718
                14,959
                15,264
              
              
                1395w-27(g)(3)(D); 1857(g)(3)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for a Medicare Advantage organization's or Part D sponsor's early termination of its contract
                2016
                136,689
                138,925
                141,760
              
              
                1395y(b)(3)(C)
                42 CFR 411.103(b)
                CMS
                Penalty for an employer or other entity to offer any financial or other incentive for an individual entitled to benefits not to enroll under a group health plan or large group health plan which would be a primary plan
                2016
                8,908
                9,054
                9,239
              
              
                1395y(b)(5)(C)(ii)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(20), 42 CFR 402.105(b)(2)
                CMS
                Penalty for any non-governmental employer that, before October 1, 1998, willfully or repeatedly failed to provide timely and accurate information requested relating to an employee's group health insurance coverage
                2016
                1,450
                1,474
                1,504
              
              
                
                1395y(b)(6)(B)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(21), 402.105(a)
                CMS
                Penalty for any entity that knowingly, willfully, and repeatedly fails to complete a claim form relating to the availability of other health benefits in accordance with statute or provides inaccurate information relating to such on the claim form
                2016
                3,182
                3,234
                3,300
              
              
                1395y(b)(7)(B)(i)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for any entity serving as insurer, third party administrator, or fiduciary for a group health plan that fails to provide information that identifies situations where the group health plan is or was a primary plan to Medicare to the HHS Secretary
                2016
                1,138
                1,157
                1,181
              
              
                1395pp(h) 5
                
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(23), 402.105(d)(2)(xv)
                CMS
                Penalty for any durable medical equipment supplier, including a supplier of prosthetic devices, prosthetics, orthotics, or supplies, that knowingly and willfully fails to make refunds in a timely manner to Medicare beneficiaries under certain conditions. (42 U.S.C. 1395(m)(18) sanctions apply here in the same manner, which is under 1395u(j)(2) and 1320a-7a(a))
                2018
                15,024
                15,270
                30,000
              
              
                1395nn(g)(5)
                42 CFR 411.361
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that fails to report information required by HHS under Section 1877(f) concerning ownership, investment, and compensation arrangements
                2016
                18,936
                19,246
                19,639
              
              
                
                1395pp(h)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(23), 402.105(d)(2)(xv)
                CMS
                Penalty for any durable medical equipment supplier, including a supplier of prosthetic devices, prosthetics, orthotics, or supplies, that knowingly and willfully fails to make refunds in a timely manner to Medicare beneficiaries under certain conditions. (42 U.S.C. 1395(m)(18) sanctions apply here in the same manner, which is under 1395u(j)(2) and 1320a-7a(a))
                2016
                15,024
                15,270
                15,582
              
              
                1395ss(a)(2)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(24), 405.105(f)(1)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that issues a Medicare supplemental policy that has not been approved by the State regulatory program or does not meet Federal standards after a statutorily defined effective date
                2016
                51,569
                52,413
                53,483
              
              
                1395ss(d)(3)(A)(vi)(II)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for someone other than issuer that sells or issues a Medicare supplemental policy to beneficiary without a disclosure statement
                2016
                26,723
                27,160
                27,714
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for an issuer that sells or issues a Medicare supplemental policy without disclosure statement
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                1395ss(d)(3)(B)(iv)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for someone other than issuer that sells or issues a Medicare supplemental policy without acknowledgement form.
                2016
                26,723
                27,160
                27,714
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty for issuer that sells or issues a Medicare supplemental policy without an acknowledgement form
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                1395ss(p)(8)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(25), 402.105(e)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that sells or issues Medicare supplemental polices after a given date that fail to conform to the NAIC or Federal standards established by statute
                2016
                26,723
                27,160
                27,714
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(25), 405.105(f)(2)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that sells or issues Medicare supplemental polices after a given date that fail to conform to the NAIC or Federal standards established by statute
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                1395ss(p)(9)(C)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(26), 402.105(e)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that sells a Medicare supplemental policy and fails to make available for sale the core group of basic benefits when selling other Medicare supplemental policies with additional benefits or fails to provide the individual, before selling the policy, an outline of coverage describing benefits
                2016
                26,723
                27,160
                27,714
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(26), 405.105(f)(3), (4)
                
                Penalty for any person that sells a Medicare supplemental policy and fails to make available for sale the core group of basic benefits when selling other Medicare supplemental policies with additional benefits or fails to provide the individual, before selling the policy, an outline of coverage describing benefits
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                
                1395ss(q)(5)(C)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(27), 405.105(f)(5)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that fails to suspend the policy of a policyholder made eligible for medical assistance or automatically reinstates the policy of a policyholder who has lost eligibility for medical assistance, under certain circumstances
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                1395ss(r)(6)(A)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(28), 405.105(f)(6)
                CMS
                Penalty for any person that fails to provide refunds or credits as required by section 1882(r)(1)(B)
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                1395ss(s)(4)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(29), 405.105(c)
                CMS
                Penalty for any issuer of a Medicare supplemental policy that does not waive listed time periods if they were already satisfied under a proceeding Medicare supplemental policy, or denies a policy, or conditions the issuances or effectiveness of the policy, or discriminates in the pricing of the policy base on health status or other specified criteria
                2016
                18,908
                19,217
                19,609
              
              
                1395ss(t)(2)
                42 CFR 402.1(c)(30), 405.105(f)(7)
                CMS
                Penalty for any issuer of a Medicare supplemental policy that fails to fulfill listed responsibilities
                2016
                44,539
                45,268
                46,192
              
              
                1395ss(v)(4)(A)
                
                CMS
                Penalty someone other than issuer who sells, issues, or renews a Medigap Rx policy to an individual who is a Part D enrollee
                2016
                19,284
                19,599
                19,999
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty for an issuer who sells, issues, or renews a Medigap Rx policy who is a Part D enrollee
                2016
                32,140
                32,666
                33,333
              
              
                1395bbb(c)(1)
                42 CFR 488.725(c)
                CMS
                Penalty for any individual who notifies or causes to be notified a home health agency of the time or date on which a survey of such agency is to be conducted
                2016
                4,126
                4,194
                4,280
              
              
                1395bbb(f)(2)(A)(i)
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(2)(iii); 42 CFR 488.845(b)(3)-(6); and 42 CFR 488.845(d)(1)(ii)
                CMS
                Maximum daily penalty amount for each day a home health agency is not in compliance with statutory requirements
                2016
                19,787
                20,111
                20,521
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(3)
                
                Penalty per day for home health agency's noncompliance (Upper Range)
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                16,819
                17,094
                17,443
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                19,787
                20,111
                20,521
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(3)(i)
                
                Penalty for a home health agency's deficiency or deficiencies that cause immediate jeopardy and result in actual harm
                2016
                19,787
                20,111
                20,521
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(3)(ii)
                
                Penalty for a home health agency's deficiency or deficiencies that cause immediate jeopardy and result in potential for harm
                2016
                17,808
                18,099
                18,468
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(3)(iii)
                
                Penalty for an isolated incident of noncompliance in violation of established HHA policy
                2016
                16,819
                17,094
                17,443
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(4)
                
                Penalty for a repeat and/or condition-level deficiency that does not constitute immediate jeopardy, but is directly related to poor quality patient care outcomes (Lower Range)
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,968
                3,017
                3,079
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                16,819
                17,094
                17,443
              
              
                
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(5)
                
                Penalty for a repeat and/or condition-level deficiency that does not constitute immediate jeopardy and that is related predominately to structure or process-oriented conditions (Lower Range)
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                989
                1,005
                1,026
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                7,915
                8,044
                8,208
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(b)(6)
                
                Penalty imposed for instance of noncompliance that may be assessed for one or more singular events of condition-level noncompliance that are identified and where the noncompliance was corrected during the onsite survey
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                1,979
                2,011
                2,052
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                19,787
                20,111
                20,521
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for each day of noncompliance (Maximum)
                2016
                19,787
                20,111
                20,521
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.845(d)(1)(ii)
                
                Penalty for each day of noncompliance (Maximum)
                2016
                19,787
                20,111
                20,521
              
              
                1396b(m)(5)(B)
                42 CFR 460.46
                CMS
                Penalty for PACE organization's practice that would reasonably be expected to have the effect of denying or discouraging enrollment
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                22,077
                22,438
                22,896
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                147,177
                149,585
                152,638
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a PACE organization that charges excessive premiums
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a PACE organization misrepresenting or falsifying information to CMS, the State, or an individual or other entity
                2016
                147,177
                149,585
                152,638
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for each determination the CMS makes that the PACE organization has failed to provide medically necessary items and services of the failure has adversely affected (or has the substantial likelihood of adversely affecting) a PACE participant
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for involuntarily disenrolling a participant
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for discriminating or discouraging enrollment or disenrollment of participants on the basis of an individual's health status or need for health care services
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                1396r(h)(3)(C)(ii)(I)
                42 CFR 488.408(d)(1)(iii)
                CMS
                Penalty per day for a nursing facility's failure to meet a Category 2 Certification
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                103
                105
                107
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                6,188
                6,289
                6,417
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.408(d)(1)(iv)
                CMS
                Penalty per instance for a nursing facility's failure to meet Category 2 certification
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.408(e)(1)(iii)
                CMS
                Penalty per day for a nursing facility's failure to meet Category 3 certification
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                6,291
                6,394
                6,525
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.408(e)(1)(iv)
                CMS
                Penalty per instance for a nursing facility's failure to meet Category 3 certification
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                
                 
                42 CFR 488.408(e)(2)(ii)
                CMS
                Penalty per instance for a nursing facility's failure to meet Category 3 certification, which results in immediate jeopardy
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.438(a)(1)(i)
                CMS
                Penalty per day for nursing facility's failure to meet certification (Upper Range)
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                6,291
                6,394
                6,525
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.438(a)(1)(ii)
                CMS
                Penalty per day for nursing facility's failure to meet certification (Lower Range)
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                103
                105
                107
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                6,188
                6,289
                6,417
              
              
                 
                42 CFR 488.438(a)(2)
                CMS
                Penalty per instance for nursing facility's failure to meet certification
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2,063
                2,097
                2,140
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                1396r(f)(2)(B)(iii)(I)(c)
                42 CFR 483.151(b)(2)(iv) and (b)(3)(iii)
                CMS
                Grounds to prohibit approval of Nurse Aide Training Program—if assessed a penalty in 1819(h)(2)(B)(i) or 1919(h)(2)(A)(ii) of “not less than $5,000” [Not CMP authority, but a specific CMP amount (CMP at this level) that is the triggering condition for disapproval]
                2016
                10,314
                10,483
                10,697
              
              
                
                1396r(h)(3)(C)(ii)(I)
                42 CFR 483.151(c)(2)
                CMS
                Grounds to waive disapproval of nurse aide training program—reference to disapproval based on imposition of CMP “not less than $5,000” [Not CMP authority but CMP imposition at this level determines eligibility to seek waiver of disapproval of nurse aide training program]
                2016
                10,314
                10,483
                10,697
              
              
                1396t(j)(2)(C)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for each day of noncompliance for a home or community care provider that no longer meets the minimum requirements for home and community care
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                2
                2
                2
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                17,816
                18,107
                18,477
              
              
                1396u-2(e)(2)(A)(i)
                42 CFR 438.704
                CMS
                Penalty for a Medicaid managed care organization that fails substantially to provide medically necessary items and services
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for Medicaid managed care organization that imposes premiums or charges on enrollees in excess of the premiums or charges permitted
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicaid managed care organization that misrepresents or falsifies information to another individual or entity
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for a Medicaid managed care organization that fails to comply with the applicable statutory requirements for such organizations
                2016
                36,794
                37,396
                38,159
              
              
                1396u-2(e)(2)(A)(ii)
                42 CFR 438.704
                CMS
                Penalty for a Medicaid managed care organization that misrepresents or falsifies information to the HHS Secretary
                2016
                147,177
                149,585
                152,638
              
              
                
                 
                
                
                Penalty for Medicaid managed care organization that acts to discriminate among enrollees on the basis of their health status
                2016
                147,177
                149,585
                152,638
              
              
                1396u-2(e)(2)(A)(iv)
                42 CFR 438.704
                CMS
                Penalty for each individual that does not enroll as a result of a Medicaid managed care organization that acts to discriminate among enrollees on the basis of their health status
                2016
                22,077
                22,438
                22,896
              
              
                1396u(h)(2)
                42 CFR Part 441, Subpart I
                CMS
                Penalty for a provider not meeting one of the requirements relating to the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of individuals receiving community supported living arrangements services
                2016
                20,628
                20,965
                21,393
              
              
                1396w-2(c)(1)
                
                CMS
                Penalty for disclosing information related to eligibility determinations for medical assistance programs
                2016
                11,002
                11,182
                11,410
              
              
                18041(c)(2)
                45 CFR 150.315; 45 CFR 156.805(c)
                CMS
                Failure to comply with requirements of the Public Health Services Act; Penalty for violations of rules or standards of behavior associated with issuer participation in the Federally-facilitated Exchange. (42 U.S.C. 300gg-22(b)(2)(C))
                2016
                150
                152
                155
              
              
                18081(h)(1)(A)(i)(II)
                42 CFR 155.285
                CMS
                Penalty for providing false information on Exchange application
                2016
                27,186
                27,631
                28,195
              
              
                
                18081(h)(1)(B)
                42 CFR 155.285
                CMS
                Penalty for knowingly or willfully providing false information on Exchange application
                2016
                271,862
                276,310
                281,949
              
              
                18081(h)(2)
                42 CFR 155.260
                CMS
                Penalty for knowingly or willfully disclosing protected information from Exchange
                2016
                27,186
                27,631
                28,195
              
              
                
                  31 U.S.C.
                
              
              
                1352
                45 CFR 93.400(e)
                HHS
                Penalty for the first time an individual makes an expenditure prohibited by regulations regarding lobbying disclosure, absent aggravating circumstances
                2016
                18,936
                19,246
                19,639
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for second and subsequent offenses by individuals who make an expenditure prohibited by regulations regarding lobbying disclosure
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                18,936
                19,246
                19,639
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                189,361
                192,459
                196,387
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for the first time an individual fails to file or amend a lobbying disclosure form, absent aggravating circumstances
                2016
                18,936
                19,246
                19,639
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for second and subsequent offenses by individuals who fail to file or amend a lobbying disclosure form, absent aggravating circumstances
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                18,936
                19,246
                19,639
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                189,361
                192,459
                196,387
              
              
                 
                45 CFR Part 93, Appendix A
                HHS
                Penalty for failure to provide certification regarding lobbying in the award documents for all sub-awards of all tiers
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                18,936
                19,246
                19,639
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                189,361
                192,459
                196,387
              
              
                 
                
                
                Penalty for failure to provide statement regarding lobbying for loan guarantee and loan insurance transactions
                
                
              
              
                 
                
                
                Minimum
                2016
                18,936
                19,246
                19,639
              
              
                 
                
                
                Maximum
                2016
                189,361
                192,459
                196,387
              
              
                
                3801-3812
                45 CFR 79.3(a)(1)(iv)
                HHS
                Penalty against any individual who—with knowledge or reason to know—makes, presents or submits a false, fictitious or fraudulent claim to the Department
                2016
                9,894
                10,056
                10,261
              
              
                 
                45 CFR 79.3(b)(1(ii)
                HHS
                Penalty against any individual who—with knowledge or reason to know—makes, presents or submits a false, fictitious or fraudulent claim to the Department
                2016
                9,894
                10,056
                10,261
              
              
                1 Some HHS components have not promulgated regulations regarding their civil monetary penalty-specific statutory authorities.
              
                2 The description is not intended to be a comprehensive explanation of the underlying violation; the statute and corresponding regulation, if applicable, should be consulted.
              
                3 Statutory or Inflation Act Adjustment.
              
                4 The cost of living multiplier for 2018, based on the CPI-U for the month of October 2017, not seasonally adjusted, is 1.02041, as indicated in OMB Memorandum M-18-03, “Implementation of Penalty Inflation Adjustments for 2018, Pursuant to the Federal Civil Penalties Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015” (December 15, 2017).
              
                5 2018 Maximum Adjusted Penalty column adjusted based on changes to the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 for 42 U.S.C.1320a-7a(a),1320a-7a(b), 1395l(h)(5)(D),1395m(a)(11)(A),1395m(a)(18)(B), 1395m(b)(5)(C), 1395m(h)(3), 1395m(j)(4), 1395m(k)(6), 1395m(l)(6), 1395u(b)(18)(B), 1395u(j)(2)(B), 1395u(k), 1395u(l)(3), 1395u(m)(3), 1395u(n)(3), 1395u(o)(3)(B), 1395w-4(g)(1)(B), 1395w-4(g)(3)(B),1395pp(h).
            
            [81 FR 61565, Sept. 6, 2016, as amended at 83 FR 51370, Oct. 11, 2018]
             
          
        
      
    
  
  
    
      
      FINDING AIDS
      A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations which is published separately and revised annually.
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
      List of CFR Sections Affected
    
    
      Chap.
      
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
      (Revised as of October 1, 2019)
      
        Title 1—General Provisions
        I
        Administrative Committee of the Federal Register (Parts 1—49)
        II
        Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50—299)
        III
        Administrative Conference of the United States (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400—599)
        VI
        National Capital Planning Commission (Parts 600—699)
      
      
        Title 2—Grants and Agreements
        Subtitle A—Office of Management and Budget Guidance for Grants and Agreements
        I
        Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 2—199)
        II
        Office of Management and Budget Guidance (Parts 200—299)
        Subtitle B—Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and Agreements
        III
        Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Department of Agriculture (Parts 400—499)
        VI
        Department of State (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Agency for International Development (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Department of Energy (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        Department of Defense (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        Department of Transportation (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII
        Department of Commerce (Parts 1300—1399)
        XIV
        Department of the Interior (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVIII
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 1800—1899)
        XX
        United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000—2099)
        XXII
        Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 2200—2299)
        XXIII
        Social Security Administration (Parts 2300—2399)
        XXIV
        Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400—2499)
        XXV
        National Science Foundation (Parts 2500—2599)
        XXVI

        National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2600—2699)
        
        XXVII
        Small Business Administration (Parts 2700—2799)
        XXVIII
        Department of Justice (Parts 2800—2899)
        XXIX
        Department of Labor (Parts 2900—2999)
        XXX
        Department of Homeland Security (Parts 3000—3099)
        XXXI
        Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 3100—3199)
        XXXII
        National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200—3299)
        XXXIII
        National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300—3399)
        XXXIV
        Department of Education (Parts 3400—3499)
        XXXV
        Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500—3599)
        XXXVI
        Office of National Drug Control Policy, Executive Office of the President (Parts 3600—3699)
        XXXVII
        Peace Corps (Parts 3700—3799)
        LVIII
        Election Assistance Commission (Parts 5800—5899)
        LIX
        Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council (Parts 5900—5999)
      
      
        Title 3—The President
        I
        Executive Office of the President (Parts 100—199)
      
      
        Title 4—Accounts
        I
        Government Accountability Office (Parts 1—199)
      
      
        Title 5—Administrative Personnel
        I
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1—1199)
        II
        Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200—1299)
        III
        Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300—1399)
        IV
        Office of Personnel Management and Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 1400—1499)
        V
        The International Organizations Employees Loyalty Board (Parts 1500—1599)
        VI
        Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 1600—1699)
        VIII
        Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800—1899)
        IX
        Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900—1999)
        XI
        Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100—2199)
        XIV
        Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400—2499)
        XVI
        Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600—2699)
        XXI
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100—3199)
        XXII
        Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200—3299)
        XXIII
        Department of Energy (Parts 3300—3399)
        XXIV
        Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400—3499)
        XXV
        Department of the Interior (Parts 3500—3599)
        XXVI
        Department of Defense (Parts 3600—3699)
        
        XXVIII
        Department of Justice (Parts 3800—3899)
        XXIX
        Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900—3999)
        XXX
        Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000—4099)
        XXXI
        Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100—4199)
        XXXIII
        U.S. International Development Finance Corporation (Parts 4300—4399)
        XXXIV
        Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 4400—4499)
        XXXV
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500—4599)
        XXXVI
        Department of Homeland Security (Parts 4600—4699)
        XXXVII
        Federal Election Commission (Parts 4700—4799)
        XL
        Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000—5099)
        XLI
        Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100—5199)
        XLII
        Department of Labor (Parts 5200—5299)
        XLIII
        National Science Foundation (Parts 5300—5399)
        XLV
        Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500—5599)
        XLVI
        Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600—5699)
        XLVII
        Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700—5799)
        XLVIII
        Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800—5899)
        XLIX
        Federal Labor Relations Authority (Parts 5900—5999)
        L
        Department of Transportation (Parts 6000—6099)
        LII
        Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200—6299)
        LIII
        Department of Education (Parts 6300—6399)
        LIV
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400—6499)
        LV
        National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500—6599)
        LVI
        National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600—6699)
        LVII
        General Services Administration (Parts 6700—6799)
        LVIII
        Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Parts 6800—6899)
        LIX
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 6900—6999)
        LX
        United States Postal Service (Parts 7000—7099)
        LXI
        National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100—7199)
        LXII
        Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200—7299)
        LXIII
        Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300—7399)
        LXIV
        Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400—7499)
        LXV
        Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 7500—7599)
        LXVI
        National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 7600—7699)
        LXVII
        Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700—7799)
        LXVIII
        Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 7800—7899)
        LXIX
        Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900—7999)
        LXX
        Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (Parts 8000—8099)
        LXXI
        Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100—8199)
        LXXIII
        Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300—8399)
        
        LXXIV
        Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Parts 8400—8499)
        LXXVI
        Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 8600—8699)
        LXXVII
        Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700—8799)
        LXXX
        Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 9000—9099)
        LXXXIII
        Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (Parts 9300—9399)
        LXXXIV
        Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 9400—9499)
        LXXXVI
        National Credit Union Administration (Parts 9600—9699)
        XCVII
        Department of Homeland Security Human Resources Management System (Department of Homeland Security—Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 9700—9799)
        XCVIII
        Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency (Parts 9800—9899)
        XCIX
        Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization Commission (Parts 9900—9999)
        C
        National Council on Disability (Parts 10000—10049)
        CI
        National Mediation Board (Part 10101)
      
      
        Title 6—Domestic Security
        I
        Department of Homeland Security, Office of the Secretary (Parts 1—199)
        X
        Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 7—Agriculture
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Agriculture (Parts 0—26)
        Subtitle B—Regulations of the Department of Agriculture
        I
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of Agriculture (Parts 27—209)
        II
        Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 210—299)
        III
        Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of Agriculture (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 700—799)
        VIII

        Agricultural Marketing Service (Federal Grain Inspection Service, Fair Trade Practices Program), Department of Agriculture (Parts 800—899)
        
        IX
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department of Agriculture (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture (Parts 1000—1199)
        XI
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department of Agriculture (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIV
        Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800—2099)
        XX
        Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200—2299)
        XXV
        Office of Advocacy and Outreach, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2500—2599)
        XXVI
        Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2600—2699)
        XXVII
        Office of Information Resources Management, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2700—2799)
        XXVIII
        Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2800—2899)
        XXIX
        Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2900—2999)
        XXX
        Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3000—3099)
        XXXI
        Office of Environmental Quality, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3100—3199)
        XXXII
        Office of Procurement and Property Management, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200—3299)
        XXXIII
        Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3300—3399)
        XXXIV
        National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Parts 3400—3499)
        XXXV
        Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3500—3599)
        XXXVI
        National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3600—3699)
        XXXVII
        Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3700—3799)
        XXXVIII
        World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3800—3899)
        XLI
        [Reserved]
        XLII
        Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200—4299)
      
      
        
        Title 8—Aliens and Nationality
        I
        Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1—499)
        V
        Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of Justice (Parts 1000—1399)
      
      
        Title 9—Animals and Animal Products
        I
        Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Federal Grain Inspection Service, Fair Trade Practices Program), Department of Agriculture (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300—599)
      
      
        Title 10—Energy
        I
        Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0—199)
        II
        Department of Energy (Parts 200—699)
        III
        Department of Energy (Parts 700—999)
        X
        Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 1000—1099)
        XIII
        Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1300—1399)
        XVII
        Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste Commission (Parts 1800—1899)
      
      
        Title 11—Federal Elections
        I
        Federal Election Commission (Parts 1—9099)
        II
        Election Assistance Commission (Parts 9400—9499)
      
      
        Title 12—Banks and Banking
        I
        Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Federal Reserve System (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400—499)
        V
        (Parts 600—699) [Reserved]
        VI
        Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII

        Financial Stability Oversight Council (Parts 1300—1399)
        
        XIV
        Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Office of Financial Research (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800—1899)
      
      
        Title 13—Business Credit and Assistance
        I
        Small Business Administration (Parts 1—199)
        III
        Economic Development Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 500—599)
      
      
        Title 14—Aeronautics and Space
        I
        Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200—399)
        III
        Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 400—1199)
        V
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 1200—1299)
        VI
        Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300—1399)
      
      
        Title 15—Commerce and Foreign Trade
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 0—29)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Commerce and Foreign Trade
        I
        Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 30—199)
        II
        National Institute of Standards and Technology, Department of Commerce (Parts 200—299)
        III
        International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce (Parts 400—499)
        VII
        Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of Commerce (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 900—999)
        XI

        National Technical Information Service, Department of Commerce (Parts 1100—1199)
        
        XIII
        East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300—1399)
        XIV
        Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400—1499)
        Subtitle C—Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade Agreements
        XX
        Office of the United States Trade Representative (Parts 2000—2099)
        Subtitle D—Regulations Relating to Telecommunications and Information
        XXIII
        National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 2300—2399) [Reserved]
      
      
        Title 16—Commercial Practices
        I
        Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0—999)
        II
        Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000—1799)
      
      
        Title 17—Commodity and Securities Exchanges
        I
        Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200—399)
        IV
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 400—499)
      
      
        Title 18—Conservation of Power and Water Resources
        I
        Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of Energy (Parts 1—399)
        III
        Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400—499)
        VI
        Water Resources Council (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800—899)
        XIII
        Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300—1399)
      
      
        Title 19—Customs Duties
        I
        U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury (Parts 0—199)
        II
        United States International Trade Commission (Parts 200—299)
        III
        International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400—599) [Reserved]
      
      
        Title 20—Employees' Benefits
        I
        Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department of Labor (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200—399)
        III
        Social Security Administration (Parts 400—499)
        
        IV
        Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of Labor (Parts 500—599)
        V
        Employment and Training Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 600—699)
        VI
        Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department of Labor (Parts 700—799)
        VII
        Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 800—899)
        VIII
        Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 900—999)
        IX
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Department of Labor (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 21—Food and Drugs
        I
        Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1—1299)
        II
        Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice (Parts 1300—1399)
        III
        Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400—1499)
      
      
        Title 22—Foreign Relations
        I
        Department of State (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Agency for International Development (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Peace Corps (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        International Joint Commission, United States and Canada (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500—599)
        VII
        Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700—799)
        IX
        Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        United States International Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII
        Millennium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300—1399)
        XIV
        Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor Relations Authority; General Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        African Development Foundation (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700—1799)
      
      
        Title 23—Highways
        I

        Federal Highway Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1—999)
        
        II
        National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and Federal Highway Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1200—1299)
        III
        National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1300—1399)
      
      
        Title 24—Housing and Urban Development
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0—99)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
        I
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 100—199)
        II
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Government National Mortgage Association, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 600—699) [Reserved]
        VII
        Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With Disabilities Program) (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 900—1699)
        XII
        Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2000—2099)
        XV
        Emergency Mortgage Insurance and Loan Programs, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2700—2799) [Reserved]
        XX
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 3200—3899)
        XXIV
        Board of Directors of the HOPE for Homeowners Program (Parts 4000—4099) [Reserved]
        XXV
        Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100—4199)
      
      
        
        Title 25—Indians
        I
        Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior (Parts 1—299)
        II
        Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the Interior (Parts 300—399)
        III
        National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the Interior (Parts 500—599)
        IV
        Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 700—899)
        V
        Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, and Indian Health Service, Department of Health and Human Services (Part 900—999)
        VI
        Office of the Assistant Secretary, Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior (Parts 1000—1199)
        VII
        Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, Department of the Interior (Parts 1200—1299)
      
      
        Title 26—Internal Revenue
        I
        Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1—End)
      
      
        Title 27—Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms
        I
        Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1—399)
        II
        Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Department of Justice (Parts 400—699)
      
      
        Title 28—Judicial Administration
        I
        Department of Justice (Parts 0—299)
        III
        Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice (Parts 300—399)
        V
        Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council (Parts 900—999)
        XI
        Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 1100—1199)
      
      
        Title 29—Labor
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 0—99)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Labor
        I
        National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100—199)
        
        II
        Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of Labor (Parts 200—299)
        III
        National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of Labor (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 500—899)
        IX
        Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission (Parts 900—999)
        X
        National Mediation Board (Parts 1200—1299)
        XII
        Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 1400—1499)
        XIV
        Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 1900—1999)
        XX
        Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission (Parts 2200—2499)
        XXV
        Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 2500—2599)
        XXVII
        Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Parts 2700—2799)
        XL
        Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000—4999)
      
      
        Title 30—Mineral Resources
        I
        Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, Department of the Interior (Parts 200—299)
        IV
        Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Department of the Interior (Parts 500—599)
        VII
        Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior (Parts 700—999)
        XII
        Office of Natural Resources Revenue, Department of the Interior (Parts 1200—1299)
      
      
        Title 31—Money and Finance: Treasury
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of the Treasury (Parts 0—50)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
        I
        Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 51—199)
        II
        Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 200—399)
        IV
        Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the Treasury (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the Treasury (Parts 600—699)
        VII

        Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of the Treasury (Parts 700—799)
        
        VIII
        Office of Investment Security, Department of the Treasury (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the Treasury—Department of Justice) (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 32—National Defense
        Subtitle A—Department of Defense
        I
        Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1—399)
        V
        Department of the Army (Parts 400—699)
        VI
        Department of the Navy (Parts 700—799)
        VII
        Department of the Air Force (Parts 800—1099)
        Subtitle B—Other Regulations Relating to National Defense
        XII
        Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200—1299)
        XVI
        Selective Service System (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800—1899)
        XIX
        Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900—1999)
        XX
        Information Security Oversight Office, National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000—2099)
        XXI
        National Security Council (Parts 2100—2199)
        XXIV
        Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400—2499)
        XXVII
        Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 2700—2799)
        XXVIII
        Office of the Vice President of the United States (Parts 2800—2899)
      
      
        Title 33—Navigation and Navigable Waters
        I
        Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, Department of Defense (Parts 200—399)
        IV
        Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, Department of Transportation (Parts 400—499)
      
      
        Title 34—Education
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary, Department of Education (Parts 1—99)
        Subtitle B—Regulations of the Offices of the Department of Education
        I
        Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education (Parts 100—199)
        II
        Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, Department of Education (Parts 200—299)
        III

        Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Department of Education (Parts 300—399)
        
        IV
        Office of Career, Technical and Adult Education, Department of Education (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500—599) [Reserved]
        VI
        Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of Education (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Office of Educational Research and Improvement, Department of Education (Parts 700—799) [Reserved]
        Subtitle C—Regulations Relating to Education
        XI
        (Parts 1100—1199) [Reserved]
        XII
        National Council on Disability (Parts 1200—1299)
      
      
        Title 35 [Reserved]
      
      
        Title 36—Parks, Forests, and Public Property
        I
        National Park Service, Department of the Interior (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        [Reserved]
        VII
        Library of Congress (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Presidio Trust (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 1200—1299)
        XV
        Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600—1699)
      
      
        Title 37—Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights
        I
        United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce (Parts 1—199)
        II
        U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        National Institute of Standards and Technology, Department of Commerce (Parts 400—599)
      
      
        Title 38—Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief
        I
        Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0—199)
        II
        Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 200—299)
      
      
        
        Title 39—Postal Service
        I
        United States Postal Service (Parts 1—999)
        III
        Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000—3099)
      
      
        Title 40—Protection of Environment
        I
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1—1099)
        IV
        Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Justice (Parts 1400—1499)
        V
        Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500—1599)
        VI
        Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 1600—1699)
        VII
        Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700—1799)
        VIII
        Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council (Parts 1800—1899)
      
      
        Title 41—Public Contracts and Property Management
        Subtitle A—Federal Procurement Regulations System [Note]
        Subtitle B—Other Provisions Relating to Public Contracts
        50
        Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1—50-999)
        51
        Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1—51-99)
        60
        Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 60-1—60-999)
        61
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Department of Labor (Parts 61-1—61-999)
        62—100
        [Reserved]
        Subtitle C—Federal Property Management Regulations System
        101
        Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1—101-99)
        102
        Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1—102-299)
        103—104
        [Reserved]
        105
        General Services Administration (Parts 105-1—105-999)
        109
        Department of Energy Property Management Regulations (Parts 109-1—109-99)
        114
        Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1—114-99)
        115
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1—115-99)
        128
        Department of Justice (Parts 128-1—128-99)
        129—200
        [Reserved]
        Subtitle D—Other Provisions Relating to Property Management [Reserved]
        Subtitle E—Federal Information Resources Management Regulations System [Reserved]
        Subtitle F—Federal Travel Regulation System
        300
        General (Parts 300-1—300-99)
        301

        Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1—301-99)
        
        302
        Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1—302-99)
        303
        Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of Certain Employees (Part 303-1—303-99)
        304
        Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source (Parts 304-1—304-99)
      
      
        Title 42—Public Health
        I
        Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1—199)
        IV
        Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 400—699)
        V
        Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 43—Public Lands: Interior
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of the Interior (Parts 1—199)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Public Lands
        I
        Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior (Parts 400—999)
        II
        Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior (Parts 1000—9999)
        III
        Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation Commission (Parts 10000—10099)
      
      
        Title 44—Emergency Management and Assistance
        I
        Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 0—399)
        IV
        Department of Commerce and Department of Transportation (Parts 400—499)
      
      
        Title 45—Public Welfare
        Subtitle A—Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1—199)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II
        Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support Enforcement Program), Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 400—499)
        V

        Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States, Department of Justice (Parts 500—599)
        
        VI
        National Science Foundation (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Denali Commission (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Office of Community Services, Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII
        Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1300—1399)
        XVI
        Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        National Commission on Libraries and Information Science (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800—1899)
        XXI
        Commission of Fine Arts (Parts 2100—2199)
        XXIII
        Arctic Research Commission (Parts 2300—2399)
        XXIV
        James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 2400—2499)
        XXV
        Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 2500—2599)
      
      
        Title 46—Shipping
        I
        Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 200—399)
        III
        Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400—499)
        IV
        Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500—599)
      
      
        Title 47—Telecommunication
        I
        Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0—199)
        II
        Office of Science and Technology Policy and National Security Council (Parts 200—299)
        III
        National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department of Commerce, and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 400—499)
        V
        The First Responder Network Authority (Parts 500—599)
      
      
        Title 48—Federal Acquisition Regulations System
        1
        Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1—99)
        
        2
        Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of Defense (Parts 200—299)
        3
        Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300—399)
        4
        Department of Agriculture (Parts 400—499)
        5
        General Services Administration (Parts 500—599)
        6
        Department of State (Parts 600—699)
        7
        Agency for International Development (Parts 700—799)
        8
        Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800—899)
        9
        Department of Energy (Parts 900—999)
        10
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000—1099)
        12
        Department of Transportation (Parts 1200—1299)
        13
        Department of Commerce (Parts 1300—1399)
        14
        Department of the Interior (Parts 1400—1499)
        15
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500—1599)
        16
        Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1600—1699)
        17
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700—1799)
        18
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 1800—1899)
        19
        Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900—1999)
        20
        Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000—2099)
        21
        Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 2100—2199)
        23
        Social Security Administration (Parts 2300—2399)
        24
        Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400—2499)
        25
        National Science Foundation (Parts 2500—2599)
        28
        Department of Justice (Parts 2800—2899)
        29
        Department of Labor (Parts 2900—2999)
        30
        Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000—3099)
        34
        Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 3400—3499)
        51
        Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 5100—5199) [Reserved]
        52
        Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 5200—5299)
        53
        Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300—5399) [Reserved]
        54
        Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 5400—5499)
        57
        African Development Foundation (Parts 5700—5799)
        61
        Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, General Services Administration (Parts 6100—6199)
        99
        Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal Procurement Policy, Office of Management and Budget (Parts 9900—9999)
      
      
        
        Title 49—Transportation
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Transportation (Parts 1—99)
        Subtitle B—Other Regulations Relating to Transportation
        I
        Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 100—199)
        II
        Federal Railroad Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400—499)
        V
        National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Federal Transit Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800—999)
        X
        Surface Transportation Board (Parts 1000—1399)
        XI
        Research and Innovative Technology Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1400—1499) [Reserved]
        XII
        Transportation Security Administration, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1500—1699)
      
      
        Title 50—Wildlife and Fisheries
        I
        United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior (Parts 1—199)
        II
        National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 200—299)
        III
        International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior and National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce); Endangered Species Committee Regulations (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 600—699)
      
    
    
      
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
      (Revised as of October 1, 2019)
      Agency
      CFR Title, Subtitle or Chapter
      Administrative Conference of the United States
      1, III
      Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
      36, VIII
      Advocacy and Outreach, Office of
      7, XXV
      Afghanistan Reconstruction, Special Inspector General for
      5, LXXXIII
      African Development Foundation
      22, XV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 57
      Agency for International Development
      2, VII; 22, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 7
      Agricultural Marketing Service
      7, I, VIII, IX, X, XI; 9, II
      Agricultural Research Service
      7, V
      Agriculture, Department of
      2, IV; 5, LXXIII
      Advocacy and Outreach, Office of
      7, XXV
      Agricultural Marketing Service
      7, I, VIII, IX, X, XI; 9, II
      Agricultural Research Service
      7, V
      Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
      7, III; 9, I
      Chief Financial Officer, Office of
      7, XXX
      Commodity Credit Corporation
      7, XIV
      Economic Research Service
      7, XXXVII
      Energy Policy and New Uses, Office of
      2, IX; 7, XXIX
      Environmental Quality, Office of
      7, XXXI
      Farm Service Agency
      7, VII, XVIII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 4
      Federal Crop Insurance Corporation
      7, IV
      Food and Nutrition Service
      7, II
      Food Safety and Inspection Service
      9, III
      Foreign Agricultural Service
      7, XV
      Forest Service
      36, II
      Information Resources Management, Office of
      7, XXVII
      Inspector General, Office of
      7, XXVI
      National Agricultural Library
      7, XLI
      National Agricultural Statistics Service
      7, XXXVI
      National Institute of Food and Agriculture
      7, XXXIV
      Natural Resources Conservation Service
      7, VI
      Operations, Office of
      7, XXVIII
      Procurement and Property Management, Office of
      7, XXXII
      Rural Business-Cooperative Service
      7, XVIII, XLII
      Rural Development Administration
      7, XLII
      Rural Housing Service
      7, XVIII, XXXV
      Rural Telephone Bank
      7, XVI
      Rural Utilities Service
      7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
      Secretary of Agriculture, Office of
      7, Subtitle A
      Transportation, Office of
      7, XXXIII
      World Agricultural Outlook Board
      7, XXXVIII
      Air Force, Department of
      32, VII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement
      48, 53
      Air Transportation Stabilization Board
      14, VI
      Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
      27, I
      Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Bureau of
      27, II
      AMTRAK
      49, VII
      American Battle Monuments Commission
      36, IV
      American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee
      25, VII
      Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
      7, III; 9, I
      Appalachian Regional Commission
      5, IX
      
      Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board
      36, XI
      Arctic Research Commission
      45, XXIII
      Armed Forces Retirement Home
      5, XI; 38, II
      Army, Department of
      32, V
      Engineers, Corps of
      33, II; 36, III
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 51
      Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs, Office of
      34, V
      Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for Purchase from People Who Are
      41, 51
      Broadcasting Board of Governors
      22, V
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 19
      Career, Technical, and Adult Education, Office of
      34, IV
      Census Bureau
      15, I
      Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
      42, IV
      Central Intelligence Agency
      32, XIX
      Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board
      40, VI
      Chief Financial Officer, Office of
      7, XXX
      Child Support Enforcement, Office of
      45, III
      Children and Families, Administration for
      45, II, III, IV, X, XIII
      Civil Rights, Commission on
      5, LXVIII; 45, VII
      Civil Rights, Office for
      34, I
      Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency
      5, XCVIII
      Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia
      5, LXX
      Coast Guard
      33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
      Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)
      46, III
      Commerce, Department of
      2, XIII; 44, IV; 50, VI
      Census Bureau
      15, I
      Economic Analysis, Bureau of
      15, VIII
      Economic Development Administration
      13, III
      Emergency Management and Assistance
      44, IV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 13
      Foreign-Trade Zones Board
      15, IV
      Industry and Security, Bureau of
      15, VII
      International Trade Administration
      15, III; 19, III
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      15, II; 37, IV
      National Marine Fisheries Service
      50, II, IV
      National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
      15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, VI
      National Technical Information Service
      15, XI
      National Telecommunications and Information Administration
      15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
      National Weather Service
      15, IX
      Patent and Trademark Office, United States
      37, I
      Secretary of Commerce, Office of
      15, Subtitle A
      Commercial Space Transportation
      14, III
      Commodity Credit Corporation
      7, XIV
      Commodity Futures Trading Commission
      5, XLI; 17, I
      Community Planning and Development, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, V, VI
      Community Services, Office of
      45, X
      Comptroller of the Currency
      12, I
      Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission
      29, IX
      Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
      5, LXXXIV; 12, X
      Consumer Product Safety Commission
      5, LXXI; 16, II
      Copyright Royalty Board
      37, III
      Corporation for National and Community Service
      2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
      Cost Accounting Standards Board
      48, 99
      Council on Environmental Quality
      40, V
      Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia
      5, LXX; 28, VIII
      Customs and Border Protection
      19, I
      Defense Contract Audit Agency
      32, I
      Defense, Department of
      2, XI; 5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 40, VII
      Advanced Research Projects Agency
      32, I
      Air Force Department
      32, VII
      Army Department
      32, V; 33, II; 36, III; 48, 51
      
      Defense Acquisition Regulations System
      48, 2
      Defense Intelligence Agency
      32, I
      Defense Logistics Agency
      32, I, XII; 48, 54
      Engineers, Corps of
      33, II; 36, III
      National Imagery and Mapping Agency
      32, I
      Navy Department
      32, VI; 48, 52
      Secretary of Defense, Office of
      2, XI; 32, I
      Defense Contract Audit Agency
      32, I
      Defense Intelligence Agency
      32, I
      Defense Logistics Agency
      32, XII; 48, 54
      Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board
      10, XVII
      Delaware River Basin Commission
      18, III
      Denali Commission
      45, IX
      Disability, National Council on
      5, C; 34, XII
      District of Columbia, Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the
      5, LXX; 28, VIII
      Drug Enforcement Administration
      21, II
      East-West Foreign Trade Board
      15, XIII
      Economic Analysis, Bureau of
      15, VIII
      Economic Development Administration
      13, III
      Economic Research Service
      7, XXXVII
      Education, Department of
      2, XXXIV; 5, LIII
      Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs, Office of
      34, V
      Career, Technical, and Adult Education, Office of
      34, IV
      Civil Rights, Office for
      34, I
      Educational Research and Improvement, Office of
      34, VII
      Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of
      34, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 34
      Postsecondary Education, Office of
      34, VI
      Secretary of Education, Office of
      34, Subtitle A
      Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Office of
      34, III
      Educational Research and Improvement, Office of
      34, VII
      Election Assistance Commission
      2, LVIII; 11, II
      Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of
      34, II
      Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board
      13, V
      Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board
      13, IV
      Employee Benefits Security Administration
      29, XXV
      Employees' Compensation Appeals Board
      20, IV
      Employees Loyalty Board
      5, V
      Employment and Training Administration
      20, V
      Employment Policy, National Commission for
      1, IV
      Employment Standards Administration
      20, VI
      Endangered Species Committee
      50, IV
      Energy, Department of
      2, IX; 5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 9
      Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
      5, XXIV; 18, I
      Property Management Regulations
      41, 109
      Energy, Office of
      7, XXIX
      Engineers, Corps of
      33, II; 36, III
      Engraving and Printing, Bureau of
      31, VI
      Environmental Protection Agency
      2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, VII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 15
      Property Management Regulations
      41, 115
      Environmental Quality, Office of
      7, XXXI
      Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
      5, LXII; 29, XIV
      Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, I
      Executive Office of the President
      3, I
      Environmental Quality, Council on
      40, V
      Management and Budget, Office of
      2, Subtitle A; 5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 48, 99
      National Drug Control Policy, Office of
      2, XXXVI; 21, III
      National Security Council
      32, XXI; 47, 2
      Presidential Documents
      3
      Science and Technology Policy, Office of
      32, XXIV; 47, II
      
      Trade Representative, Office of the United States
      15, XX
      Export-Import Bank of the United States
      2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
      Family Assistance, Office of
      45, II
      Farm Credit Administration
      5, XXXI; 12, VI
      Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation
      5, XXX; 12, XIV
      Farm Service Agency
      7, VII, XVIII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 1
      Federal Aviation Administration
      14, I
      Commercial Space Transportation
      14, III
      Federal Claims Collection Standards
      31, IX
      Federal Communications Commission
      5, XXIX; 47, I
      Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of
      41, 60
      Federal Crop Insurance Corporation
      7, IV
      Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
      5, XXII; 12, III
      Federal Election Commission
      5, XXXVII; 11, I
      Federal Emergency Management Agency
      44, I
      Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 21
      Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation
      48, 16
      Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
      5, XXIV; 18, I
      Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
      12, XI
      Federal Financing Bank
      12, VIII
      Federal Highway Administration
      23, I, II
      Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
      1, IV
      Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office
      12, XVII
      Federal Housing Finance Agency
      5, LXXX; 12, XII
      Federal Housing Finance Board
      12, IX
      Federal Labor Relations Authority
      5, XIV, XLIX; 22, XIV
      Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
      31, VII
      Federal Management Regulation
      41, 102
      Federal Maritime Commission
      46, IV
      Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service
      29, XII
      Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission
      5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
      Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
      49, III
      Federal Prison Industries, Inc.
      28, III
      Federal Procurement Policy Office
      48, 99
      Federal Property Management Regulations
      41, 101
      Federal Railroad Administration
      49, II
      Federal Register, Administrative Committee of
      1, I
      Federal Register, Office of
      1, II
      Federal Reserve System
      12, II
      Board of Governors
      5, LVIII
      Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board
      5, VI, LXXVI
      Federal Service Impasses Panel
      5, XIV
      Federal Trade Commission
      5, XLVII; 16, I
      Federal Transit Administration
      49, VI
      Federal Travel Regulation System
      41, Subtitle F
      Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
      31, X
      Financial Research Office
      12, XVI
      Financial Stability Oversight Council
      12, XIII
      Fine Arts, Commission of
      45, XXI
      Fiscal Service
      31, II
      Fish and Wildlife Service, United States
      50, I, IV
      Food and Drug Administration
      21, I
      Food and Nutrition Service
      7, II
      Food Safety and Inspection Service
      9, III
      Foreign Agricultural Service
      7, XV
      Foreign Assets Control, Office of
      31, V
      Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States
      45, V
      Foreign Service Grievance Board
      22, IX
      Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel
      22, XIV
      Foreign Service Labor Relations Board
      22, XIV
      Foreign-Trade Zones Board
      15, IV
      Forest Service
      36, II
      General Services Administration
      5, LVII; 41, 105
      Contract Appeals, Board of
      48, 61
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 5
      
      Federal Management Regulation
      41, 102
      Federal Property Management Regulations
      41, 101
      Federal Travel Regulation System
      41, Subtitle F
      General
      41, 300
      Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses
      41, 304
      Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of Certain Employees
      41, 303
      Relocation Allowances
      41, 302
      Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances
      41, 301
      Geological Survey
      30, IV
      Government Accountability Office
      4, I
      Government Ethics, Office of
      5, XVI
      Government National Mortgage Association
      24, III
      Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration
      7, VIII; 9, II
      Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council
      2, LIX; 40, VIII
      Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation
      45, XVIII
      Health and Human Services, Department of
      2, III; 5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
      Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
      42, IV
      Child Support Enforcement, Office of
      45, III
      Children and Families, Administration for
      45, II, III, IV, X, XIII
      Community Services, Office of
      45, X
      Family Assistance, Office of
      45, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 3
      Food and Drug Administration
      21, I
      Indian Health Service
      25, V
      Inspector General (Health Care), Office of
      42, V
      Public Health Service
      42, I
      Refugee Resettlement, Office of
      45, IV
      Homeland Security, Department of
      2, XXX; 5, XXXVI; 6, I; 8, I
      Coast Guard
      33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
      Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)
      46, III
      Customs and Border Protection
      19, I
      Federal Emergency Management Agency
      44, I
      Human Resources Management and Labor Relations Systems
      5, XCVII
      Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau
      19, IV
      Transportation Security Administration
      49, XII
      HOPE for Homeowners Program, Board of Directors of
      24, XXIV
      Housing and Urban Development, Department of
      2, XXIV; 5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
      Community Planning and Development, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, V, VI
      Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, I
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 24
      Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office of
      12, XVII
      Government National Mortgage Association
      24, III
      Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, II, VIII, X, XX
      Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring, Office of
      24, IV
      Inspector General, Office of
      24, XII
      Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, IX
      Secretary, Office of
      24, Subtitle A, VII
      Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, II, VIII, X, XX
      Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring,  Office of
      24, IV
      Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau
      19, IV
      Immigration Review, Executive Office for
      8, V
      Independent Counsel, Office of
      28, VII
      Independent Counsel, Offices of
      28, VI
      Indian Affairs, Bureau of
      25, I, V
      Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant Secretary
      25, VI
      Indian Arts and Crafts Board
      25, II
      Indian Health Service
      25, V
      
      Industry and Security, Bureau of
      15, VII
      Information Resources Management, Office of
      7, XXVII
      Information Security Oversight Office, National Archives and Records Administration
      32, XX
      Inspector General
      Agriculture Department
      7, XXVI
      Health and Human Services Department
      42, V
      Housing and Urban Development Department
      24, XII, XV
      Institute of Peace, United States
      22, XVII
      Inter-American Foundation
      5, LXIII; 22, X
      Interior, Department of
      2, XIV
      American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee
      25, VII
      Endangered Species Committee
      50, IV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 14
      Federal Property Management Regulations System
      41, 114
      Fish and Wildlife Service, United States
      50, I, IV
      Geological Survey
      30, IV
      Indian Affairs, Bureau of
      25, I, V
      Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant Secretary
      25, VI
      Indian Arts and Crafts Board
      25, II
      Land Management, Bureau of
      43, II
      National Indian Gaming Commission
      25, III
      National Park Service
      36, I
      Natural Resource Revenue, Office of
      30, XII
      Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of
      30, V
      Reclamation, Bureau of
      43, I
      Safety and Enforcement Bureau, Bureau of
      30, II
      Secretary of the Interior, Office of
      2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
      Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Office of
      30, VII
      Internal Revenue Service
      26, I
      International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico, United States Section
      22, XI
      International Development, United States Agency for
      22, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 7
      International Development Cooperation Agency, United States
      22, XII
      International Development Finance Corporation, U.S.
      5, XXXIII; 22, VII
      International Joint Commission, United States and Canada
      22, IV
      International Organizations Employees Loyalty Board
      5, V
      International Trade Administration
      15, III; 19, III
      International Trade Commission, United States
      19, II
      Interstate Commerce Commission
      5, XL
      Investment Security, Office of
      31, VIII
      James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation
      45, XXIV
      Japan-United States Friendship Commission
      22, XVI
      Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries
      20, VIII
      Justice, Department of
      2, XXVIII; 5, XXVIII; 28, I, XI; 40, IV
      Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Bureau of
      27, II
      Drug Enforcement Administration
      21, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 28
      Federal Claims Collection Standards
      31, IX
      Federal Prison Industries, Inc.
      28, III
      Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States
      45, V
      Immigration Review, Executive Office for
      8, V
      Independent Counsel, Offices of
      28, VI
      Prisons, Bureau of
      28, V
      Property Management Regulations
      41, 128
      Labor, Department of
      2, XXIX; 5, XLII
      Employee Benefits Security Administration
      29, XXV
      Employees' Compensation Appeals Board
      20, IV
      Employment and Training Administration
      20, V
      Employment Standards Administration
      20, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 29
      Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of
      41, 60
      Federal Procurement Regulations System
      41, 50
      
      Labor-Management Standards, Office of
      29, II, IV
      Mine Safety and Health Administration
      30, I
      Occupational Safety and Health Administration
      29, XVII
      Public Contracts
      41, 50
      Secretary of Labor, Office of
      29, Subtitle A
      Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
      41, 61; 20, IX
      Wage and Hour Division
      29, V
      Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of
      20, I, VII
      Labor-Management Standards, Office of
      29, II, IV
      Land Management, Bureau of
      43, II
      Legal Services Corporation
      45, XVI
      Libraries and Information Science, National Commission on
      45, XVII
      Library of Congress
      36, VII
      Copyright Royalty Board
      37, III
      U.S. Copyright Office
      37, II
      Local Television Loan Guarantee Board
      7, XX
      Management and Budget, Office of
      5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 48, 99
      Marine Mammal Commission
      50, V
      Maritime Administration
      46, II
      Merit Systems Protection Board
      5, II, LXIV
      Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for
      32, XXVII
      Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization Commission
      5, XCIX
      Millennium Challenge Corporation
      22, XIII
      Mine Safety and Health Administration
      30, I
      Minority Business Development Agency
      15, XIV
      Miscellaneous Agencies
      1, IV
      Monetary Offices
      31, I
      Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation
      36, XVI
      Museum and Library Services, Institute of
      2, XXXI
      National Aeronautics and Space Administration
      2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 18
      National Agricultural Library
      7, XLI
      National Agricultural Statistics Service
      7, XXXVI
      National and Community Service, Corporation for
      2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
      National Archives and Records Administration
      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
      Information Security Oversight Office
      32, XX
      National Capital Planning Commission
      1, IV, VI
      National Counterintelligence Center
      32, XVIII
      National Credit Union Administration
      5, LXXXVI; 12, VII
      National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council
      28, IX
      National Drug Control Policy, Office of
      2, XXXVI; 21, III
      National Endowment for the Arts
      2, XXXII
      National Endowment for the Humanities
      2, XXXIII
      National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities
      45, XI
      National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
      32, I
      National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
      23, II, III; 47, VI; 49, V
      National Imagery and Mapping Agency
      32, I
      National Indian Gaming Commission
      25, III
      National Institute of Food and Agriculture
      7, XXXIV
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      15, II; 37, IV
      National Intelligence, Office of Director of
      5, IV; 32, XVII
      National Labor Relations Board
      5, LXI; 29, I
      National Marine Fisheries Service
      50, II, IV
      National Mediation Board
      5, CI; 29, X
      National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
      15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, VI
      National Park Service
      36, I
      National Railroad Adjustment Board
      29, III
      National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)
      49, VII
      National Science Foundation
      2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 25
      National Security Council
      32, XXI
      National Security Council and Office of Science and Technology Policy
      47, II
      
      National Technical Information Service
      15, XI
      National Telecommunications and Information Administration
      15, XXIII; 47, III, IV, V
      National Transportation Safety Board
      49, VIII
      Natural Resources Conservation Service
      7, VI
      Natural Resource Revenue, Office of
      30, XII
      Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of
      25, IV
      Navy, Department of
      32, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 52
      Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation
      24, XXV
      Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste Commission
      10, XVIII
      Nuclear Regulatory Commission
      2, XX; 5, XLVIII; 10, I
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 20
      Occupational Safety and Health Administration
      29, XVII
      Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission
      29, XX
      Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of
      30, V
      Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust
      36, XV
      Operations Office
      7, XXVIII
      Patent and Trademark Office, United States
      37, I
      Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses
      41, 304
      Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of Certain Employees
      41, 303
      Peace Corps
      2, XXXVII; 22, III
      Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation
      36, IX
      Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
      29, XL
      Personnel Management, Office of
      5, I, XXXV; 5, IV; 45, VIII
      Human Resources Management and Labor Relations Systems, Department of Homeland Security
      5, XCVII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 17
      Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 21
      Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation
      48, 16
      Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
      49, I
      Postal Regulatory Commission
      5, XLVI; 39, III
      Postal Service, United States
      5, LX; 39, I
      Postsecondary Education, Office of
      34, VI
      President's Commission on White House Fellowships
      1, IV
      Presidential Documents
      3
      Presidio Trust
      36, X
      Prisons, Bureau of
      28, V
      Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
      6, X
      Procurement and Property Management, Office of
      7, XXXII
      Public Contracts, Department of Labor
      41, 50
      Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, IX
      Public Health Service
      42, I
      Railroad Retirement Board
      20, II
      Reclamation, Bureau of
      43, I
      Refugee Resettlement, Office of
      45, IV
      Relocation Allowances
      41, 302
      Research and Innovative Technology Administration
      49, XI
      Rural Business-Cooperative Service
      7, XVIII, XLII
      Rural Development Administration
      7, XLII
      Rural Housing Service
      7, XVIII, XXXV
      Rural Telephone Bank
      7, XVI
      Rural Utilities Service
      7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
      Safety and Environmental Enforcement, Bureau of
      30, II
      Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
      33, IV
      Science and Technology Policy, Office of
      32, XXIV
      Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and National Security Council
      47, II
      Secret Service
      31, IV
      Securities and Exchange Commission
      5, XXXIV; 17, II
      Selective Service System
      32, XVI
      Small Business Administration
      2, XXVII; 13, I
      Smithsonian Institution
      36, V
      
      Social Security Administration
      2, XXIII; 20, III; 48, 23
      Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States
      5, XI
      Special Counsel, Office of
      5, VIII
      Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Office of
      34, III
      State, Department of
      2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 6
      Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Office of
      30, VII
      Surface Transportation Board
      49, X
      Susquehanna River Basin Commission
      18, VIII
      Tennessee Valley Authority
      5, LXIX; 18, XIII
      Trade Representative, United States, Office of
      15, XX
      Transportation, Department of
      2, XII; 5, L
      Commercial Space Transportation
      14, III
      Emergency Management and Assistance
      44, IV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 12
      Federal Aviation Administration
      14, I
      Federal Highway Administration
      23, I, II
      Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
      49, III
      Federal Railroad Administration
      49, II
      Federal Transit Administration
      49, VI
      Maritime Administration
      46, II
      National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
      23, II, III; 47, IV; 49, V
      Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
      49, I
      Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
      33, IV
      Secretary of Transportation, Office of
      14, II; 49, Subtitle A
      Transportation Statistics Bureau
      49, XI
      Transportation, Office of
      7, XXXIII
      Transportation Security Administration
      49, XII
      Transportation Statistics Bureau
      49, XI
      Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)
      41, 301
      Treasury, Department of the
      2, X;5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 31, IX
      Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
      27, I
      Community Development Financial Institutions Fund
      12, XVIII
      Comptroller of the Currency
      12, I
      Customs and Border Protection
      19, I
      Engraving and Printing, Bureau of
      31, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 10
      Federal Claims Collection Standards
      31, IX
      Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
      31, VII
      Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
      31, X
      Fiscal Service
      31, II
      Foreign Assets Control, Office of
      31, V
      Internal Revenue Service
      26, I
      Investment Security, Office of
      31, VIII
      Monetary Offices
      31, I
      Secret Service
      31, IV
      Secretary of the Treasury, Office of
      31, Subtitle A
      Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation
      45, XVIII
      United States and Canada, International Joint Commission
      22, IV
      United States and Mexico, International Boundary and Water Commission, United States Section
      22, XI
      U.S. Copyright Office
      37, II
      Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation Commission
      43, III
      Veterans Affairs, Department of
      2, VIII; 38, I
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 8
      Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
      41, 61; 20, IX
      Vice President of the United States, Office of
      32, XXVIII
      Wage and Hour Division
      29, V
      Water Resources Council
      18, VI
      Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of
      20, I, VII
      World Agricultural Outlook Board
      7, XXXVIII
    
    
      45 CFR (10-1-19 Edition)
      List of CFR Sections Affected
      
      List of CFR Sections Affected

      All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) that were made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 2014 are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. The user should consult the entries for chapters, parts and subparts as well as sections for revisions.

      For changes to this volume of the CFR prior to this listing, consult the annual edition of the monthly List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA). The LSA is available at www.govinfo.gov. For changes to this volume of the CFR prior to 2001, see the “List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000” published in 11 separate volumes. The “List of CFR Sections Affected 1986-2000” is available at www.govinfo.gov.
      
      
        2014
        45 CFR
        79 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        18 Added
        20801
        Removed
        32170
        74 Removed; interim
        75889
        75 Added; interim
        75889
        89 Policy statement; interim
        55367
        92 Removed; interim
        75981
      
      
        2015
        45 CFR
        80 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        1 Removed
        34838
        18 Added
        13252
        95.611 (a)(2) revised
        75843
        101 Added; interim
        42413
      
      
        2016
        45 CFR
        81 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        5 Revised
        74939
        16.1 Amended; interim
        3012
        16.2 (b) amended; interim
        3012
        16.3 (b) amended; interim
        3012
        16.7 (a) amended; interim
        3012
        16.20 (a) revised; interim
        3012
        16.22 (b)(1) amended; interim
        3012
        63.8 (c)(1) amended; interim
        3012
        63.34 Amended; interim
        3012
        75.1 Amended; interim
        3012
        75.2 Amended; interim
        3012
        Correctly amended
        19044
        75.101 (b)(1) table, (2), (d)(1) and (e)(1) introductory text revised; (c) amended; interim
        3013
        (f) added
        89395
        75.102 (b) amended; interim
        3014
        75.103 (a) and (b) amended; interim
        3014
        75.104 (a)(7) amended; interim
        3014
        75.110 (a) revised; interim
        3014
        (a) amended
        89395
        75.113 Amended; interim
        3014
        75.203 (c)(5) amended; interim
        3014
        75.205 (a) revised; interim
        3014
        (a)(2) correctly amended
        19044
        75.206 (a) amended; interim
        3015
        75.207 (a)(4) amended; interim
        3015
        75.210 (a)(1) and (d) amended; (b)(1)(iii) added; interim
        3015
        75.211 (b) revised; (c) added; interim
        3015
        75.212 Redesignated as 75.213; new 75.212 added; interim
        3015
        75.213 Redesignated as 75.214; redesignated from 75.212; interim
        3015
        Amended; interim
        3016
        75.214 Redesignated as 75.215; redesignated from 75.213; interim
        3015
        
        75.215 Redesignated as 75.216; redesignated from 75.214; interim
        3015
        75.216 Redesignated as 75.217; redesignated from 75.215; interim
        3015
        75.217 Redesignated as 75.218; redesignated from 75.216; interim
        3015
        75.218 Redesignated from 75.217; interim
        3015
        75.300 (c) and (d) added
        89395
        75.305 (b) introductory text amended; (b)(6)(ii) and (9) introductory text revised; interim
        3016
        (a) revised
        89395
        75.306 (c) amended; interim
        3016
        75.307 (e) amended; interim
        3016
        75.308 (c) revised; interim
        3016
        75.322 (d)(2) amended; interim
        3016
        75.327 (h) amended; interim
        3016
        75.329 (c)(2)(i) and (iii) amended; interim
        3016
        75.351 (b) introductory text revised; interim
        3016
        75.352 (a)(1)(i), (iv), (vi), (vii), (viii) and (x) revised; interim
        3016
        75.363 Revised; interim
        3017
        75.365 Revised
        89395
        75.372 (a)(1) and (b) revised; (c) added; interim
        3017
        75.373 (b) revised; interim
        3017
        75.409 Introductory text amended; interim
        3017
        75.414 (e)(3) revised; interim
        3017
        (c)(1)(i), (ii) and (iii) added; (f) amended
        89395
        75.419 (b) introductory text amended; interim
        3017
        75.431 (h)(3) amended; (i)(1) and (j) revised; interim
        3017
        75.439 (b)(7) added; interim
        3018
        75.448 (b)(3) amended; interim
        3018
        75.449 (b)(1) and (e) amended; interim
        3018
        75.450 (c)(2)(iv) amended; interim
        3018
        75.456 Revised; interim
        3018
        75.459 Heading amended; interim
        3018
        75.461 (b)(3) added; interim
        3018
        75.465 (c) introductory text amended; interim
        3018
        75.474 (d) amended; interim
        3018
        75.477 Added
        89395
        75.501 (k) amended; interim
        3018
        75.515 (b) amended; interim
        3018
        75 Appendices I, III and IV amended; interim
        3018
        Appendices V, VII, VIII, X, and XI amended; Appendix XII added; interim
        3019
        Appendix II correctly amended
        19044
        79.3 (a)(1)(iv) and (b)(1)(ii) amended
        61565
        87 Revised
        19426
        87.1 (b) amended; interim
        3020
        87.2 (b) amended; interim
        3020
        92 Added
        31465
        92 Appendix A corrected
        46613
        93.400 (a) amended
        61565
        93 Appendix A amended
        61565
        95.610 (b)(12) revised
        35479
        95.612 Amended
        35479
        95.613 (a) amended; interim
        3020
        95.621 (d) amended; interim
        3020
        95.625 (a) revised; (b) amended
        35479
        95.705 (a) amended; interim
        3020
        97.707 (a) amended; interim
        3020
        98.1 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67573
        98.2 Amended; eff. 11-29-16
        67573
        98.10 Introductory text, (d) and (e) revised; (f) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67574
        98.11 (a)(3) amended; (b)(5) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67574
        98.12 (c) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67574
        98.14 (a)(1)(A) through (D) redesignated as (a)(1)(i) through (iv); (a)(1) introductory text, new (iii), new (iv) and (c)(3) revised; (a)(1)(v) through (xiv), (3), (4) and (d) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67574
        98.15 (a)(6) and (b) revised; (a)(7) through (11) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67575
        98.16 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67576
        98.17 (a) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67578
        98.18 (b) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67578
        98.19 Added; eff. 11-29-16
        67578
        98.20 (a) introductory text, (2), (3) and (b) introductory text revised; (b)(2) and (3) amended; (b)(4) and (c) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67579
        98.21 Added; eff. 11-29-16
        67579
        98.30 (e)(1), (f) introductory text and (2) revised; (g) and (h) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67580
        
        98.31 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67581
        98.32 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67581
        98.33 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67581
        98.40 (a)(2) redesignated as (a)(3); new (a)(2) added; new (a)(3) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67582
        98.41 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67582
        98.42 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67583
        98.43 Redesignated as 98.45; added; eff. 11-29-16
        67584
        8.44 Redesignated as 98.46; eff. 11-29-16
        67584
        Added; eff. 11-29-16
        67585
        98.45 Redesignated as 98.47; redesignated from 98.43; eff. 11-29-16
        67584
        Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67586
        98.46 Redesignated as 98.48; redesignated from 98.44; eff. 11-29-16
        67584
        Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67587
        98.47 Redesignated as 98.49; redesignated from 98.45; eff. 11-29-16
        67584
        98.48 Redesignated from 98.46; eff. 11-29-16
        67584
        98.49 Redesignated from 98.47; eff. 11-29-16
        67584
        98.50 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67587
        98.51 Redesignated as 98.53; added; eff. 11-29-16
        67588
        98.52 Redesignated as 98.54; added; eff. 11-29-16
        67588
        98.53 Redesignated as 98.55; redesignated from 98.51 and revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67588
        98.54 Redesignated as 98.56; redesignated from 98.52; eff. 11-29-16
        67588
        (b) and (c) redesignated as (c) and (d); new (b) and (e) added; (a) introductory text, (6) and new (d) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67590
        98.55 Redesignated as 98.57; redesignated from 98.53; eff. 11-29-16
        67588
        (e)(2)(iv), (f), (g)(2) and (h)(2) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67590
        98.56 Redesignated from 98.54; eff. 11-29-16
        67588
        (b)(1) amended; (d) and (e) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67590
        98.57 Redesignated from 98.55; eff. 11-29-16
        67588
        98.60 (d)(4)(ii) amended; interim
        3020
        (b) introductory text, (1), (d)(2)(i), (4)(ii), (6) introductory text and (h) revised; (d)(t) redesignated as (d)(8); new (d)(7) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67591
        98.61 (a) and (c) introductory text revised; (f) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67591
        98.63 (b) and (c) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67591
        98.64 (c)(1) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67591
        98.65 (a) and (g) revised; (h) and (i) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67591
        98.68 Added; eff. 11-29-16
        67591
        98.70 (d) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67592
        98.71 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67592
        98.80 (a), (c)(1) and (2) revised; (f) removed; eff. 11-29-16
        67592
        98.81 (b) introductory text, (1), (5), (6) and (c) revised; (b)(9) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67593
        98.82 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67593
        98.83 Revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67593
        98.84 (d)(1) through (6) amended; interim
        3020
        (b)(3) amended; (b)(3)(i) and (ii) added; (d)(1) through (6) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67594
        98.92 (a)(1) revised; (b)(3) and (4) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67594
        98.93 (b) amended; eff. 11-29-16
        67595
        98.100 (d)(2) amended; (e) revised; eff. 11-29-16
        67595
        98.102 (a)(5) revised; (c) added; eff. 11-29-16
        67595
        102 Added
        61565
      
      
        2017
        45 CFR
        82 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        46 Authority citation revised; eff. 1-19-18
        7273
        46.101—46.124 (Subpart A) Revised; eff. 1-19-18
        7273
        98.83 (d)(1) correctly revised
        3186
        102.3 Table revised
        9175
      
      
        2018
        45 CFR
        83 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        5b.11 (b)(2)(iv)(A) and (B) amended; (b)(2)(iv)(C) added
        14185
        
        46 Regulation at 82 FR 7273 eff. date delayed to 7-19-18
        2885
        46.101 (l)(3) and (4) revised; interim
        2893
        46.101 (l)(1) heading and (5) added; (l)(2), (3), and (4) revised
        28518
        102.3 Table revised
        51370
      
      
        2019
        (Regulations published from January 1, 2019, through October 1, 2019)
        45 CFR
        84 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        5b.11 (b)(2)(viii)(A) added
        14624
        88 Revised
        23263
        88 Technical correction
        26580
      
      ○
    
  
