
  April 1, 2019
  
    
      
      
      Title 24
      Housing and Urban Development
      Parts 0 to 199
      Revised as of April 1, 2019
      Containing a codification of documents of general applicability and future effect
      As of April 1, 2019
      
        Published by the Office of the Federal Register National Archives and Records Administration as a Special Edition of the Federal Register
      
    
    
      
      
        U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE
        Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
        
          archives.ai
        
        The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as the official codification of Federal regulations established under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is prima facie evidence of the original documents published in the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).
        It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this material without the express, written permission of the Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 1017.
        Use of ISBN Prefix
        This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Publishing Office Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the U.S. Government Publishing Office requests that any reprinted edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work with a new ISBN.
      
      
        
          gpologo2.eps
        
        U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P U B L I S H I N G O F F I C E
      
      
        U.S. Superintendent of Documents • Washington, DC 20402-0001
        http://bookstore.gpo.gov
        Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800
      
    
    
      
      Table of Contents
      Page
      
        Explanation
        v
      
      
        Title 24:
        
          SUBTITLE A—Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development
          
          3
        
        
          SUBTITLE B—Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development 
          
        
        
          Chapter I—Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development
          669
        
      
      
        Finding Aids:
        Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
        789
        Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
        809
        List of CFR Sections Affected
        819
      
    
    
      
      Cite this Code: CFR
      

      To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part and section number. Thus, 24 CFR 0.1 refers to title 24, part 0, section 1.
    
    
      
      Explanation
      The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into parts covering specific regulatory areas.
      Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:
      
        Title 1 through Title 16 
        as of January 1
        Title 17 through Title 27 
        as of April 1
        Title 28 through Title 41 
        as of July 1
        Title 42 through Title 50 
        as of October 1
      
      The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each volume.
      
        LEGAL STATUS
        The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).
      
      
        HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS
        The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
        To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its revision date (in this case, April 1, 2019), consult the “List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA),” which is issued monthly, and the “Cumulative List of Parts Affected,” which appears in the Reader Aids section of the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.
      
      
        EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES
        Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be inserted following the text.
      
      
        OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

        The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information collection request. Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting requirements.
      
      
        PAST PROVISIONS OF THE CODE
        Provisions of the Code that are no longer in force and effect as of the revision date stated on the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text of provisions in effect on any given date in the past by using the appropriate List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA). For the convenience of the reader, a “List of CFR Sections Affected” is published at the end of each CFR volume. For changes to the Code prior to the LSA listings at the end of the volume, consult previous annual editions of the LSA. For changes to the Code prior to 2001, consult the List of CFR Sections Affected compilations, published for 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000.
      
      
        “[RESERVED]” TERMINOLOGY
        The term “[Reserved]” is used as a place holder within the Code of Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a “[Reserved]” location at any time. Occasionally “[Reserved]” is used editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and not accidentally dropped due to a printing or computer error.
      
      
        INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
        
          What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force of law.
        
          What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which approval is based are:
        (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of material published in the Federal Register.
        (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative process.
        (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
        
          What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001, or call 202-741-6010.
      
      
        CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

        A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in this volume.
        
        An index to the text of “Title 3—The President” is carried within that volume.
        The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. This index is based on a consolidation of the “Contents” entries in the daily Federal Register.
        A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.
      
      
        REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL
        There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing in the Code of Federal Regulations.
      
      
        INQUIRIES
        For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at the top of odd-numbered pages.

        For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001 or e-mail fedreg.info@nara.gov.
        
      
      
        SALES
        The Government Publishing Office (GPO) processes all sales and distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2104, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, write to: US Government Publishing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO 63197-9000.
      
      
        ELECTRONIC SERVICES

        The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal Register, Public Laws, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Compilation of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic format via www.govinfo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-mail, ContactCenter@gpo.gov.
        

        The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal-register.
        

        The e-CFR is a regularly updated, unofficial editorial compilation of CFR material and Federal Register amendments, produced by the Office of the Federal Register and the Government Publishing Office. It is available at www.ecfr.gov.
          
        
        
          Oliver A. Potts,
        
        
          Director,
        
        
          Office of the Federal Register
        
        
          April 1, 2019.
        
      
      
         
         
         
      
       
    
    
      
      THIS TITLE
      Title 24—Housing and Urban Development is composed of five volumes. The first four volumes containing parts 0-199, parts 200-499, parts 500-699, parts 700-1699, represent the regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The fifth volume, containing part 1700 to end, continues with regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and also includes regulations of the Board of Directors of the Hope for Homeowners Program, and the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation. The contents of these volumes represent all current regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of April 1, 2019.
      For this volume, Robert J. Sheehan, III was Chief Editor. The Code of Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of John Hyrum Martinez, assisted by Stephen J. Frattini.
    
  
  
    24 CFR Subtitle A (4-1-19 Edition)
    Office of the Secretary, HUD
    
      
        
        Title 24—Housing and Urban Development
        (This book contains parts 0 to 199)
      
      
        Part
        
          SUBTITLE A—Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development
          
          0
        
        
          SUBTITLE B—Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
          
        
        
          
            chapter i—Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development
          100
        
      
    
    
      
      Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development
      
        
          Editorial Note:
          Nomenclature changes to chapter I appear at 59 FR 14092, Mar. 25, 1994.
        
        Part
        Page
        
          0
          Standards of conduct
          7
          1
          Nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs of the Department of Housing and Urban Development—effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
          7
          3
          Nondiscrimination on the basis of sex in education programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance
          14
          4
          HUD Reform Act
          31
          5
          General HUD program requirements; waivers
          38
          6
          Nondiscrimination in programs and activities receiving assistance under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
          132
          8
          Nondiscrimination based on handicap in federally assisted programs and activities of the Department of Housing and Urban Development
          139
          9
          Enforcement of nondiscrimination on the basis of disability in programs or activities conducted by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
          161
          10
          Rulemaking: Policy and procedures
          172
          13
          Use of penalty mail in the location and recovery of missing children
          174
          14
          Implementation of the Equal Access to Justice Act in administrative proceedings
          175
          
          15
          Public access to HUD records under the Freedom of Information Act and testimony and production of information by HUD employees
          182
          16
          Implementation of the Privacy Act of 1974
          201
          17
          Administrative claims
          214
          18
          Indemnification of HUD employees
          231
          20
          Office of Hearings and Appeals
          232
          24
          Governmentwide debarment and suspension (nonprocurement)
          233
          25
          Mortgagee Review Board
          233
          26
          Hearing procedures
          239
          27
          Nonjudicial foreclosure of multifamily and single family mortgages
          262
          28
          Implementation of the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1986
          270
          30
          Civil money penalties: certain prohibited conduct
          275
          35
          Lead-based paint poisoning prevention in certain residential structures
          284
          40
          Accessibility standards for design, construction, and alteration of publicly owned residential structures
          335
          41
          Policies and procedures for the enforcement of standards and requirements for accessibility by the physically handicapped
          336
          42
          Displacement, relocation assistance, and real property acquisition for HUD and HUD-assisted programs
          339
          43-45
          [Reserved]
          50
          Protection and enhancement of environmental quality
          343
          51
          Environmental criteria and standards
          353
          52
          Intergovernmental review of Department of Housing and Urban Development programs and activities
          370
          55
          Floodplain management and protection of wetlands
          373
          58
          Environmental review procedures for entities assuming HUD environmental responsibilities
          386
          60
          Protection of human subjects
          406
          70
          Use of volunteers on projects subject to Davis-Bacon and HUD-determined wage rates
          424
          81
          The Secretary of HUD's regulation of the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac)
          427
          
          84
          Uniform administrative requirements for grants and agreements with institutions of higher education, hospitals, and other non-profit organizations
          472
          85
          Administrative requirements for grants and cooperative agreements to State, local and federally recognized Indian tribal governments
          472
          87
          New restrictions on lobbying
          472
          91
          Consolidated submissions for community planning and development programs
          484
          92
          Home Investment Partnerships Program
          536
          93
          Housing trust fund
          621
          94-99
          [Reserved]
           
          Appendixes A-C to Subtitle A [Reserved]
        
      
      
        
        Pt. 0
        PART 0—STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
        
          § 0.1
          Cross-reference to employees ethical conduct standards and financial disclosure regulations.
          Employees of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (Department) are subject to the executive branch-wide standards of ethical conduct at 5 CFR part 2635, the Department's regulation at 5 CFR part 7501 which supplements the executive branch-wide standards, and the executive branch-wide financial disclosure regulation at 5 CFR part 2634.
          5 U.S.C. 301, 7301; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d)
          [61 FR 36251, July 9, 1996]
        
      
      
        Pt. 1
        PART 1—NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT—EFFECTUATION OF TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964
        
          Sec.
          1.1
          Purpose.
          1.2
          Definitions.
          1.3
          Application of part 1.
          1.4
          Discrimination prohibited.
          1.5
          Assurances required.
          1.6
          Compliance information.
          1.7
          Conduct of investigations.
          1.8
          Procedure for effecting compliance.
          1.9
          Hearings.
          1.10
          Effect on other regulations; forms and instructions.
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 2000d-1 and 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 1.1
          Purpose.

          The purpose of this part 1 is to effectuate the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (hereafter referred to as the Act) to the end that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
        
        
          § 1.2
          Definitions.
          As used in this part 1—
          (a) The term Department means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
          (b) The term Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
          (c) The term responsible Department official means the Secretary or, to the extent of any delegation of authority by the Secretary to act under this part 1, any other Department official to whom the Secretary may hereafter delegate such authority.
          (d) The term United States means the States of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, and the territories and possessions of the United States, and the term State means any one of the foregoing.
          (e) The term Federal financial assistance includes: (1) Grants, loans, and advances of Federal funds, (2) the grant or donation of Federal property and interests in property, (3) the detail of Federal personnel, (4) the sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or transient basis), Federal property or any interest in such property without consideration or at a nominal consideration, or at a consideration which is reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient, or in recognition of the public interest to be served by such sale or lease to the recipient, and (5) any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance. The term Federal financial assistance does not include a contract of insurance or guaranty.
          (f) The term recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any State or political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient, for any program or activity, or who otherwise participates in carrying out such program or activity (such as a redeveloper in the Urban Renewal Program), including any successor, assign, or transferee thereof, but such term does not include any ultimate beneficiary under any such program or activity.
          (g) The term applicant means one who submits an application, contract, request, or plan requiring Department approval as a condition to eligibility for Federal financial assistance, and the term application means such an application, contract, request, or plan.
        
        
          § 1.3
          Application of part 1.
          This part 1 applies to any program or activity for which Federal financial assistance is authorized under a law administered by the Department. It applies to money paid, property transferred, or other Federal financial assistance extended to any such program or activity on or after January 3, 1965. This part 1 does not apply to: (a) Any Federal financial assistance by way of insurance or guaranty contracts, (b) money paid, property transferred, or other assistance extended to any such program or activity before January 3, 1965, (c) any assistance to any person who is the ultimate beneficiary under any such program or activity, or (d) any employment practice, under any such program or activity, of any employer, employment agency, or labor organization, except to the extent described in § 1.4(c).
          [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 83 FR 26360, June 7, 2018]
        
        
          § 1.4
          Discrimination prohibited.
          (a) General. No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies.
          (b) Specific discriminatory actions prohibited. (1) A recipient under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, on the ground of race, color, or national origin:
          (i) Deny a person any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under the program or activity;
          (ii) Provide any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits to a person which are different, or are provided in a different manner, from those provided to others under the program or activity;
          (iii) Subject a person to segregation or separate treatment in any matter related to his receipt of housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits under the program or activity;
          (iv) Restrict a person in any way in access to such housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in connection with such housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits under the program or activity;
          (v) Treat a person differently from others in determining whether he satisfies any occupancy, admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement or condition which persons must meet in order to be provided any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under the program or activity;
          (vi) Deny a person opportunity to participate in the program or activity through the provision of services or otherwise, or afford him an opportunity to do so which is different from that afforded others under the program or activity (including the opportunity to participate in the program or activity as an employee but only to the extent set forth in paragraph (c) of this section).
          (vii) Deny a person the opportunity to participate as a member of a planning or advisory body which is an integral part of the program.

          (2)(i) A recipient, in determining the types of housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits which will be provided under any such program or activity, or the class of persons to whom, or the situations in which, such housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits will be provided under any such program or activity, or the class of persons to be afforded an opportunity to participate in any such program or activity, may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting persons to discrimination because of their race, color, or national origin, or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity as respect to persons of a particular race, color, or national origin.

          (ii) A recipient, in operating low-rent housing with Federal financial assistance under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.), shall assign eligible applicants to dwelling units in accordance with a plan, duly adopted by the recipient and approved by the responsible Department official, providing for assignment on a community-wide basis in sequence based upon the date and time the application is received, the size or type of unit suitable, and factors affecting preference or priority established by the recipient's regulations, which are not inconsistent with the objectives of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and this part 1. The plan may allow an applicant to refuse a tendered vacancy for good cause without losing his standing on the list but shall limit the number of refusals without cause as prescribed by the responsible Department official.
          (iii) The responsible Department official is authorized to prescribe and promulgate plans, exceptions, procedures, and requirements for the assignment and reassignment of eligible applicants and tenants consistent with the purpose of paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section, this part 1, and title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, in order to effectuate and insure compliance with the requirements imposed thereunder.
          (3) In determining the site or location of housing, accommodations, or facilities, an applicant or recipient may not make selections with the purpose or effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under any program to which this part 1 applies, on the ground of race, color, or national origin; or with the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Act or this part 1.
          (4) As used in this part 1 the housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance shall be deemed to include any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits provided in or through a facility provided with the aid of Federal financial assistance.
          (5) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section does not limit the generality of the prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
          (6)(i) In administering a program regarding which the recipient has previously discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, or national origin, the recipient must take affirmative action to overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
          (ii) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination, a recipient in administering a program should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, or national origin.
          Where previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, to exclude individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to discrimination under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies, the applicant or recipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and to accomplish the purpose of the Act.
          (c) Employment practices. (1) Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance to a program or activity to which this part 1 applies is to provide employment, a recipient may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, subject a person to discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in its employment practices under such program or activity (including recruitment or recruitment advertising, employment, layoff, termination, upgrading, demotion, transfer, rates of pay or other forms of compensation and use of facilities). The requirements applicable to construction employment under such program or activity shall be those specified in or pursuant to part III of Executive Order 11246 or any executive order which supersedes or amends it.
          (2) Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is not to provide employment, but discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in the employment practices of the recipient or other persons subject to this part 1 tends, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, to exclude individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to discrimination under any program to which this part 1 applies, the provisions of this paragraph (c) shall apply to the employment practices of the recipient or other persons subject to this part 1 to the extent necessary to assure equality of opportunity to, and nondiscriminatory treatment of, beneficiaries.
        
        
          § 1.5
          Assurances required.
          (a) General. (1) Every contract for Federal financial assistance to carry out a program or activity to which this part 1 applies, executed on or after January 3, 1965, and every application for such Federal financial assistance submitted on or after January 3, 1965, shall, as a condition to its approval and the extension of any Federal financial assistance pursuant to such contract or application, contain or be accompanied by an assurance that the program or activity will be conducted and the housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits to be provided will be operated and administered in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part 1. In the case of a contract or application where the Federal financial assistance is to provide or is in the form of personal property or real property or interest therein or structures thereon, the assurance shall obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits, or for as long as the recipient retains ownership or possession of the property, whichever is longer. In all other cases the assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended pursuant to the contract or application. The responsible Department official shall specify the form of the foregoing assurance for such program or activity, and the extent to which like assurances will be required of subgrantees, contractors and subcontractors, transferees, successors in interest, and other participants in the program or activity. Any such assurance shall include provisions which give the United States a right to seek its judicial enforcement.
          (2) In the case of real property, structures or improvements thereon, or interests therein, acquired through a program of Federal financial assistance the instrument effecting any disposition by the recipient of such real property, structures or improvements thereon, or interests therein, shall contain a covenant running with the land assuring nondiscrimination for the period during which the real property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits. In the case where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of a transfer of real property or interests therein from the Federal Government, the instrument effecting or recording the transfer shall contain such a covenant.
          (3) In program receiving Federal financial assistance in the form, or for the acquisition, of real property or an interest in real property, to the extent that rights to space on, over, or under any such property are included as part of the program receiving such assistance, the nondiscrimination requirements of this part 1 shall extend to any facility located wholly or in part in such space.
          (b) Preexisting contracts—funds not disbursed. In any case where a contract for Federal financial assistance, to carry out a program or activity to which this part 1 applies, has been executed prior to January 3, 1965, and the funds have not been fully disbursed by the Department, the responsible Department official shall, where necessary to effectuate the purposes of this part 1, require an assurance similar to that provided in paragraph (a) of this section as a condition to the disbursement of further funds.
          (c) Preexisting contracts—periodic payments. In any case where a contract for Federal financial assistance, to carry out a program or activity to which this part 1 applies, has been executed prior to January 3, 1965, and provides for periodic payments for the continuation of the program or activity, the recipient shall, in connection with the first application for such periodic payments on or after January 3, 1965: (1) Submit a statement that the program or activity is being conducted in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part 1 and (2) provide such methods of administration for the program or activity as are found by the responsible Department official to give reasonable assurance that the recipient will comply with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part 1.
          (d) Assurances from institutions. (1) In the case of any application for Federal financial assistance to an institution of higher education, the assurance required by this section shall extend to admission practices and to all other practices relating to the treatment of students.
          (2) The assurance required with respect to an institution of higher education, hospital, or any other institution, insofar as the assurance relates to the institution's practices with respect to admission or other treatment of persons as students, patients, or clients of the institution or to the opportunity to participate in the provision of services or other benefits to such persons, shall be applicable to the entire institution unless the applicant establishes, to the satisfaction of the responsible Department official, that the institution's practices in designated parts or programs of the institution will in no way affect its practices in the program of the institution for which Federal financial assistance is sought, or the beneficiaries of or participants in such program. If in any such case the assistance sought is for the construction of a facility or part of a facility, the assurance shall in any event extend to the entire facility and to facilities operated in connection therewith.
          (e) Elementary and secondary schools. The requirements of this section with respect to any elementary or secondary school or school system shall be deemed to be satisfied if such school or school system (1) is subject to a final order of a court of the United States for the desegregation of such school or school system, and provides an assurance that it will comply with such order, including any future modification of such order, or (2) submits a plan for the desegregation of such school or school system which the responsible official of the Department of Health and Human Services determines is adequate to accomplish the purposes of the Act and this part 1 within the earliest practicable time, and provides reasonable assurance that it will carry out such plan.
          [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 50 FR 9269, Mar. 7, 1985]
        
        
          § 1.6
          Compliance information.
          (a) Cooperation and assistance. The responsible Department official and each Department official who by law or delegation has the principal responsibility within the Department for the administration of any law extending financial assistance subject to this part 1 shall to the fullest extent practicable seek the cooperation of recipients in obtaining compliance with this part 1 and shall provide assistance and guidance to recipients to help them comply voluntarily with this part 1.
          (b) Compliance reports. Each recipient shall keep such records and submit to the responsible Department official or his designee timely, complete, and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in such form and containing such information, as the responsible Department official or his designee may determine to be necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is complying with this part 1. In general, recipients should have available for the department racial and ethnic data showing the extent to which members of minority groups are beneficiaries of federally assisted programs.
          (c) Access to sources of information. Each recipient shall permit access by the responsible Department official or his designee during normal business hours to such of its books, records, accounts, and other sources of information, and its facilities as may be pertinent to ascertain compliance with this part 1. Where any information required of a recipient is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, institution, or person and this agency, institution, or person shall fail or refuse to furnish this information, the recipient shall so certify in its report and shall set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information.
          (d) Information to beneficiaries and participants. Each recipient shall make available to participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such information regarding the provisions of this part 1 and its applicability to the program or activity under which the recipient receives Federal financial assistance, and make such information available to them in such manner, as the responsible Department official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by the Act and this part 1.
        
        
          § 1.7
          Conduct of investigations.
          (a) Periodic compliance reviews. The responsible Department official or his designee shall from time to time review the practices of recipients to determine whether they are complying with this part 1.
          (b) Complaints. Any person who believes himself or any specific class of persons to be subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part 1 may by himself or by a representative file with the responsible Department official or his designee a written complaint. A complaint must be filed not later than 180 days from the date of the alleged discrimination, unless the time for filing is extended by the responsible Department official or his designee.
          (c) Investigations. The responsible Department official or his designee shall make a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, report, complaint, or any other information indicates a possible failure to comply with this part 1. The investigation should include, where appropriate, a review of the pertinent practices and policies of the recipient, the circumstances under which the possible noncompliance with this part 1 occurred, and other factors relevant to a determination as to whether the recipient has failed to comply with this part .
          (d) Resolution of matters. (1) If an investigation pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section indicates a failure to comply with this part 1, the responsible Department official or his designee will so inform the recipient and the matter will be resolved by informal means whenever possible. If it has been determined that the matter cannot be resolved by informal means, action will be taken as provided for in § 1.8.
          (2) If an investigation does not warrant action pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) of this section the responsible Department official or his designee will so inform the recipient and the complainant, if any, in writing.
          (e) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any person for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by title VI of the Act or this part 1, or because he has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of complainants shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any investigation, hearing, or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.
        
        
          § 1.8
          Procedure for effecting compliance.
          (a) General. If there appears to be a failure or threatened failure to comply with this part 1, and if the noncompliance or threatened noncompliance cannot be corrected by informal means, compliance with this part 1 may be effected by the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance, or by any other means authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not limited to: (1) A reference to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance or other contractual undertaking, and (2) any applicable proceeding under State or local law.
          (b) Noncompliance with § 1.5. If an applicant fails or refuses to furnish an assurance required under § 1.5 or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with the requirement imposed by or pursuant to that section, Federal financial assistance may be refused in accordance with the procedures of paragraph (c) of this section. The Department shall not be required to provide assistance in such a case during the pendency of the administrative proceedings under such paragraph, except that the Department shall continue assistance during the pendency of such proceedings where such assistance is due and payable pursuant to a contract therefor approved prior to January 3, 1965.
          (c) Termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance. No order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective until (1) the responsible Department official has advised the applicant or recipient of his failure to comply and has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means, (2) there has been an express finding on the record, after opportunity for hearing, of a failure by the applicant or recipient to comply with a requirement imposed by or pursuant to this part 1, (3) the action has been approved by the Secretary, and (4) the expiration of 30 days after the Secretary has filed with the committees of the House and Senate having legislative jurisdiction over the program or activity involved a full written report of the circumstances and the grounds for such action. Any action to suspend or terminate or to refuse to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance shall be limited to the particular political entity, or part thereof, or other recipient as to whom such a finding has been made and shall be limited in its effect to the particular program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found.
          (d) Other means authorized by law. No action to effect compliance by any other means authorized by law shall be taken until (1) the responsible Department official has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means, (2) the recipient or other person has been notified of its failure to comply and of the action to be taken to effect compliance, and (3) the expiration of at least 10 days from the mailing of such notice to the applicant or recipient. During this period of at least 10 days additional efforts shall be made to persuade the applicant or recipient to comply with this part 1 and to take such corrective action as may be appropriate.
        
        
          § 1.9
          Hearings.
          (a) Opportunity for hearing. Whenever an opportunity for a hearing is required by § 1.8(c), reasonable notice shall be given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the affected applicant or recipient. This notice shall advise the applicant or recipient of the action proposed to be taken, the specific provision under which the proposed action against it is to be taken, and the matters of fact or law asserted as the basis for this action, and either:
          (1) Fix a date not less than 20 days after the date of such notice within which the applicant or recipient may request of the responsible Department official that the matter be scheduled for hearing, or (2) advise the applicant or recipient that the matter in question has been set down for hearing at a stated time and place. The time and place so fixed shall be reasonable and shall be subject to change for cause. The complainant, if any, shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit written information and argument for the record. The failure of an applicant or recipient to request a hearing under this paragraph (a) or to appear at a hearing for which a date has been set shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to a hearing under section 602 of the Act and § 1.8(c) and consent to the making of a decision on the basis of such information as is available.
          (b) Hearing procedures. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with 24 CFR part 180.
          [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 61 FR 52217, Oct. 4, 1996]
        
        
          
          § 1.10
          Effect on other regulations; forms and instructions.
          (a) Effect on other regulations. All regulations, orders, or like directions heretofore issued by any officer of the Department which impose requirements designed to prohibit any discrimination against persons on the ground of race, color, or national origin under any program or activity to which this part applies, and which authorize the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance to any applicant or recipient for failure to comply with such requirements, are hereby superseded to the extent that such discrimination is prohibited by this part, except that nothing in this part shall be deemed to relieve any person of any obligation assumed or imposed under any such superseded regulation, order, instruction, or like direction prior to January 3, 1965. Nothing in this part, however, shall be deemed to supersede any of the following (including future amendments thereof):
          (1) Executive Orders 11246 and 11375 and regulations issued thereunder, or
          (2) Executive Order 11063 and regulations issued thereunder, or any other order, regulations or instructions, insofar as such order, regulations, or instructions, prohibit discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in any program or activity or situation to which this part is inapplicable, or prohibit discrimination on any other ground.
          (b) Forms and instructions. The responsible Department official shall assure that forms and detailed instructions and procedures for effectuating this part are issued and promptly made available to interested persons.
          (c) Supervision and coordination. The Secretary may from time to time assign to officials of the Department, or to officials of other departments or agencies of the Government with the consent of such department or agency, responsibilities in connection with the effectuation of the purposes of title VI of the Act and this part (other than responsibility for final decision as provided in § 1.10), including the achievement of effective coordination and maximum uniformity within the Department and within the Executive Branch of the Government in the application of title VI and this part to similar programs or activities and in similar situations. Any action taken, determination made, or requirement imposed by an official of another department or agency acting pursuant to an assignment of responsibility under this paragraph shall have the same effect as though such action had been taken by the responsible official of this Department.
          [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973. Redesignated at 61 FR 52217, Oct. 4, 1996]
        
      
      
        Pt. 3
        PART 3—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF SEX IN EDUCATION PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
        
          
            Subpart A—Introduction
            Sec.
            3.100
            Purpose and effective date.
            3.105
            Definitions.
            3.110
            Remedial and affirmative action and self-evaluation.
            3.115
            Assurance required.
            3.120
            Transfers of property.
            3.125
            Effect of other requirements.
            3.130
            Effect of employment opportunities.
            3.135
            Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
            3.140
            Dissemination of policy.
          
          
            Subpart B—Coverage
            3.200
            Application.
            3.205
            Educational institutions and other entities controlled by religious organizations.
            3.210
            Military and merchant marine educational institutions.
            3.215
            Membership practices of certain organizations.
            3.220
            Admissions.
            3.225
            Educational institutions eligible to submit transition plans.
            3.230
            Transition plans.
            3.235
            Statutory amendments.
          
          
            Subpart C—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Admission and Recruitment Prohibited
            3.300
            Admission.
            3.305
            Preference in admission.
            
            3.310
            Recruitment.
          
          
            Subpart D—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
            3.400
            Education programs or activities.
            3.405
            Housing.
            3.410
            Comparable facilities.
            3.415
            Access to course offerings.
            3.420
            Access to schools operated by LEAs.
            3.425
            Counseling and use of appraisal and counseling materials.
            3.430
            Financial assistance.
            3.435
            Employment assistance to students.
            3.440
            Health and insurance benefits and services.
            3.445
            Marital or parental status.
            3.450
            Athletics.
            3.455
            Textbooks and curricular material.
          
          
            Subpart E—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Employment in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
            3.500
            Employment.
            3.505
            Employment criteria.
            3.510
            Recruitment.
            3.515
            Compensation.
            3.520
            Job classification and structure.
            3.525
            Fringe benefits.
            3.530
            Marital or parental status.
            3.535
            Effect of state or local law or other requirements.
            3.540
            Advertising.
            3.545
            Pre-employment inquiries.
            3.550
            Sex as a bona fide occupational qualification.
          
          
            Subpart F—Procedures
            3.600
            Notice of covered programs.
            3.605
            Enforcement procedures.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1683, 1685, 1686, 1687, 1688.
        
        
          Source:
          65 FR 52865, 52879, Aug. 30, 2000, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—Introduction
          
            § 3.100
            Purpose and effective date.
            The purpose of these Title IX regulations is to effectuate Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended (except sections 904 and 906 of those Amendments) (20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1683, 1685, 1686, 1687, 1688), which is designed to eliminate (with certain exceptions) discrimination on the basis of sex in any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, whether or not such program or activity is offered or sponsored by an educational institution as defined in these Title IX regulations. The effective date of these Title IX regulations shall be September 29, 2000.
          
          
            § 3.105
            Definitions.
            As used in these Title IX regulations, the term:
            
              Administratively separate unit means a school, department, or college of an educational institution (other than a local educational agency) admission to which is independent of admission to any other component of such institution.
            
              Admission means selection for part-time, full-time, special, associate, transfer, exchange, or any other enrollment, membership, or matriculation in or at an education program or activity operated by a recipient.
            
              Applicant means one who submits an application, request, or plan required to be approved by an official of the Federal agency that awards Federal financial assistance, or by a recipient, as a condition to becoming a recipient.
            
              Designated agency official means Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
            
              Educational institution means a local educational agency (LEA) as defined by 20 U.S.C. 8801(18), a preschool, a private elementary or secondary school, or an applicant or recipient that is an institution of graduate higher education, an institution of undergraduate higher education, an institution of professional education, or an institution of vocational education, as defined in this section.
            
              Federal financial assistance means any of the following, when authorized or extended under a law administered by the Federal agency that awards such assistance:
            (1) A grant or loan of Federal financial assistance, including funds made available for:
            (i) The acquisition, construction, renovation, restoration, or repair of a building or facility or any portion thereof; and

            (ii) Scholarships, loans, grants, wages, or other funds extended to any entity for payment to or on behalf of students admitted to that entity, or extended directly to such students for payment to that entity.
            
            (2) A grant of Federal real or personal property or any interest therein, including surplus property, and the proceeds of the sale or transfer of such property, if the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not, upon such sale or transfer, properly accounted for to the Federal Government.
            (3) Provision of the services of Federal personnel.
            (4) Sale or lease of Federal property or any interest therein at nominal consideration, or at consideration reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of public interest to be served thereby, or permission to use Federal property or any interest therein without consideration.
            (5) Any other contract, agreement, or arrangement that has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance to any education program or activity, except a contract of insurance or guaranty.
            
              Institution of graduate higher education means an institution that:
            (1) Offers academic study beyond the bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degree, whether or not leading to a certificate of any higher degree in the liberal arts and sciences;
            (2) Awards any degree in a professional field beyond the first professional degree (regardless of whether the first professional degree in such field is awarded by an institution of undergraduate higher education or professional education); or
            (3) Awards no degree and offers no further academic study, but operates ordinarily for the purpose of facilitating research by persons who have received the highest graduate degree in any field of study.
            
              Institution of professional education means an institution (except any institution of undergraduate higher education) that offers a program of academic study that leads to a first professional degree in a field for which there is a national specialized accrediting agency recognized by the Secretary of Education.
            
              Institution of undergraduate higher education means:
            (1) An institution offering at least two but less than four years of college-level study beyond the high school level, leading to a diploma or an associate degree, or wholly or principally creditable toward a baccalaureate degree; or
            (2) An institution offering academic study leading to a baccalaureate degree; or
            (3) An agency or body that certifies credentials or offers degrees, but that may or may not offer academic study.
            
              Institution of vocational education means a school or institution (except an institution of professional or graduate or undergraduate higher education) that has as its primary purpose preparation of students to pursue a technical, skilled, or semiskilled occupation or trade, or to pursue study in a technical field, whether or not the school or institution offers certificates, diplomas, or degrees and whether or not it offers full-time study.
            
              Recipient means any State or political subdivision thereof, or any instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any person, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and that operates an education program or activity that receives such assistance, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee thereof.
            
              Student means a person who has gained admission.
            
              Title IX means Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-318, 86 Stat. 235, 373 (codified as amended at 20 U.S.C. 1681-1688) (except sections 904 and 906 thereof), as amended by section 3 of Public Law 93-568, 88 Stat. 1855, by section 412 of the Education Amendments of 1976, Public Law 94-482, 90 Stat. 2234, and by Section 3 of Public Law 100-259, 102 Stat. 28, 28-29 (20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1683, 1685, 1686, 1687, 1688).
            
              Title IX regulations means the provisions set forth at §§ 3.100 through 3.605.
            
              Transition plan means a plan subject to the approval of the Secretary of Education pursuant to section 901(a)(2) of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681(a)(2), under which an educational institution operates in making the transition from being an educational institution that admits only students of one sex to being one that admits students of both sexes without discrimination.
            [65 FR 52865, 52879, Aug. 30, 2000, as amended at 65 FR 52880, Aug. 30, 2000]
          
          
            § 3.110
            Remedial and affirmative action and self-evaluation.
            (a) Remedial action. If the designated agency official finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, such recipient shall take such remedial action as the designated agency official deems necessary to overcome the effects of such discrimination.
            (b) Affirmative action. In the absence of a finding of discrimination on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, a recipient may take affirmative action consistent with law to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation therein by persons of a particular sex. Nothing in these Title IX regulations shall be interpreted to alter any affirmative action obligations that a recipient may have under Executive Order 11246, 3 CFR, 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339; as amended by Executive Order 11375, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 684; as amended by Executive Order 11478, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 803; as amended by Executive Order 12086, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 230; as amended by Executive Order 12107, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 264.
            (c) Self-evaluation. Each recipient education institution shall, within one year of September 29, 2000:
            (1) Evaluate, in terms of the requirements of these Title IX regulations, its current policies and practices and the effects thereof concerning admission of students, treatment of students, and employment of both academic and non-academic personnel working in connection with the recipient's education program or activity;
            (2) Modify any of these policies and practices that do not or may not meet the requirements of these Title IX regulations; and
            (3) Take appropriate remedial steps to eliminate the effects of any discrimination that resulted or may have resulted from adherence to these policies and practices.
            (d) Availability of self-evaluation and related materials. Recipients shall maintain on file for at least three years following completion of the evaluation required under paragraph (c) of this section, and shall provide to the designated agency official upon request, a description of any modifications made pursuant to paragraph (c)(2) of this section and of any remedial steps taken pursuant to paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
          
          
            § 3.115
            Assurance required.
            (a) General. Either at the application stage or the award stage, Federal agencies must ensure that applications for Federal financial assistance or awards of Federal financial assistance contain, be accompanied by, or be covered by a specifically identified assurance from the applicant or recipient, satisfactory to the designated agency official, that each education program or activity operated by the applicant or recipient and to which these Title IX regulations apply will be operated in compliance with these Title IX regulations. An assurance of compliance with these Title IX regulations shall not be satisfactory to the designated agency official if the applicant or recipient to whom such assurance applies fails to commit itself to take whatever remedial action is necessary in accordance with § 3.110(a) to eliminate existing discrimination on the basis of sex or to eliminate the effects of past discrimination whether occurring prior to or subsequent to the submission to the designated agency official of such assurance.
            (b) Duration of obligation. (1) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide real property or structures thereon, such assurance shall obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the real property or structures are used to provide an education program or activity.
            (2) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide personal property, such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which it retains ownership or possession of the property.

            (3) In all other cases such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended.
            
            (c) Form. (1) The assurances required by paragraph (a) of this section, which may be included as part of a document that addresses other assurances or obligations, shall include that the applicant or recipient will comply with all applicable Federal statutes relating to nondiscrimination. These include but are not limited to: Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended (20 U.S.C. 1681-1683, 1685-1688).
            (2) The designated agency official will specify the extent to which such assurances will be required of the applicant's or recipient's subgrantees, contractors, subcontractors, transferees, or successors in interest.
          
          
            § 3.120
            Transfers of property.
            If a recipient sells or otherwise transfers property financed in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance to a transferee that operates any education program or activity, and the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not upon such sale or transfer properly accounted for to the Federal Government, both the transferor and the transferee shall be deemed to be recipients, subject to the provisions of §§ 3.205 through 3.235(a).
          
          
            § 3.125
            Effect of other requirements.
            (a) Effect of other Federal provisions. The obligations imposed by these Title IX regulations are independent of, and do not alter, obligations not to discriminate on the basis of sex imposed by Executive Order 11246, 3 CFR, 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339; as amended by Executive Order 11375, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 684; as amended by Executive Order 11478, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 803; as amended by Executive Order 12087, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 230; as amended by Executive Order 12107, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 264; sections 704 and 855 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295m, 298b-2); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.); the Equal Pay Act of 1963 (29 U.S.C. 206); and any other Act of Congress or Federal regulation.
            (b) Effect of State or local law or other requirements. The obligation to comply with these Title IX regulations is not obviated or alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement that would render any applicant or student ineligible, or limit the eligibility of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, to practice any occupation or profession.
            (c) Effect of rules or regulations of private organizations. The obligation to comply with these Title IX regulations is not obviated or alleviated by any rule or regulation of any organization, club, athletic or other league, or association that would render any applicant or student ineligible to participate or limit the eligibility or participation of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, in any education program or activity operated by a recipient and that receives Federal financial assistance.
          
          
            § 3.130
            Effect of employment opportunities.
            The obligation to comply with these Title IX regulations is not obviated or alleviated because employment opportunities in any occupation or profession are or may be more limited for members of one sex than for members of the other sex.
          
          
            § 3.135
            Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
            (a) Designation of responsible employee. Each recipient shall designate at least one employee to coordinate its efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under these Title IX regulations, including any investigation of any complaint communicated to such recipient alleging its noncompliance with these Title IX regulations or alleging any actions that would be prohibited by these Title IX regulations. The recipient shall notify all its students and employees of the name, office address, and telephone number of the employee or employees appointed pursuant to this paragraph.
            (b) Complaint procedure of recipient. A recipient shall adopt and publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and employee complaints alleging any action that would be prohibited by these Title IX regulations.
          
          
            § 3.140
            Dissemination of policy.
            (a) Notification of policy. (1) Each recipient shall implement specific and continuing steps to notify applicants for admission and employment, students and parents of elementary and secondary school students, employees, sources of referral of applicants for admission and employment, and all unions or professional organizations holding collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient, that it does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the educational programs or activities that it operates, and that it is required by Title IX and these Title IX regulations not to discriminate in such a manner. Such notification shall contain such information, and be made in such manner, as the designated agency official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by Title IX and these Title IX regulations, but shall state at least that the requirement not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to employment therein, and to admission thereto unless §§ 3.300 through 3.310 do not apply to the recipient, and that inquiries concerning the application of Title IX and these Title IX regulations to such recipient may be referred to the employee designated pursuant to § 3.135, or to the designated agency official.
            (2) Each recipient shall make the initial notification required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section within 90 days of September 29, 2000 or of the date these Title IX regulations first apply to such recipient, whichever comes later, which notification shall include publication in:
            (i) Newspapers and magazines operated by such recipient or by student, alumnae, or alumni groups for or in connection with such recipient; and
            (ii) Memoranda or other written communications distributed to every student and employee of such recipient.
            (b) Publications. (1) Each recipient shall prominently include a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section in each announcement, bulletin, catalog, or application form that it makes available to any person of a type, described in paragraph (a) of this section, or which is otherwise used in connection with the recruitment of students or employees.
            (2) A recipient shall not use or distribute a publication of the type described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section that suggests, by text or illustration, that such recipient treats applicants, students, or employees differently on the basis of sex except as such treatment is permitted by these Title IX regulations.
            (c) Distribution. Each recipient shall distribute without discrimination on the basis of sex each publication described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, and shall apprise each of its admission and employment recruitment representatives of the policy of nondiscrimination described in paragraph (a) of this section, and shall require such representatives to adhere to such policy.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Coverage
          
            § 3.200
            Application.
            Except as provided in §§ 3.205 through 3.235(a), these Title IX regulations apply to every recipient and to each education program or activity operated by such recipient that receives Federal financial assistance.
          
          
            § 3.205
            Educational institutions and other entities controlled by religious organizations.
            (a) Exemption. These Title IX regulations do not apply to any operation of an educational institution or other entity that is controlled by a religious organization to the extent that application of these Title IX regulations would not be consistent with the religious tenets of such organization.
            (b) Exemption claims. An educational institution or other entity that wishes to claim the exemption set forth in paragraph (a) of this section shall do so by submitting in writing to the designated agency official a statement by the highest-ranking official of the institution, identifying the provisions of these Title IX regulations that conflict with a specific tenet of the religious organization.
          
          
            § 3.210
            Military and merchant marine educational institutions.

            These Title IX regulations do not apply to an educational institution whose primary purpose is the training of individuals for a military service of the United States or for the merchant marine.
          
          
            § 3.215
            Membership practices of certain organizations.
            (a) Social fraternities and sororities. These Title IX regulations do not apply to the membership practices of social fraternities and sororities that are exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 26 U.S.C. 501(a), the active membership of which consists primarily of students in attendance at institutions of higher education.
            (b) YMCA, YWCA, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, and Camp Fire Girls. These Title IX regulations do not apply to the membership practices of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA), the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA), the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts, and Camp Fire Girls.
            (c) Voluntary youth service organizations. These Title IX regulations do not apply to the membership practices of a voluntary youth service organization that is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 26 U.S.C. 501(a), and the membership of which has been traditionally limited to members of one sex and principally to persons of less than nineteen years of age.
          
          
            § 3.220
            Admissions.
            (a) Admissions to educational institutions prior to June 24, 1973, are not covered by these Title IX regulations.
            (b) Administratively separate units. For the purposes only of this section, §§ 3.225 and 3.230, and §§ 3.300 through 3.310, each administratively separate unit shall be deemed to be an educational institution.
            (c) Application of §§ 3.300 through 3.310. Except as provided in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply to each recipient. A recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of §§ 3.300 through 3.310.
            (d) Educational institutions. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section as to recipients that are educational institutions, §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply only to institutions of vocational education, professional education, graduate higher education, and public institutions of undergraduate higher education.
            (e) Public institutions of undergraduate higher education. §§ 3.300 through 3.310 do not apply to any public institution of undergraduate higher education that traditionally and continually from its establishment has had a policy of admitting students of only one sex.
          
          
            § 3.225
            Educational institutions eligible to submit transition plans.
            (a) Application. This section applies to each educational institution to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply that:
            (1) Admitted students of only one sex as regular students as of June 23, 1972; or
            (2) Admitted students of only one sex as regular students as of June 23, 1965, but thereafter admitted, as regular students, students of the sex not admitted prior to June 23, 1965.
            (b) Provision for transition plans. An educational institution to which this section applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of §§ 3.300 through 3.310.
          
          
            § 3.230
            Transition plans.
            (a) Submission of plans. An institution to which § 3.225 applies and that is composed of more than one administratively separate unit may submit either a single transition plan applicable to all such units, or a separate transition plan applicable to each such unit.
            (b) Content of plans. In order to be approved by the Secretary of Education, a transition plan shall:
            (1) State the name, address, and Federal Interagency Committee on Education Code of the educational institution submitting such plan, the administratively separate units to which the plan is applicable, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom questions concerning the plan may be addressed. The person who submits the plan shall be the chief administrator or president of the institution, or another individual legally authorized to bind the institution to all actions set forth in the plan.

            (2) State whether the educational institution or administratively separate unit admits students of both sexes as regular students and, if so, when it began to do so.
            (3) Identify and describe with respect to the educational institution or administratively separate unit any obstacles to admitting students without discrimination on the basis of sex.
            (4) Describe in detail the steps necessary to eliminate as soon as practicable each obstacle so identified and indicate the schedule for taking these steps and the individual directly responsible for their implementation.
            (5) Include estimates of the number of students, by sex, expected to apply for, be admitted to, and enter each class during the period covered by the plan.
            (c) Nondiscrimination. No policy or practice of a recipient to which § 3.225 applies shall result in treatment of applicants to or students of such recipient in violation of §§ 3.300 through 3.310 unless such treatment is necessitated by an obstacle identified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section and a schedule for eliminating that obstacle has been provided as required by paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
            (d) Effects of past exclusion. To overcome the effects of past exclusion of students on the basis of sex, each educational institution to which § 3.225 applies shall include in its transition plan, and shall implement, specific steps designed to encourage individuals of the previously excluded sex to apply for admission to such institution. Such steps shall include instituting recruitment programs that emphasize the institution's commitment to enrolling students of the sex previously excluded.
          
          
            § 3.235
            Statutory amendments.
            (a) This section, which applies to all provisions of these Title IX regulations, addresses statutory amendments to Title IX.
            (b) These Title IX regulations shall not apply to or preclude:
            (1) Any program or activity of the American Legion undertaken in connection with the organization or operation of any Boys State conference, Boys Nation conference, Girls State conference, or Girls Nation conference;
            (2) Any program or activity of a secondary school or educational institution specifically for:
            (i) The promotion of any Boys State conference, Boys Nation conference, Girls State conference, or Girls Nation conference; or
            (ii) The selection of students to attend any such conference;
            (3) Father-son or mother-daughter activities at an educational institution or in an education program or activity, but if such activities are provided for students of one sex, opportunities for reasonably comparable activities shall be provided to students of the other sex;
            (4) Any scholarship or other financial assistance awarded by an institution of higher education to an individual because such individual has received such award in a single-sex pageant based upon a combination of factors related to the individual's personal appearance, poise, and talent. The pageant, however, must comply with other nondiscrimination provisions of Federal law.
            (c) Program or activity or program means:
            (1) All of the operations of any entity described in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through (iv) of this section, any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance:
            (i)(A) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
            (B) The entity of such State or local government that distributes such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
            (ii)(A) A college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or
            (B) A local educational agency (as defined in section 8801 of title 20), system of vocational education, or other school system;

            (iii)(A) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
            
            (1) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
            (2) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
            (B) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
            (iv) Any other entity that is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (ii), or (iii) of this section.
            (2)(i) Program or activity does not include any operation of an entity that is controlled by a religious organization if the application of 20 U.S.C. 1681 to such operation would not be consistent with the religious tenets of such organization.
            (ii) For example, all of the operations of a college, university, or other postsecondary institution, including but not limited to traditional educational operations, faculty and student housing, campus shuttle bus service, campus restaurants, the bookstore, and other commercial activities are part of a “program or activity” subject to these Title IX regulations if the college, university, or other institution receives Federal financial assistance.
            (d)(1) Nothing in these Title IX regulations shall be construed to require or prohibit any person, or public or private entity, to provide or pay for any benefit or service, including the use of facilities, related to an abortion. Medical procedures, benefits, services, and the use of facilities, necessary to save the life of a pregnant woman or to address complications related to an abortion are not subject to this section.
            (2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a penalty to be imposed on any person or individual because such person or individual is seeking or has received any benefit or service related to a legal abortion. Accordingly, subject to paragraph (d)(1) of this section, no person shall be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, employment, or other educational program or activity operated by a recipient that receives Federal financial assistance because such individual has sought or received, or is seeking, a legal abortion, or any benefit or service related to a legal abortion.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Admission and Recruitment Prohibited
          
            § 3.300
            Admission.
            (a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be denied admission, or be subjected to discrimination in admission, by any recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply, except as provided in §§ 3.225 and 3.230.
            (b) Specific prohibitions. (1) In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply shall not:
            (i) Give preference to one person over another on the basis of sex, by ranking applicants separately on such basis, or otherwise;
            (ii) Apply numerical limitations upon the number or proportion of persons of either sex who may be admitted; or
            (iii) Otherwise treat one individual differently from another on the basis of sex.
            (2) A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for admission that has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless the use of such test or criterion is shown to predict validly success in the education program or activity in question and alternative tests or criteria that do not have such a disproportionately adverse effect are shown to be unavailable.
            (c) Prohibitions relating to marital or parental status. In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply:

            (1) Shall not apply any rule concerning the actual or potential parental, family, or marital status of a student or applicant that treats persons differently on the basis of sex;
            
            (2) Shall not discriminate against or exclude any person on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom, or establish or follow any rule or practice that so discriminates or excludes;
            (3) Subject to § 3.235(d), shall treat disabilities related to pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability or physical condition; and
            (4) Shall not make pre-admission inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for admission, including whether such applicant is “Miss” or “Mrs.” A recipient may make pre-admission inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for admission, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by these Title IX regulations.
          
          
            § 3.305
            Preference in admission.
            A recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply shall not give preference to applicants for admission, on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or other school or entity that admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preference has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of §§ 3.300 through 3.310.
          
          
            § 3.310
            Recruitment.
            (a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment. A recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and admission of students. A recipient may be required to undertake additional recruitment efforts for one sex as remedial action pursuant to § 3.110(a), and may choose to undertake such efforts as affirmative action pursuant to § 3.110(b).
            (b) Recruitment at certain institutions. A recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 apply shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at educational institutions, schools, or entities that admit as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of §§ 3.300 through 3.310.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
          
            § 3.400
            Education programs or activities.
            (a) General. Except as provided elsewhere in these Title IX regulations, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other education program or activity operated by a recipient that receives Federal financial assistance. Sections 3.400 through 3.455 do not apply to actions of a recipient in connection with admission of its students to an education program or activity of a recipient to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 do not apply, or an entity, not a recipient, to which §§ 3.300 through 3.310 would not apply if the entity were a recipient.
            (b) Specific prohibitions. Except as provided in §§ 3.400 through 3.455, in providing any aid, benefit, or service to a student, a recipient shall not, on the basis of sex:
            (1) Treat one person differently from another in determining whether such person satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such aid, benefit, or service;
            (2) Provide different aid, benefits, or services or provide aid, benefits, or services in a different manner;
            (3) Deny any person any such aid, benefit, or service;
            (4) Subject any person to separate or different rules of behavior, sanctions, or other treatment;
            (5) Apply any rule concerning the domicile or residence of a student or applicant, including eligibility for in-state fees and tuition;
            (6) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit, or service to students or employees;
            (7) Otherwise limit any person in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity.
            (c) Assistance administered by a recipient educational institution to study at a foreign institution. A recipient educational institution may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other awards established by foreign or domestic wills, trusts, or similar legal instruments, or by acts of foreign governments and restricted to members of one sex, that are designed to provide opportunities to study abroad, and that are awarded to students who are already matriculating at or who are graduates of the recipient institution; Provided, that a recipient educational institution that administers or assists in the administration of such scholarships, fellowships, or other awards that are restricted to members of one sex provides, or otherwise makes available, reasonable opportunities for similar studies for members of the other sex. Such opportunities may be derived from either domestic or foreign sources.
            (d) Aids, benefits or services not provided by recipient. (1) This paragraph (d) applies to any recipient that requires participation by any applicant, student, or employee in any education program or activity not operated wholly by such recipient, or that facilitates, permits, or considers such participation as part of or equivalent to an education program or activity operated by such recipient, including participation in educational consortia and cooperative employment and student-teaching assignments.
            (2) Such recipient:
            (i) Shall develop and implement a procedure designed to assure itself that the operator or sponsor of such other education program or activity takes no action affecting any applicant, student, or employee of such recipient that these Title IX regulations would prohibit such recipient from taking; and
            (ii) Shall not facilitate, require, permit, or consider such participation if such action occurs.
          
          
            § 3.405
            Housing.
            (a) Generally. A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, apply different rules or regulations, impose different fees or requirements, or offer different services or benefits related to housing, except as provided in this section (including housing provided only to married students).
            (b) Housing provided by recipient. (1) A recipient may provide separate housing on the basis of sex.
            (2) Housing provided by a recipient to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, shall be as a whole:
            (i) Proportionate in quantity to the number of students of that sex applying for such housing; and
            (ii) Comparable in quality and cost to the student.
            (c) Other housing. (1) A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, administer different policies or practices concerning occupancy by its students of housing other than that provided by such recipient.
            (2)(i) A recipient which, through solicitation, listing, approval of housing, or otherwise, assists any agency, organization, or person in making housing available to any of its students, shall take such reasonable action as may be necessary to assure itself that such housing as is provided to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, is as a whole:
            (A) Proportionate in quantity; and
            (B) Comparable in quality and cost to the student.
            (ii) A recipient may render such assistance to any agency, organization, or person that provides all or part of such housing to students of only one sex.
          
          
            § 3.410
            Comparable facilities.
            A recipient may provide separate toilet, locker room, and shower facilities on the basis of sex, but such facilities provided for students of one sex shall be comparable to such facilities provided for students of the other sex.
          
          
            § 3.415
            Access to course offerings.

            (a) A recipient shall not provide any course or otherwise carry out any of its education program or activity separately on the basis of sex, or require or refuse participation therein by any of its students on such basis, including health, physical education, industrial, business, vocational, technical, home economics, music, and adult education courses.
            
            (b)(1) With respect to classes and activities in physical education at the elementary school level, the recipient shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than one year from September 29, 2000. With respect to physical education classes and activities at the secondary and post-secondary levels, the recipient shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than three years from September 29, 2000.
            (2) This section does not prohibit grouping of students in physical education classes and activities by ability as assessed by objective standards of individual performance developed and applied without regard to sex.
            (3) This section does not prohibit separation of students by sex within physical education classes or activities during participation in wrestling, boxing, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball, and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
            (4) Where use of a single standard of measuring skill or progress in a physical education class has an adverse effect on members of one sex, the recipient shall use appropriate standards that do not have such effect.
            (5) Portions of classes in elementary and secondary schools, or portions of education programs or activities, that deal exclusively with human sexuality may be conducted in separate sessions for boys and girls.
            (6) Recipients may make requirements based on vocal range or quality that may result in a chorus or choruses of one or predominantly one sex.
          
          
            § 3.420
            Access to schools operated by LEAs.
            A recipient that is a local educational agency shall not, on the basis of sex, exclude any person from admission to:
            (a) Any institution of vocational education operated by such recipient; or
            (b) Any other school or educational unit operated by such recipient, unless such recipient otherwise makes available to such person, pursuant to the same policies and criteria of admission, courses, services, and facilities comparable to each course, service, and facility offered in or through such schools.
          
          
            § 3.425
            Counseling and use of appraisal and counseling materials.
            (a) Counseling. A recipient shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex in the counseling or guidance of students or applicants for admission.
            (b) Use of appraisal and counseling materials. A recipient that uses testing or other materials for appraising or counseling students shall not use different materials for students on the basis of their sex or use materials that permit or require different treatment of students on such basis unless such different materials cover the same occupations and interest areas and the use of such different materials is shown to be essential to eliminate sex bias. Recipients shall develop and use internal procedures for ensuring that such materials do not discriminate on the basis of sex. Where the use of a counseling test or other instrument results in a substantially disproportionate number of members of one sex in any particular course of study or classification, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination in the instrument or its application.
            (c) Disproportion in classes. Where a recipient finds that a particular class contains a substantially disproportionate number of individuals of one sex, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination on the basis of sex in counseling or appraisal materials or by counselors.
          
          
            § 3.430
            Financial assistance.
            (a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, in providing financial assistance to any of its students, a recipient shall not:
            (1) On the basis of sex, provide different amounts or types of such assistance, limit eligibility for such assistance that is of any particular type or source, apply different criteria, or otherwise discriminate;

            (2) Through solicitation, listing, approval, provision of facilities, or other services, assist any foundation, trust, agency, organization, or person that provides assistance to any of such recipient's students in a manner that discriminates on the basis of sex; or
            (3) Apply any rule or assist in application of any rule concerning eligibility for such assistance that treats persons of one sex differently from persons of the other sex with regard to marital or parental status.
            (b) Financial aid established by certain legal instruments. (1) A recipient may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance established pursuant to domestic or foreign wills, trusts, bequests, or similar legal instruments or by acts of a foreign government that require that awards be made to members of a particular sex specified therein; Provided, that the overall effect of the award of such sex-restricted scholarships, fellowships, and other forms of financial assistance does not discriminate on the basis of sex.
            (2) To ensure nondiscriminatory awards of assistance as required in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, recipients shall develop and use procedures under which:
            (i) Students are selected for award of financial assistance on the basis of nondiscriminatory criteria and not on the basis of availability of funds restricted to members of a particular sex;
            (ii) An appropriate sex-restricted scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance is allocated to each student selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section; and
            (iii) No student is denied the award for which he or she was selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section because of the absence of a scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance designated for a member of that student's sex.
            (c) Athletic scholarships. (1) To the extent that a recipient awards athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid, it must provide reasonable opportunities for such awards for members of each sex in proportion to the number of students of each sex participating in interscholastic or intercollegiate athletics.
            (2) A recipient may provide separate athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid for members of each sex as part of separate athletic teams for members of each sex to the extent consistent with this paragraph (c) and § 3.450.
          
          
            § 3.435
            Employment assistance to students.
            (a) Assistance by recipient in making available outside employment. A recipient that assists any agency, organization, or person in making employment available to any of its students:
            (1) Shall assure itself that such employment is made available without discrimination on the basis of sex; and
            (2) Shall not render such services to any agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of sex in its employment practices.
            (b) Employment of students by recipients. A recipient that employs any of its students shall not do so in a manner that violates §§ 3.500 through 3.550.
          
          
            § 3.440
            Health and insurance benefits and services.
            Subject to § 3.235(d), in providing a medical, hospital, accident, or life insurance benefit, service, policy, or plan to any of its students, a recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex, or provide such benefit, service, policy, or plan in a manner that would violate §§ 3.500 through 3.550 if it were provided to employees of the recipient. This section shall not prohibit a recipient from providing any benefit or service that may be used by a different proportion of students of one sex than of the other, including family planning services. However, any recipient that provides full coverage health service shall provide gynecological care.
          
          
            § 3.445
            Marital or parental status.
            (a) Status generally. A recipient shall not apply any rule concerning a student's actual or potential parental, family, or marital status that treats students differently on the basis of sex.
            (b) Pregnancy and related conditions. (1) A recipient shall not discriminate against any student, or exclude any student from its education program or activity, including any class or extracurricular activity, on the basis of such student's pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom, unless the student requests voluntarily to participate in a separate portion of the program or activity of the recipient.
            (2) A recipient may require such a student to obtain the certification of a physician that the student is physically and emotionally able to continue participation as long as such a certification is required of all students for other physical or emotional conditions requiring the attention of a physician.
            (3) A recipient that operates a portion of its education program or activity separately for pregnant students, admittance to which is completely voluntary on the part of the student as provided in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, shall ensure that the separate portion is comparable to that offered to non-pregnant students.
            (4) Subject to § 3.235(d), a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability with respect to any medical or hospital benefit, service, plan, or policy that such recipient administers, operates, offers, or participates in with respect to students admitted to the recipient's educational program or activity.
            (5) In the case of a recipient that does not maintain a leave policy for its students, or in the case of a student who does not otherwise qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence for as long a period of time as is deemed medically necessary by the student's physician, at the conclusion of which the student shall be reinstated to the status that she held when the leave began.
          
          
            § 3.450
            Athletics.
            (a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, be treated differently from another person, or otherwise be discriminated against in any interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics offered by a recipient, and no recipient shall provide any such athletics separately on such basis.
            (b) Separate teams. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, a recipient may operate or sponsor separate teams for members of each sex where selection for such teams is based upon competitive skill or the activity involved is a contact sport. However, where a recipient operates or sponsors a team in a particular sport for members of one sex but operates or sponsors no such team for members of the other sex, and athletic opportunities for members of that sex have previously been limited, members of the excluded sex must be allowed to try out for the team offered unless the sport involved is a contact sport. For the purposes of these Title IX regulations, contact sports include boxing, wrestling, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball, and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
            (c) Equal opportunity. (1) A recipient that operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics shall provide equal athletic opportunity for members of both sexes. In determining whether equal opportunities are available, the designated agency official will consider, among other factors:
            (i) Whether the selection of sports and levels of competition effectively accommodate the interests and abilities of members of both sexes;
            (ii) The provision of equipment and supplies;
            (iii) Scheduling of games and practice time;
            (iv) Travel and per diem allowance;
            (v) Opportunity to receive coaching and academic tutoring;
            (vi) Assignment and compensation of coaches and tutors;
            (vii) Provision of locker rooms, practice, and competitive facilities;
            (viii) Provision of medical and training facilities and services;
            (ix) Provision of housing and dining facilities and services;
            (x) Publicity.

            (2) For purposes of paragraph (c)(1) of this section, unequal aggregate expenditures for members of each sex or unequal expenditures for male and female teams if a recipient operates or sponsors separate teams will not constitute noncompliance with this section, but the designated agency official may consider the failure to provide necessary funds for teams for one sex in assessing equality of opportunity for members of each sex.
            (d) Adjustment period. A recipient that operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics at the elementary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than one year from September 29, 2000. A recipient that operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics at the secondary or postsecondary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than three years from September 29, 2000.
          
          
            § 3.455
            Textbooks and curricular material.
            Nothing in these Title IX regulations shall be interpreted as requiring or prohibiting or abridging in any way the use of particular textbooks or curricular materials.
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Discrimination on the Basis of Sex in Employment in Education Programs or Activities Prohibited
          
            § 3.500
            Employment.
            (a) General. (1) No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination in employment, or recruitment, consideration, or selection therefor, whether full-time or part-time, under any education program or activity operated by a recipient that receives Federal financial assistance.
            (2) A recipient shall make all employment decisions in any education program or activity operated by such recipient in a nondiscriminatory manner and shall not limit, segregate, or classify applicants or employees in any way that could adversely affect any applicant's or employee's employment opportunities or status because of sex.
            (3) A recipient shall not enter into any contractual or other relationship which directly or indirectly has the effect of subjecting employees or students to discrimination prohibited by §§ 3.500 through 3.550, including relationships with employment and referral agencies, with labor unions, and with organizations providing or administering fringe benefits to employees of the recipient.
            (4) A recipient shall not grant preferences to applicants for employment on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or entity that admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preferences has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of these Title IX regulations.
            (b) Application. The provisions of §§ 3.500 through 3.550 apply to:
            (1) Recruitment, advertising, and the process of application for employment;
            (2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, consideration for and award of tenure, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, application of nepotism policies, right of return from layoff, and rehiring;
            (3) Rates of pay or any other form of compensation, and changes in compensation;
            (4) Job assignments, classifications, and structure, including position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
            (5) The terms of any collective bargaining agreement;
            (6) Granting and return from leaves of absence, leave for pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, leave for persons of either sex to care for children or dependents, or any other leave;
            (7) Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, whether or not administered by the recipient;
            (8) Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related activities, selection for tuition assistance, selection for sabbaticals and leaves of absence to pursue training;
            (9) Employer-sponsored activities, including social or recreational programs; and
            (10) Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
          
          
            § 3.505
            Employment criteria.

            A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for any employment opportunity that has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless:
            (a) Use of such test or other criterion is shown to predict validly successful performance in the position in question; and
            (b) Alternative tests or criteria for such purpose, which do not have such disproportionately adverse effect, are shown to be unavailable.
          
          
            § 3.510
            Recruitment.
            (a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment and hiring. A recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and hiring of employees. Where a recipient has been found to be presently discriminating on the basis of sex in the recruitment or hiring of employees, or has been found to have so discriminated in the past, the recipient shall recruit members of the sex so discriminated against so as to overcome the effects of such past or present discrimination.
            (b) Recruitment patterns. A recipient shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at entities that furnish as applicants only or predominantly members of one sex if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of §§ 3.500 through 3.550.
          
          
            § 3.515
            Compensation.
            A recipient shall not make or enforce any policy or practice that, on the basis of sex:
            (a) Makes distinctions in rates of pay or other compensation;
            (b) Results in the payment of wages to employees of one sex at a rate less than that paid to employees of the opposite sex for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility, and that are performed under similar working conditions.
          
          
            § 3.520
            Job classification and structure.
            A recipient shall not:
            (a) Classify a job as being for males or for females;
            (b) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority lists, career ladders, or tenure systems based on sex; or
            (c) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority systems, career ladders, or tenure systems for similar jobs, position descriptions, or job requirements that classify persons on the basis of sex, unless sex is a bona fide occupational qualification for the positions in question as set forth in § 3.550.
          
          
            § 3.525
            Fringe benefits.
            (a) “Fringe benefits” defined. For purposes of these Title IX regulations, fringe benefits means: Any medical, hospital, accident, life insurance, or retirement benefit, service, policy or plan, any profit-sharing or bonus plan, leave, and any other benefit or service of employment not subject to the provision of § 3.515.
            (b) Prohibitions. A recipient shall not:
            (1) Discriminate on the basis of sex with regard to making fringe benefits available to employees or make fringe benefits available to spouses, families, or dependents of employees differently upon the basis of the employee's sex;
            (2) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a fringe benefit plan that does not provide for equal periodic benefits for members of each sex and for equal contributions to the plan by such recipient for members of each sex; or
            (3) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a pension or retirement plan that establishes different optional or compulsory retirement ages based on sex or that otherwise discriminates in benefits on the basis of sex.
          
          
            § 3.530
            Marital or parental status.
            (a) General. A recipient shall not apply any policy or take any employment action:
            (1) Concerning the potential marital, parental, or family status of an employee or applicant for employment that treats persons differently on the basis of sex; or
            (2) Which is based upon whether an employee or applicant for employment is the head of household or principal wage earner in such employee's or applicant's family unit.
            (b) Pregnancy. A recipient shall not discriminate against or exclude from employment any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom.
            (c) Pregnancy as a temporary disability. Subject to § 3.235(d), a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, recovery therefrom, and any temporary disability resulting therefrom as any other temporary disability for all job-related purposes, including commencement, duration, and extensions of leave, payment of disability income, accrual of seniority and any other benefit or service, and reinstatement, and under any fringe benefit offered to employees by virtue of employment.
            (d) Pregnancy leave. In the case of a recipient that does not maintain a leave policy for its employees, or in the case of an employee with insufficient leave or accrued employment time to qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence without pay for a reasonable period of time, at the conclusion of which the employee shall be reinstated to the status that she held when the leave began or to a comparable position, without decrease in rate of compensation or loss of promotional opportunities, or any other right or privilege of employment.
          
          
            § 3.535
            Effect of state or local law or other requirements.
            (a) Prohibitory requirements. The obligation to comply with §§ 3.500 through 3.550 is not obviated or alleviated by the existence of any State or local law or other requirement that imposes prohibitions or limits upon employment of members of one sex that are not imposed upon members of the other sex.
            (b) Benefits. A recipient that provides any compensation, service, or benefit to members of one sex pursuant to a State or local law or other requirement shall provide the same compensation, service, or benefit to members of the other sex.
          
          
            § 3.540
            Advertising.
            A recipient shall not in any advertising related to employment indicate preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sex unless sex is a bona fide occupational qualification for the particular job in question.
          
          
            § 3.545
            Pre-employment inquiries.
            (a) Marital status. A recipient shall not make pre-employment inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for employment, including whether such applicant is “Miss” or “Mrs.”
            (b) Sex. A recipient may make pre-employment inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for employment, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by these Title IX regulations.
          
          
            § 3.550
            Sex as a bona fide occupational qualification.
            A recipient may take action otherwise prohibited by §§ 3.500 through 3.550 provided it is shown that sex is a bona fide occupational qualification for that action, such that consideration of sex with regard to such action is essential to successful operation of the employment function concerned. A recipient shall not take action pursuant to this section that is based upon alleged comparative employment characteristics or stereotyped characterizations of one or the other sex, or upon preference based on sex of the recipient, employees, students, or other persons, but nothing contained in this section shall prevent a recipient from considering an employee's sex in relation to employment in a locker room or toilet facility used only by members of one sex.
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Procedures
          
            § 3.600
            Notice of covered programs.

            Within 60 days of September 29, 2000, each Federal agency that awards Federal financial assistance shall publish in the Federal Register a notice of the programs covered by these Title IX regulations. Each such Federal agency shall periodically republish the notice of covered programs to reflect changes in covered programs. Copies of this notice also shall be made available upon request to the Federal agency's office that enforces Title IX.
          
          
            
            § 3.605
            Enforcement procedures.
            The investigative, compliance, and enforcement procedural provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d) (“Title VI”) are hereby adopted and applied to these Title IX regulations. These procedures may be found at 24 CFR part 1.
            [65 FR 52880, Aug. 30, 2000]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 4
        PART 4—HUD REFORM ACT
        
          
            Subpart A—Accountability in the Provision of HUD Assistance
            Sec.
            4.1
            Purpose.
            4.3
            Definitions.
            4.5
            Notice and documentation of assistance subject to section 102(a).
            4.7
            Notice of funding decisions.
            4.9
            Disclosure requirements for assistance subject to section 102(b).
            4.11
            Updating of disclosure.
            4.13
            Limitation of assistance subject to section 102(d).
          
          
            Subpart B—Prohibition of Advance Disclosure of Funding Decisions
            4.20
            Purpose.
            4.22
            Definitions.
            4.24
            Scope.
            4.26
            Permissible and impermissible disclosures.
            4.28
            Civil penalties.
            4.30
            Procedure upon discovery of a violation.
            4.32
            Investigation by Office of Inspector General.
            4.34
            Review of Inspector General's report by the Ethics Law Division.
            4.36
            Action by the Ethics Law Division.
            4.38
            Administrative remedies.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3537a, 3545.
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 14449, Apr. 1, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—Accountability in the Provision of HUD Assistance
          
            § 4.1
            Purpose.
            The provisions of this subpart A are authorized under section 102 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (Pub. L. 101-235, approved December 15, 1989) (42 U.S.C. 3537a) (hereinafter, Section 102). Both the provisions of Section 102 and this subpart A apply for the purposes of Section 102. Section 102 contains a number of provisions designed to ensure greater accountability and integrity in the way in which the Department makes assistance available under certain of its programs.
          
          
            § 4.3
            Definitions.
            
              Applicant includes a person whose application for assistance must be submitted to HUD for any purpose including approval, environmental review, or rent determination.
            
              Assistance under any program or discretionary fund administered by the Secretary is subject to Section 102(a), and means any assistance, under any program administered by the Department, that provides by statute, regulation or otherwise for the competitive distribution of funding.
            
              Assistance within the jurisdiction of the Department is subject to Section 102(b), and means any contract, grant, loan, cooperative agreement, or other form of assistance, including the insurance or guarantee of a loan or mortgage, that is provided with respect to a specific project or activity under a program administered by the Department, whether or not it is awarded through a competitive process.
            
              Assistance within the jurisdiction of the Department to any housing project is subject to Section 102(d), and means:
            (1) Assistance which is provided directly by HUD to any person or entity, but not to subrecipients. It includes assistance for the acquisition, rehabilitation, operation conversion, modernization, renovation, or demolition of any property containing five or more dwelling units that is to be used primarily for residential purposes. It includes assistance to independent group residences, board and care facilities, group homes and transitional housing but does not include primarily nonresidential facilities such as intermediate care facilities, nursing homes and hospitals. It also includes any change requested by a recipient in the amount of assistance previously provided, except changes resulting from annual adjustments in Section 8 rents under Section 8(c)(2)(A) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f);

            (2) Assistance to residential rental property receiving a tax credit under Federal, State or local law.
            
            (3) For purposes of this definition, assistance includes assistance resulting from annual adjustments in Section 8 rents under Section 8(c)(2)(A) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, unless the initial assistance was made available before April 15, 1991, and no other assistance subject to this subpart A was made available on or after that date.
            
              Housing project means: (1) Property containing five or more dwelling units that is to be used for primarily residential purposes, including (but not limited to) living arrangements such as independent group residences, board and care facilities, group homes, and transitional housing, but excluding facilities that provide primarily non-residential services, such as intermediate care facilities, nursing homes, and hospitals.
            (2) Residential rental property receiving a tax credit under Federal, State, or local law.
            
              Interested party means any person involved in the application for assistance, or in the planning, development or implementation of the project or activity for which assistance is sought and any other person who has a pecuniary interest exceeding the lower of $50,000 or 10 percent in the project or activity for which assistance is sought.
            
              Selection criteria includes, in addition to any objective measures of housing and other need, project merit, or efficient use of resources, the weight or relative importance of each published selection criterion as well as any other factors that may affect the selection of recipients.
          
          
            § 4.5
            Notice and documentation of assistance subject to section 102(a).
            (a) Notice. Before the Department solicits an application for assistance subject to Section 102(a), it will post a notice describing application procedures and selection criteria not less than 30 calendar days before the deadline by which applications must be submitted.
            (b) Documentation of decisions. HUD will make available for public inspection, for at least five (5) years, and beginning not less than 30 calendars days after it provides the assistance, all documentation and other information regarding the basis for the funding decision with respect to each application submitted to HUD for assistance. HUD will also make available any written indication of support that it received from any applicant. Recipients of HUD assistance must ensure, in accordance with HUD guidance, the public availability of similar information submitted by subrecipients of HUD assistance.
            [61 FR 14449, Apr. 1, 1996, as amended at 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 4.7
            Notice of funding decisions.
            HUD will publish a Notice in the Federal Register at least quarterly to notify the public of all decisions made by the Department to provide:
            (a) Assistance subject to Section 102(a); and
            (b) Assistance that is provided through grants or cooperative agreements on a discretionary (non-formula, non-demand) basis, but that is not provided on the basis of a competition.
          
          
            § 4.9
            Disclosure requirements for assistance subject to section 102(b).
            (a) Receipt and reasonable expectation of receipt. (1) In determining the threshold of applicability of Section 102(b), an applicant will be deemed to have received or to have a reasonable expectation of receiving:
            (i) The total amount of assistance received during the Federal fiscal year during which the application was submitted;
            (ii) The total amount of assistance requested for the fiscal year in which any pending application, including the current application, was submitted; and
            (iii) For the fiscal year described in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, the total amount of assistance from the Department or any other entity that is likely to be made available on a formula basis or in the form of program income as defined in 2 CFR 200.80.

            (2) In the case of assistance that will be provided pursuant to contract over a period of time (such as project-based assistance under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937), all amounts that are to be provided over the term of the contract, irrespective of when they are to be received.
            
            (b) Content of disclosure. Applicants that receive or can reasonably be expected to receive, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section, an aggregate amount of assistance that is in excess of $200,000 must disclose the following information:
            (1) Other governmental assistance that is or is expected to be made available, based upon a reasonable assessment of the circumstances, with respect to the project or activities for which the assistance is sought;
            (2) The name and pecuniary interest of any interested party; and
            (3) A report of the expected sources and uses of funds for the project or activity which is the subject of the application, including governmental and non-governmental sources of funds and private capital resulting from tax benefits.
            (c) In the case of mortgage insurance under 24 CFR subtitle B, chapter II, the mortgagor is responsible for making the disclosures required under Section 102(b) and this section, and the mortgagee is responsible for furnishing the mortgagor's disclosures to the Department.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2510-0011)
            [61 FR 14449, Apr. 1, 1996, as amended at 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 4.11
            Updating of disclosure.
            (a) During the period in which an application for assistance covered under Section 102(b) is pending, or in which such assistance is being provided, the applicant must report to the Department, or to the State or unit of general local government, as appropriate:
            (1) Any information referred to in Section 102(b) that the applicant should have disclosed with respect to the application, but did not disclose;
            (2) Any information referred to in Section 102(b) that initially arose after the time for making disclosures under that subsection, including the name and pecuniary interest of any person who did not have a pecuniary interest in the project or activity that exceeded the threshold in Section 102(b) at the time of the application, but that subsequently exceeded the threshold.
            (b) With regard to changes in information that was disclosed under Sections 102(b) or 102(c):
            (1) For programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development:
            (i) Any change in other government assistance covered by Section 102(b) that exceeds the amount of all assistance that was previously disclosed by the lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent of the assistance;
            (ii) Any change in the expected sources or uses of funds that exceed the amount of all previously disclosed sources or uses by the lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent of previously disclosed sources;
            (2) For all other programs:
            (i) Any change in other government assistance under Section 102(b)(1) that exceeds the amount of assistance that was previously disclosed;
            (ii) Any change in the pecuniary interest of any person under Section 102(b)(2) that exceeds the amount of all previously disclosed interests by the lesser of $50,000 or 10 percent of such interest;
            (iii) For all projects receiving a tax credit under Federal, Sate or local law, any change in the expected sources or uses of funds that were previously disclosed;
            (iv) For all other projects:
            (A) Any change in the expected source of funds from a single source that exceeds the lesser of the amount previously disclosed for that source of funds by $250,000 or 10 percent of the funds previously disclosed for that source;
            (B) Any change in the expected sources of funds from all sources previously disclosed that exceeds the lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent of the amounts previously disclosed from all sources of funds;
            (C) Any change in a single expected use of funds that exceeds the lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent of the previously disclosed use;
            (D) Any change in the use of all funds that exceeds the lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent of the previously disclosed uses for all funds.
            (c) Period of coverage. For purposes of updating of Section 102(c), an application for assistance will be considered to be pending from the time the application is submitted until the Department communicates its decision with respect to the selection of the applicant.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2510-0011)
          
          
            § 4.13
            Limitation of assistance subject to section 102(d).
            (a) In making the certification for assistance subject to Section 102(d), the Secretary will consider the aggregate amount of assistance from the Department and from other sources that is necessary to ensure the feasibility of the assisted activity. The Secretary will take into account all factors relevant to feasibility, which may include, but are not limited to, past rates of returns for owners, sponsors, and investors; the long-term needs of the project and its tenants; and the usual and customary fees charged in carrying out the assisted activity.

            (b) If the Department determines that the aggregate of assistance within the jurisdiction of the Department to a housing project from the Department and from other governmental sources exceeds the amount that the Secretary determines is necessary to make the assisted activity feasible, the Department will consider all options available to enable it to make the required certification, including reductions in the amount of Section 8 subsidies. The Department also may impose a dollar-for-dollar, or equivalent, reduction in the amount of HUD assistance to offset the amount of other government assistance. In grant programs, this could result in a reduction of any grant amounts not yet drawn down. The Department may make these adjustments immediately, or in conjunction with servicing actions anticipated to occur in the near future (e.g., in conjunction with the next annual adjustment of Section 8 rents).
            (c) If an applicant does not meet the $200,000 disclosure requirement in § 4.7(b), an applicant must certify whether there is, or is expected to be made, available with respect to the housing project any other governmental assistance. The Department may also require any applicant subject to this subpart A to submit such a certification in conjunction with the Department's processing of any subsequent servicing action on that project. If there is other government assistance for purposes of the two preceding sentences, the applicant must submit such information as the Department deems necessary to make the certification and subsequent adjustments under Section 102(d).
            (d) The certification under Section 102(d) shall be retained in the official file for the housing project.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Prohibition of Advance Disclosure of Funding Decisions
          
            § 4.20
            Purpose.
            The provisions of this subpart B are authorized under section 103 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (Pub. L. 101-235, approved December 15, 1989) (42 U.S.C. 3537a) (hereinafter, Section 103). Both the provisions of Section 103 and this subpart B apply for the purposes of Section 103. Section 103 proscribes direct or indirect communication of certain information during the selection process by HUD employees to persons within or outside of the Department who are not authorized to receive that information. The purpose of the proscription is to preclude giving an unfair advantage to applicants who would receive information not available to other applicants or to the public. Section 103 also authorizes the Department to impose a civil money penalty on a HUD employee who knowingly discloses protected information, if such a violation of Section 103 is material, and authorizes the Department to sanction the person who received information improperly by, among other things, denying assistance to that person.
          
          
            § 4.22
            Definitions.
            
              Application means a written request for assistance regardless of whether the request is in proper form or format.
            
              Assistance does not include any contract (e.g., a procurement contract) that is subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) (48 CFR ch. 1).
            
              Disclose means providing information directly or indirectly to a person through any means of communication.
            
            
              Employee includes persons employed on a full-time, part-time, or temporary basis, and special government employees as defined in 18 U.S.C. 202. The term applies whether or not the employee is denoted as an officer of the Department. “Employee” is to be construed broadly to include persons who are retained on a contractual or consultative basis under an Office of Human Resources appointment. However, “employee” does not include an independent contractor, e.g., a firm or individual working under the authority of a procurement contract.
            
              Material or materially means in some influential or substantial respect or having to do more with substance than with form.
            
              Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, authority, firm, partnership, society, State, local government, or any other organization or group of people.
            
              Selection process means the period with respect to a selection for assistance that begins when the HUD official responsible for awarding the assistance involved, or his or her designee, makes a written request (which includes the selection criteria to be used in providing the assistance) to the Office of General Counsel (OGC) to prepare the NOFA, solicitation, or request for applications for assistance for publication in the Federal Register. The period includes the evaluation of applications, and concludes with the announcement of the selection of recipients of assistance.
          
          
            § 4.24
            Scope.
            (a) Coverage. The prohibitions against improper disclosure of covered selection information apply to any person who is an employee of the Department. In addition, the Department will require any other person who participates at the invitation of the Department in the selection process to sign a certification that he or she will be bound by the provisions of this part.
            (b) Applicability. The prohibitions contained in this part apply to conduct occurring on or after June 12, 1991.
          
          
            § 4.26
            Permissible and impermissible disclosures.
            (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 103, an employee is permitted to disclose information during the selection process with respect to:
            (1) The requirements of a HUD program or programs, including unpublished policy statements and the provision of technical assistance concerning program requirements, provided that the requirements or statements are disclosed on a uniform basis to any applicant or potential applicant. For purposes of this part, the term “technical assistance” includes such activities as explaining and responding to questions about program regulations, defining terms in an application package, and providing other forms of technical guidance that may be described in a NOFA. The term “technical assistance” also includes identification of those parts of an application that need substantive improvement, but this term does not include advising the applicant how to make those improvements.
            (2) The dates by which particular decisions in the selection process will be made;
            (3) Any information which has been published in the Federal Register in a NOFA or otherwise;

            (4) Any information which has been made public through means other than the Federal Register;
            (5) An official audit, inquiry or investigation, if the disclosure is made to an auditor or investigator authorized by the HUD Inspector General to conduct the audit or investigation;
            (6) Legal activities, including litigation, if the disclosure is made to an attorney who is representing or is otherwise responsible to the Department in connection with the activities; or

            (7) Procedures that are required to be performed to process an application, e.g., environmental or budget reviews, and technical assistance from experts in fields who are regularly employed by other government agencies, provided that the agency with which the expert is employed or associated is not an applicant for HUD assistance during the pending funding cycle.
            
            (b) An authorized employee, during the selection process, may contact an applicant for the purpose of:
            (1) Communication of the applicant's failure to qualify, after a preliminary review for eligibility and completeness with respect to his or her application, and the reasons for the failure to qualify, or the fact of the applicant's failure to be determined to be technically acceptable after a full review; or
            (2) Clarification of the terms of the applicant's application. A clarification, for the purpose of this paragraph (b), may include a request for additional information consistent with regulatory requirements.
            (c) Prohibition of advance disclosure of funding decisions. During the selection process an employee shall not knowingly disclose any covered selection information regarding the selection process to any person other than an employee authorized to receive that information.
            (1) The following disclosures of information are, at any time during the selection process, a violation of Section 103:
            (i) Information regarding any applicant's relative standing;
            (ii) The amount of assistance requested by any applicant;
            (iii) Any information contained in an application;
            (2) The following disclosures of information, before the deadline for the submission of applications, shall be a violation of Section 103:
            (i) The identity of any applicant; and
            (ii) The number of applicants.
          
          
            § 4.28
            Civil penalties.
            Whenever any employee knowingly and materially violates the prohibition in Section 103, the Department may impose a civil money penalty on the employee in accordance with the provisions of 24 CFR part 30.
          
          
            § 4.30
            Procedure upon discovery of a violation.
            (a) In general. When an alleged violation of Section 103 or this subpart B comes to the attention of any person, including an employee, he or she may either:
            (1) Contact the HUD Ethics Law Division to provide information about the alleged violation; or
            (2) Contact the HUD Office of Inspector General to request an inquiry or investigation into the matter.
            (b) Ethics Law Division. When the Ethics Law Division receives information concerning an alleged violation of Section 103, it shall refer the matter to the Inspector General stating the facts of the alleged violation and requesting that the Inspector General make an inquiry or investigation into the matter.
            (c) Inspector General. When the Inspector General receives information concerning an alleged violation of Section 103 or this subpart B, he or she shall notify the Ethics Law Division when the Inspector General begins an inquiry or investigation into the matter.
            (d) Protection of employee complainants. (1) No official of the Ethics Law Division, after receipt of information from an employee stating the facts of an alleged violation of this part, shall disclose the identity of the employee without the consent of that employee. The Inspector General, after receipt of information stating the facts of an alleged violation of this part, shall not disclose the identity of the employee who provided the information without the consent of that employee, unless the Inspector General determines that disclosure of the employee's identity is unavoidable during the course of an investigation. However, any employee who knowingly reports a false alleged violation of this part is not so protected and may be subject to disciplinary action.
            (2) Any employee who has authority to take, direct others to take, recommend or approve a personnel action is prohibited from threatening, taking, failing to take, recommending, or approving any personnel action as reprisal against another employee for providing information to investigating officials.
          
          
            § 4.32
            Investigation by Office of Inspector General.

            The Office of Inspector General shall review every alleged violation of Section 103. If after a review the Office of Inspector General determines that further investigation is not warranted, it shall notify the Ethics Law Division of that determination. If, after a review, the Office of Inspector General determines that additional investigation is warranted, it shall conduct the investigation and upon completion issue a report of the investigation to the Ethics Law Division as to each alleged violation.
          
          
            § 4.34
            Review of Inspector General's report by the Ethics Law Division.
            After receipt of the Inspector General's report, the Ethics Law Division shall review the facts and circumstances of the alleged violations. In addition, the Ethics Law Division may:
            (a) Return the report to the Inspector General with a request for further investigation;
            (b) Discuss the violation with the employee alleged to have committed the violation; or
            (c) Interview any other person, including employees who it believes will be helpful in furnishing information relevant to the inquiry.
          
          
            § 4.36
            Action by the Ethics Law Division.
            (a) After review of the Inspector General's report, the Ethics Law Division shall determine whether or not there is sufficient information providing a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 or this subpart B has occurred.
            (b) If the Ethics Law Division determines that there is no reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 or this subpart B has occurred, it shall close the matter and send its determination to the Office of Inspector General.
            (c) If the Ethics Law Division determines that there is sufficient information to provide a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 or this subpart B has occurred, it shall:
            (1) Send its determination to the Office of Inspector General; and
            (2) Refer the matter to the appropriate official for review as to whether to impose a civil money penalty in accordance with 24 CFR part 30; provided, however, that the Ethics Law Division shall not make a civil money penalty recommendation unless it finds the violation to have been knowing and material. The decision to impose a civil money penalty in a particular matter may be made only upon referral from the Ethics Law Division.
            (d) In determining whether a violation is material, the Ethics Law Division shall consider the following factors, as applicable:
            (1) The content of the disclosure and its significance to the person to whom the disclosure was made;
            (2) The time during the selection process when the disclosure was made;
            (3) The person to whom the disclosure was made;
            (4) The dollar amount of assistance requested by the person to whom the disclosure was made;
            (5) The dollar amount of assistance available for a given competition or program;
            (6) The benefit, if any, received or expected by the employee, the employee's relatives or friends, or any other person with whom the employee is affiliated;
            (7) The potential injury to the Department.
            (e) If the Ethics Law Division determines that there is sufficient information to provide a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 or this subpart B has occurred, it may, in addition to referring the matter under 24 CFR part 30, refer the matter to an appropriate HUD official for consideration of any other available disciplinary action. Any referral authorized by this paragraph (e) shall be reported to the Inspector General and may be reported to the employee's supervisor.
          
          
            § 4.38
            Administrative remedies.
            (a) If the Department receives or obtains information providing a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 has occurred, the Department may impose a sanction, as determined to be appropriate, upon an applicant for or a recipient of assistance who has received covered selection information.

            (b) In determining whether a sanction is appropriate and if so which sanction or sanctions should be sought, the Secretary shall give consideration to the applicant's conduct with respect to the violation. In so doing, the Secretary shall consider the factors listed at § 4.36(d), as well as any history of prior violations in any HUD program, the benefits received or expected, deterrence of future violations and the extent of any complicity in the violation.
            (c) The Secretary may impose a sanction authorized by this section whether or not the Ethics Law Division refers a case under 24 CFR part 30, and whether or not a civil money penalty is imposed.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 5
        PART 5—GENERAL HUD PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS; WAIVERS
        
          
            Subpart A—Generally Applicable Definitions and Requirements; Waivers
            Sec.
            5.100
            Definitions.
            5.105
            Other Federal requirements.
            5.106
            Equal access in accordance with the individual's gender identity in community planning and development programs.
            5.107
            Audit requirements for non-profit organizations.
            5.109
            Equal Participation of Religious Organizations in HUD Programs and Activities.
            5.110
            Waivers.
            5.111
            Housing counseling.
            
              Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing
              5.150
              Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing: Purpose.
              5.151
              Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing: Implementation.
              5.152
              Definitions.
              5.154
              Assessment of Fair Housing (AFH).
              5.156
              Joint and Regional AFHs.
              5.158
              Community participation, consultation, and coordination.
              5.160
              Submission requirements.
              5.162
              Review of AFH.
              5.164
              Revising an accepted AFH.
              5.166
              AFFH certification.
              5.168
              Recordkeeping.
              5.167-5.180
              [Reserved]
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and Employer Identification Numbers; Procedures for Obtaining Income Information
            5.210
            Purpose, applicability, and Federal preemption.
            5.212
            Compliance with the Privacy Act and other requirements.
            5.214
            Definitions.
            
              Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and Employer Identification Numbers for Applicants and Participants in Certain HUD Programs
              5.216
              Disclosure and verification of Social Security and Employer Identification Numbers.
              5.218
              Penalties for failing to disclose and verify Social Security and Employer Identification Numbers.
            
            
              Procedures for Obtaining Income Information About Applicants and Participants
              5.230
              Consent by assistance applicants and participants.
              5.232
              Penalties for failing to sign consent forms.
              5.233
              Mandated use of HUD's Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) System.
              5.234
              Requests for information from SWICAs and Federal agencies; restrictions on use.
              5.236
              Procedures for termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of assistance based on information obtained from a SWICA or Federal agency.
              5.238
              Criminal and civil penalties.
              5.240
              Family disclosure of income information to the responsible entity and verification.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Pet Ownership for the Elderly or Persons With Disabilities
            
              General Requirements
              5.300
              Purpose.
              5.303
              Exclusion for animals that assist, support, or provide service to persons with disabilities.
              5.306
              Definitions.
              5.309
              Prohibition against discrimination.
              5.312
              Notice to tenants.
              5.315
              Content of pet rules: General requirements.
              5.318
              Discretionary pet rules.
              5.321
              Lease provisions.
              5.324
              Implementation of lease provisions.
              5.327
              Nuisance or threat to health or safety.
            
            
              Pet Ownership Requirements for Housing Programs
              5.350
              Mandatory pet rules for housing programs.
              5.353
              Housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.
              5.356
              Housing programs: Pet rule violation procedures.
              5.359
              Housing programs: Rejection of units by applicants for tenancy.
              5.360
              Housing programs: Additional lease provisions.
              5.363
              Housing programs: Protection of the pet.
            
            
              
              Pet Ownership Requirements for Public Housing Programs
              5.380
              Public housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.
            
          
          
            Subpart D—Definitions for Section 8 and Public Housing Assistance Under the United States Housing Act of 1937
            5.400
            Applicability.
            5.403
            Definitions.
          
          
            Subpart E—Restrictions on Assistance to Noncitizens
            5.500
            Applicability.
            5.502
            Requirements concerning documents.
            5.504
            Definitions.
            5.506
            General provisions.
            5.508
            Submission of evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status.
            5.510
            Documents of eligible immigration status.
            5.512
            Verification of eligible immigration status.
            5.514
            Delay, denial, reduction or termination of assistance.
            5.516
            Availability of preservation assistance to mixed families and other families.
            5.518
            Types of preservation assistance available to mixed families and other families.
            5.520
            Proration of assistance.
            5.522
            Prohibition of assistance to noncitizen students.
            5.524
            Compliance with nondiscrimination requirements.
            5.526
            Protection from liability for responsible entities and State and local government agencies and officials.
            5.528
            Liability of ineligible tenants for reimbursement of benefits.
          
          
            Subpart F—Section 8 and Public Housing, and Other HUD Assisted Housing Serving Persons with Disabilities: Family Income and Family Payment; Occupancy Requirements for Section 8 Project-Based Assistance
            5.601
            Purpose and applicability.
            5.603
            Definitions.
            
              Family Income
              5.609
              Annual income.
              5.611
              Adjusted income.
              5.612
              Restrictions on assistance to students enrolled in an institution of higher education.
              5.613
              Public housing program and Section 8 tenant-based assistance program: PHA cooperation with welfare agency.
              5.615
              Public housing program and Section 8 tenant-based assistance program: How welfare benefit reduction affects family income.
              5.617
              Self-sufficiency incentives for persons with disabilities—Disallowance of increase in annual income.
            
            
              Family Payment
              5.628
              Total tenant payment.
              5.630
              Minimum rent.
              5.632
              Utility reimbursements.
              5.634
              Tenant rent.
            
            
              Section 8 Project-Based Assistance: Occupancy Requirements
              5.653
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Admission—Income-eligibility and income-targeting.
              5.655
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Owner preferences in selection for a project or unit.
              5.657
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Reexamination of family income and composition.
              5.659
              Family information and verification.
              5.661
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Approval for police or other security personnel to live in project.
            
          
          
            Subpart G—Physical Condition Standards and Inspection Requirements
            5.701
            Applicability.
            5.703
            Physical condition standards for HUD housing that is decent, safe, sanitary and in good repair (DSS/GR).
            5.705
            Uniform physical inspection requirements.
          
          
            Subpart H—Uniform Financial Reporting Standards
            5.801
            Uniform financial reporting standards.
          
          
            Subpart I—Preventing Crime in Federally Assisted Housing—Denying Admission and Terminating Tenancy for Criminal Activity or Alcohol Abuse
            
              General
              5.850 
              Which subsidized housing is covered by this subpart?
              5.851 
              What authority do I have to screen applicants and evict tenants?
              5.852 
              What discretion do I have in screening and eviction actions?
              5.853 
              Definitions.
            
            
              Denying Admissions
              5.854 
              When must I prohibit admission of individuals who have engaged in drug-related criminal activity?
              5.855 
              When am I specifically authorized to prohibit admission of individuals who have engaged in criminal activity?
              5.856 
              When must I prohibit admission of sex offenders?
              5.857 
              When must I prohibit admission of alcohol abusers?
            
            
              
              Terminating Tenancy
              5.858 
              When authority do I have to evict drug criminals?
              5.859 
              When am I specifically authorized to evict other criminals?
              5.860 
              When am I specifically authorized to evict alcohol abusers?
              5.861 
              What evidence of criminal activity must I have to evict?
            
          
          
            Subpart J—Access to Criminal Records and Information
            5.901
            To what criminal records and searches does this subpart apply?
            5.902
            Definitions.
            5.903
            What special authority is there to obtain access to criminal records?
            5.905
            What special authority is there to obtain access to sex offender registration information?
          
          
            Subpart K—Application, Registration, and Submission Requirements
            5.1001
            Applicability.
            5.1003
            Use of a universal identifier for organizations applying for HUD grants.
            5.1004
            System of award management.
            5.1005
            Electronic submission of applications for grants and other financial assistance.
          
          
            Subpart L—Protection for Victims of Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual Assault, or Stalking
            5.2001
            Applicability.
            5.2003
            Definitions.
            5.2005
            VAWA protections.
            5.2007
            Documenting the occurrence of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
            5.2009
            Remedies available to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
            5.2011
            Effect on other laws.
          
        
        
          Authority:

          12 U.S.C. 1701x; 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437d, 1437f, 1437n, 3535(d); Sec. 327, Pub. L. 109-115, 119 Stat. 2936; Sec. 607, Pub. L. 109-162, 119 Stat. 3051 (42 U.S.C. 14043e et seq.); E.O. 13279, 67 FR 77141, 3 CFR, 2002 Comp., p. 258; and E.O. 13559, 75 FR 71319, 3 CFR, 2010 Comp., p. 273.
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Editorial Note:
          Nomenclature changes to part 5 appear at 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000.
        
        
          Subpart A—Generally Applicable Definitions and Requirements; Waivers
          
            Authority:

            29 U.S.C. 794, 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437c-1(d), 1437d, 1437f, 1437n, 3535(d), and Sec. 327, Pub. L. 109-115, 119 Stat. 2936; 42 U.S.C. 3600-3620; 42 U.S.C. 5304(b); 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 12704-12708; E.O. 11063, 27 FR 11527, 3 CFR, 1958-1963 Comp., p. 652; E.O. 12892, 59 FR 2939, 3 CFR, 1994 Comp., p. 849.
          
          
            § 5.100
            Definitions.
            The following definitions apply to this part and also in other regulations, as noted:
            
              1937 Act means the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.)
            
              ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.).
            
              ALJ means an administrative law judge appointed to HUD pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3105 or detailed to HUD pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3344.
            
              Broadband infrastructure means cables, fiber optics, wiring, or other permanent (integral to the structure) infrastructure, including wireless infrastructure, that is capable of providing access to Internet connections in individual housing units, and that meets the definition of “advanced telecommunications capability” determined by the Federal Communications Commission under section 706 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 1302).
            
              Covered person, for purposes of 24 CFR 5, subpart I, and parts 966 and 982, means a tenant, any member of the tenant's household, a guest or another person under the tenant's control.
            
              Department means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Drug means a controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
            
              Drug-related criminal activity means the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, or use of a drug, or the possession of a drug with intent to manufacture, sell, distribute or use the drug.
            
              Elderly Person means an individual who is at least 62 years of age.
            
              Fair Housing Act means title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.).
            
              Fair Market Rent (FMR) means the rent that would be required to be paid in the particular housing market area in order to obtain privately owned, decent, safe and sanitary rental housing of modest (non-luxury) nature with suitable amenities. This Fair Market Rent includes utilities (except telephone). Separate Fair Market Rents will be established by HUD for dwelling units of varying sizes (number of bedrooms) and will be published in the Federal Register in accordance with part 888 of this title.
            
              Family has the meaning provided this term in § 5.403, and applies to all HUD programs unless otherwise provided in the regulations for a specific HUD program.
            
              Federally assisted housing (for purposes of subparts I and J of this part) means housing assisted under any of the following programs:
            (1) Public housing;
            (2) Housing receiving project-based or tenant-based assistance under Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f);
            (3) Housing that is assisted under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959, as amended by section 801 of the National Affordable Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701q);
            (4) Housing that is assisted under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959, as such section existed before the enactment of the National Affordable Housing Act;
            (5) Housing that is assisted under section 811 of the National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 8013);

            (6) Housing financed by a loan or mortgage insured under section 221(d)(3) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715l(d)(3)) that bears interest at a rate determined under the proviso of section 221(d)(5) of such Act (12 U.S.C. 1715l(d)(5));
            (7) Housing insured, assisted, or held by HUD or by a State or local agency under section 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-1); or
            (8) Housing assisted by the Rural Development Administration under section 514 or section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 U.S.C. 1483, 1484).
            
              Gender identity means the gender with which a person identifies, regardless of the sex assigned to that person at birth and regardless of the person's perceived gender identity. Perceived gender identity means the gender with which a person is perceived to identify based on that person's appearance, behavior, expression, other gender related characteristics, or sex assigned to the individual at birth or identified in documents.
            
              General Counsel means the General Counsel of HUD.
            
              Grantee means the person or legal entity to which a grant is awarded and that is accountable for the use of the funds provided.
            
              Guest, only for purposes of 24 CFR part 5, subparts A and I, and parts 882, 960, 966, and 982, means a person temporarily staying in the unit with the consent of a tenant or other member of the household who has express or implied authority to so consent on behalf of the tenant. The requirements of parts 966 and 982 apply to a guest as so defined.
            
              Homeownership counseling means housing counseling related to homeownership and residential mortgage loans when provided in connection with HUD's Housing Counseling Program, or required by or provided in connection with HUD Programs as defined in § 5.111. Homeownership counseling is housing counseling that covers the decision to purchase a home, the selection and purchase of a home, issues arising during or affecting the period of ownership of a home (including financing, refinancing, default, and foreclosure, and other financial decisions) and the sale or other disposition of a home.
            
              Household, for purposes of 24 CFR part 5, subpart I, and parts, 960, 966, 882, and 982, means the family and PHA-approved live-in aide.
            
              Housing counseling is independent, expert advice customized to the need of the consumer to address the consumer's housing barriers and to help achieve their housing goals and must include the following processes: Intake; financial and housing affordability analysis; an action plan, except for reverse mortgage counseling; and a reasonable effort to have follow-up communication with the client when possible. The content and process of housing counseling must meet the standards outlined in 24 CFR part 214. Homeownership counseling and rental counseling are types of housing counseling.
            
              HUD means the same as Department.
              
            
            
              MSA means a metropolitan statistical area.
            
              NAHA means the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12701 et seq.).
            
              NEPA means the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321).
            
              NOFA means Notice of Funding Availability.
            
              OMB means the Office of Management and Budget.
            
              Organizational Unit means the jurisdictional area of each Assistant Secretary, and each office head or field administrator reporting directly to the Secretary.
            
              Other person under the tenant's control, for the purposes of the definition of covered person and for parts 5, 882, 966, and 982 means that the person, although not staying as a guest (as defined in this section) in the unit, is, or was at the time of the activity in question, on the premises (as premises is defined in this section) because of an invitation from the tenant or other member of the household who has express or implied authority to so consent on behalf of the tenant. Absent evidence to the contrary, a person temporarily and infrequently on the premises solely for legitimate commercial purposes is not under the tenant's control.
            
            
              Premises, for purposes of 24 CFR part 5, subpart I, and parts 960 and 966, means the building or complex or development in which the public or assisted housing dwelling unit is located, including common areas and grounds.
            
              Public housing means housing assisted under the 1937 Act, other than under Section 8. “Public housing” includes dwelling units in a mixed finance project that are assisted by a PHA with capital or operating assistance.
            
              Public Housing Agency (PHA) means any State, county, municipality, or other governmental entity or public body, or agency or instrumentality of these entities, that is authorized to engage or assist in the development or operation of low-income housing under the 1937 Act.
            
              Rental housing counseling means counseling related to the rental of residential property, which may include counseling regarding future homeownership opportunities when provided in connection with HUD's Housing Counseling Program, or required under or provided in connection with HUD Programs as defined in § 5.111. Rental housing counseling may also include the decision to rent, responsibilities of tenancy, affordability of renting and eviction prevention.
            
              Responsible entity means:
            (1) For the public housing program, the Section 8 tenant-based assistance program (part 982 of this title), and the Section 8 project-based certificate or voucher programs (part 983 of this title), and the Section 8 moderate rehabilitation program (part 882 of this title), responsible entity means the PHA administering the program under an ACC with HUD;
            (2) For all other Section 8 programs, responsible entity means the Section 8 project owner.
            
              Section 8 means section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f).
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Sexual orientation means one's emotional or physical attraction to the same and/or opposite sex (e.g., homosexuality, heterosexuality, or bisexuality).
            
              Substantial rehabilitation, for the purposes of determining when installation of broadband infrastructure is required as part of substantial rehabilitation of multifamily rental housing, unless otherwise defined by a program, means work that involves:
            (1) Significant work on the electrical system of the multifamily rental housing. “Significant work” means complete replacement of the electrical system or other work for which the pre-construction cost estimate is equal to or greater than 75 percent of the cost of replacing the entire electrical system. In the case of multifamily rental housing with multiple buildings with more than 4 units, “entire system” refers to the electrical system of the building undergoing rehabilitation; or

            (2) Rehabilitation of the multifamily rental housing in which the pre-construction estimated cost of the rehabilitation is equal to or greater than 75 percent of the total estimated cost of replacing the multifamily rental housing after the rehabilitation is complete. In the case of multifamily rental housing with multiple buildings with more than 4 units, the replacement cost must be the replacement cost of the building undergoing rehabilitation.
            
              URA means the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4201-4655).
            
              Violent criminal activity means any criminal activity that has as one of its elements the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force substantial enough to cause, or be reasonably likely to cause, serious bodily injury or property damage.
            [61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998; 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000; 66 FR 28791, May 24, 2001; 77 FR 5674, Feb. 3, 2012; 81 FR 64782, Sept. 21, 2016; 81 FR 90657, Dec. 14, 2016; 81 FR 92635, Dec. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 5.105
            Other Federal requirements.
            The requirements set forth in this section apply to all HUD programs, except as may be otherwise noted in the respective program regulations in title 24 of the CFR, or unless inconsistent with statutes authorizing certain HUD programs:
            (a) Nondiscrimination and equal opportunity. (1) The Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 100 et seq.; Executive Order 11063, as amended by Executive Order 12259 (3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 652 and 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 307) (Equal Opportunity in Housing Programs) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 107; title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1; the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and implementing regulations at part 8 of this title; title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.; 24 CFR part 8; section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135; Executive Order 11246, as amended by Executive Orders 11375, 11478, 12086, and 12107 (3 CFR, 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339; 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 684; 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 803; 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 230; and 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 264, respectively) (Equal Employment Opportunity Programs) and implementing regulations at 41 CFR chapter 60; Executive Order 11625, as amended by Executive Order 12007 (3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 616 and 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 139) (Minority Business Enterprises); Executive Order 12432 (3 CFR, 1983 Comp., p. 198) (Minority Business Enterprise Development); and Executive Order 12138, as amended by Executive Order 12608 (3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 393 and 3 CFR, 1987 Comp., p. 245) (Women's Business Enterprise).
            (2) Equal access to HUD-assisted or -insured housing. A determination of eligibility for housing that is assisted by HUD or subject to a mortgage insured by HUD shall be made in accordance with the eligibility requirements provided for such program by HUD, and such housing shall be made available without regard to actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status.
            (b) Disclosure requirements. The disclosure requirements and prohibitions of 31 U.S.C. 1352 and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 87; and the requirements for funding competitions established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3531 et seq.).
            (c) Debarred, suspended, or ineligible contractors and participants. The prohibitions at 2 CFR part 2424 on the use of debarred, suspended, or ineligible contractors and participants.
            (d) Drug-free workplace. The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. 701, et seq.) and HUD's implementing regulations at 2 CFR part 2429.
            [61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000; 72 FR 73491, Dec. 27, 2007; 76 FR 45167, July 28, 2011; 77 FR 5674, Feb. 3, 2012; 81 FR 64782, Sept. 21, 2016; 81 FR 80993, Nov. 17, 2016]
          
          
            § 5.106
            Equal access in accordance with the individual's gender identity in community planning and development programs.
            (a) Applicability. This section applies to assistance provided under Community Planning and Development (CPD) programs, including assistance under the following CPD programs: HOME Investment Partnerships program (24 CFR part 92), Housing Trust Fund program (24 CFR part 93), Community Development Block Grant program (24 CFR part 570), Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS program (24 CFR part 574), Emergency Solutions Grants program (24 CFR part 576), Continuum of Care program (24 CFR part 578), or Rural Housing Stability Assistance Program (24 CFR part 579). The requirements of this section apply to recipients and subrecipients, as well as to owners, operators, and managers of shelters and other buildings and facilities and providers of services funded in whole or in part by any CPD program.
            (b) Equal access in accordance with gender identity. The admissions, occupancy, and operating policies and procedures of recipients, subrecipients, owners, operators, managers, and providers identified in paragraph (a) of this section, including policies and procedures to protect privacy, health, safety, and security, shall be established or amended, as necessary, and administered in a nondiscriminatory manner to ensure that:
            (1) Equal access to CPD programs, shelters, other buildings and facilities, benefits, services, and accommodations is provided to an individual in accordance with the individual's gender identity, and in a manner that affords equal access to the individual's family;
            (2) An individual is placed, served, and accommodated in accordance with the gender identity of the individual;
            (3) An individual is not subjected to intrusive questioning or asked to provide anatomical information or documentary, physical, or medical evidence of the individual's gender identity; and
            (4) Eligibility determinations are made and assisted housing is made available in CPD programs as required by § 5.105(a)(2).
            (c) Placement and accommodation in temporary, emergency shelters and other buildings and facilities with shared sleeping quarters or shared bathing facilities—(1) Placement and accommodation. Placement and accommodation of an individual in temporary, emergency shelters and other buildings and facilities with physical limitations or configurations that require and are permitted to have shared sleeping quarters or shared bathing facilities shall be made in accordance with the individual's gender identity.
            (2) Post-admission accommodations. A recipient, subrecipient, owner, operator, manager, or provider must take nondiscriminatory steps that may be necessary and appropriate to address privacy concerns raised by residents or occupants and, as needed, update its admissions, occupancy, and operating policies and procedures in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
            (d) Documentation and record retention. Providers shall document and maintain records of compliance with the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section for a period of 5 years.
            [81 FR 64782, Sept. 21, 2016]
          
          
            § 5.107
            Audit requirements for non-profit organizations.
            Non-profit organizations subject to regulations in the part 200 and part 800 series of title 24 of the CFR shall comply with the audit requirements of 2 CFR part 200, subpart F. For HUD programs, a non-profit organization is the mortgagor or owner (as these terms are defined in the regulations in the part 200 and part 800 series) and not a related or affiliated organization or entity.
            [62 FR 61617, Nov. 18, 1997, as amended at 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 5.109
            Equal participation of faith-based organizations in HUD programs and activities.
            (a) Purpose. Consistent with Executive Order 13279 (issued on December 12, 2002, 67 FR 77141), entitled “Equal Protection of the Laws for Faith-Based and Community Organizations,” as amended by Executive Order 13559 (issued on November 17, 2010, 75 FR 71319), entitled “Fundamental Principles and Policymaking Criteria for Partnerships With Faith-Based and Other Neighborhood Organizations,” this section describes requirements for ensuring the equal participation of faith-based organizations in HUD programs and activities. These requirements apply to all HUD programs and activities, including all of HUD's Native American Programs, except as may be otherwise noted in the respective program regulations in title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), or unless inconsistent with certain HUD program authorizing statutes.
            (b) Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
            
              Direct Federal financial assistance means Federal financial assistance provided when a Federal Government agency or an intermediary, as defined in this section, selects the provider and either purchases services from that provider (i.e., via a contract) or awards funds to that provider to carry out an activity (e.g., via grant, sub-grant, sub-award, or cooperative agreement). The recipients of sub-grants or sub-awards that receive Federal financial assistance through State-administered programs (e.g., flow-through programs) are considered recipients of direct Federal financial assistance. In general, Federal financial assistance shall be treated as direct, unless it meets the definition of indirect Federal financial assistance.
            
              Federal financial assistance means assistance that non-Federal entities receive or administer in the forms of grants, contracts, loans, loan guarantees, property, cooperative agreements, food commodities, direct appropriations, or other assistance, but does not include a tax credit, deduction, or exemption.
            
              Indirect Federal financial assistance means Federal financial assistance provided when the choice of the provider is placed in the hands of the beneficiary, and the cost of that service is paid through a voucher, certificate, or other similar means of Government-funded payment. Federal financial assistance provided to an organization is considered indirect when the Government program through which the beneficiary receives the voucher, certificate, or other similar means of Government-funded payment is neutral toward religion; the organization receives the assistance as a result of a decision of the beneficiary, not a decision of the Government; and the beneficiary has at least one adequate secular option for the use of the voucher, certificate, or other similar means of Government-funded payment.
            
              Intermediary means an entity, including a nongovernmental organization, acting under a contract, grant, or other agreement with the Federal Government or with a State, tribal or local government that accepts Federal financial assistance and distributes that assistance to other entities that, in turn, carry out activities under HUD programs.
            (c) Equal participation of faith-based organizations in HUD programs and activities. Faith-based organizations are eligible, on the same basis as any other organization, to participate in HUD programs and activities. Neither the Federal Government, nor a State, tribal or local government, nor any other entity that administers any HUD program or activity, shall discriminate against an organization on the basis of the organization's religious character or affiliation, or lack thereof. In addition, decisions about awards of Federal financial assistance must be free from political interference or even the appearance of such interference and must be made on the basis of merit, not based on the religious character or affiliation, or lack thereof, of an organization.
            (d) Separation of explicitly religious activities from direct Federal financial assistance.
            

            (1) A faith-based organization that applies for, or participates in, a HUD program or activity supported with Federal financial assistance retains its independence and may continue to carry out its mission, including the definition, development, practice, and expression of its religious beliefs, provided that it does not use direct Federal financial assistance that it receives (e.g., via contract, grant, sub-grant, sub-award or cooperative agreement) to support or engage in any explicitly religious activities (including activities that involve overt religious content such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization), or in any other manner prohibited by law.

            (2) A faith-based organization that receives direct Federal financial assistance may use space (including a sanctuary, chapel, prayer hall, or other space) in its facilities (including a temple, synagogue, church, mosque, or other place of worship) to carry out activities under a HUD program without removing religious art, icons, scriptures, or other religious symbols. In addition, a faith-based organization participating in a HUD program or activity retains its authority over its internal governance, and may retain religious terms in its organization's name, select its board members on a religious basis, and include religious references in its organization's mission statements and other governing documents.
            (e) Explicitly religious activities. If an organization engages in explicitly religious activities (including activities that involve overt religious content such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization), the explicitly religious activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or activities supported by direct Federal financial assistance and participation must be voluntary for the beneficiaries of the programs or activities that receive direct Federal financial assistance.
            (f) Intermediary responsibilities to ensure equal participation of faith-based organizations in HUD programs. If an intermediary—acting under a contract, grant, or other agreement with the Federal Government or with a State, tribal or local government that is administering a program supported by Federal financial assistance—is given the authority to select a nongovernmental organization to receive Federal financial assistance under a contract, grant, sub-grant, sub-award, or cooperative agreement, the intermediary must ensure that such organization complies with the requirements of this section. If the intermediary is a nongovernmental organization, it retains all other rights of a nongovernmental organization under the program's statutory and regulatory provisions.
            (g) Beneficiary protections. Faith-based organizations that carry out programs or activities with direct Federal financial assistance from HUD must give written notice to beneficiaries and prospective beneficiaries of the programs or activities describing certain protections available to them, as provided in this subsection. In addition, if a beneficiary or prospective beneficiary objects to the religious character of the organization carrying out the programs or activities, that organization must promptly undertake reasonable efforts to identify and refer the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary to an alternative provider to which the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary has no such objection.
            (1) Written notice. The written notice must state that:
            (i) The organization may not discriminate against a beneficiary or prospective beneficiary on the basis of religion, religious belief, a refusal to hold a religious belief, or a refusal to attend or participate in a religious practice;
            (ii) The organization may not require beneficiaries to attend or participate in any explicitly religious activities that are offered by the organization, and any participation by beneficiaries in such activities must be purely voluntary;
            (iii) The organization must separate, in time or location, any privately funded explicitly religious activities from activities supported by direct Federal financial assistance;
            (iv) If a beneficiary objects to the religious character of the organization, the organization must undertake reasonable efforts to identify and refer the beneficiary to an alternative provider to which the beneficiary has no such objection; and
            (v) Beneficiaries or prospective beneficiaries may report an organization's violation of these protections, including any denial of services or benefits by an organization, by contacting or filing a written complaint to HUD or the intermediary, if applicable.
            (2) Timing of notice. The written notice must be given to prospective beneficiaries before they enroll in any HUD program or activity. When the nature of the program or activity or exigent circumstances make it impracticable to provide the written notice in advance, the organization must provide written notice to beneficiaries of their protections at the earliest available opportunity.
            (3) Referral requirements. (i) If a beneficiary or prospective beneficiary of a program or activity that receives direct Federal financial assistance from HUD objects to the religious character of an organization that carries out the program or activity, that organization must promptly undertake reasonable efforts to identify and refer the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary to an alternative provider to which the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary has no such objection.
            (ii) A referral may be made to another faith-based organization, if the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary has no objection to that provider based on the provider's religious character. But if the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary requests a secular provider, and a secular provider is available, then a referral must be made to that provider.
            (iii) Except for activities carried out by telephone, Internet, or similar means, the referral must be to an alternative provider that is in reasonable geographic proximity to the organization making the referral and that carries out activities that are similar in substance and quality to those offered by the organization. The alternative provider also must have the capacity to accept additional beneficiaries.
            (iv) If the organization determines that it is unable to identify an alternative provider, the organization shall promptly notify the intermediary or, if there is no intermediary, HUD. If HUD or an intermediary is notified that an organization is unable to identify an alternative provider, HUD or the intermediary, as appropriate, shall promptly determine whether there is any other suitable alternative provider to which the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary may be referred. An intermediary that receives a request for assistance in identifying an alternative provider may request assistance from HUD.
            (4) Recordkeeping. A faith-based organization providing a referral under paragraph (g)(3) of this section must document a beneficiary or prospective beneficiary's request for a referral, whether the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary was referred to another provider, to which provider the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary was referred, and if the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary contacted the alternative provider, unless the beneficiary or prospective beneficiary requests no follow up.
            (h) Nondiscrimination requirements. Any organization that receives Federal financial assistance under a HUD program or activity shall not, in providing services or carrying out activities with such assistance, discriminate against a beneficiary or prospective beneficiary on the basis of religion, religious belief, a refusal to hold a religious belief, or a refusal to attend or participate in a religious practice. However, this section does not require any organization that only receives indirect Federal financial assistance to modify its program or activities to accommodate a beneficiary that selects the organization to receive indirect aid.
            (i) Exemption from Title VII employment discrimination requirements. A religious organization's exemption from the Federal prohibition on employment discrimination on the basis of religion, set forth in section 702(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-1), is not forfeited when the organization participates in a HUD program. Some HUD programs, however, contain independent statutory provisions that impose certain nondiscrimination requirements on all grantees. Accordingly, grantees should consult with the appropriate HUD program office to determine the scope of applicable requirements.
            (j) Acquisition, construction, and rehabilitation of structures. Direct Federal financial assistance may be used for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of structures only to the extent that those structures are used for conducting eligible activities under a HUD program or activity. Where a structure is used for both eligible and explicitly religious activities (including activities that involve overt religious content such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization), direct Federal financial assistance may not exceed the cost of the share of acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation attributable to eligible activities in accordance with the cost accounting requirements applicable to the HUD program or activity. However, acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of sanctuaries, chapels, or other rooms that a HUD-funded faith-based organization uses as its principal place of worship, may not be paid with direct Federal financial assistance. Disposition of real property by a faith-based organization after its use for an authorized purpose, or any change in use of the property from an authorized purpose, is subject to Government-wide regulations governing real property disposition (2 CFR part 200, subpart D) and the HUD program regulations, as directed by HUD.
            (k) Commingling of Federal and State, tribal, and local funds. If a State, tribal, or local government voluntarily contributes its own funds to supplement direct Federal financial assistance for an activity, the State, tribal or local government has the option to segregate those funds or commingle them with the direct Federal financial assistance. However, if the funds are commingled, the requirements of this section apply to all of the commingled funds. Further, if a State, tribal, or local government is required to contribute matching funds to supplement direct Federal financial assistance for an activity, the matching funds are considered commingled with the direct Federal financial assistance and, therefore, subject to the requirements of this section. Some HUD programs' requirements govern any activity assisted under those programs. Accordingly, recipients should consult with the appropriate HUD program office to determine the scope of applicable requirements.
            [69 FR 41717, July 9, 2004, as amended at 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015; 81 FR 19416, Apr. 4, 2016]
          
          
            § 5.110
            Waivers.
            Upon determination of good cause, the Secretary may, subject to statutory limitations, waive any provision of this title and delegate this authority in accordance with section 106 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3535(q)).
          
          
            § 5.111
            Housing counseling.
            (a) Any housing counseling, including homeownership counseling or rental housing counseling, as defined in § 5.100, required under or provided in connection with any program administered by HUD shall be provided only by organizations and counselors certified by the Secretary under 24 CFR part 214 to provide housing counseling, consistent with 12 U.S.C. 1701x.
            (b) For purposes of this section, required under or provided in connection with any program administered by HUD means:
            (1) Housing counseling required by statute, regulation, Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA), or otherwise required by HUD;
            (2) Housing counseling that is funded under a HUD program;
            (3) Housing counseling that is required by a grantee or subgrantee of a HUD program as a condition of receiving assistance under the HUD program; or
            (4) Housing counseling to which a family assisted under a HUD program is referred, by a grantee or subgrantee of the HUD program.
            [81 FR 90657, Dec. 14, 2016]
          
          
            Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing
            
              Source:
              Sections 5.150 through 5.180 appear at 80 FR 42352, July 16, 2015, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 5.150
              Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing: Purpose.

              Pursuant to the affirmatively furthering fair housing mandate in section 808(e)(5) of the Fair Housing Act, and in subsequent legislative enactments, the purpose of the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing (AFFH) regulations in §§ 5.150 through 5.180 is to provide program participants with an effective planning approach to aid program participants in taking meaningful actions to overcome historic patterns of segregation, promote fair housing choice, and foster inclusive communities that are free from discrimination. The regulations establish specific requirements for the development and submission of an Assessment of Fair Housing (AFH) by program participants (including local governments, States, and public housing agencies (PHAs)), and the incorporation and implementation of that AFH into subsequent consolidated plans and PHA Plans in a manner that connects housing and community development policy and investment planning with meaningful actions that affirmatively further fair housing. A program participant's strategies and actions must affirmatively further fair housing and may include various activities, such as developing affordable housing, and removing barriers to the development of such housing, in areas of high opportunity; strategically enhancing access to opportunity, including through: Targeted investment in neighborhood revitalization or stabilization; preservation or rehabilitation of existing affordable housing; promoting greater housing choice within or outside of areas of concentrated poverty and greater access to areas of high opportunity; and improving community assets such as quality schools, employment, and transportation.
            
            
              § 5.151
              Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing: Implementation.
              Section 5.160 of the AFH regulations provides the date by which program participants must submit their first AFH. A program participant's AFH submission date is the date by which the program participant must comply with the regulations in §§ 5.150 through 5.180. Until such time, the program participant shall continue to conduct an analysis of impediments, as required of the program participant under one or more of the HUD programs listed in § 5.154, in accordance with requirements in effect prior to August 17, 2015.
            
            
              § 5.152
              Definitions.
              For purposes of §§ 5.150 through 5.180, the terms “consolidated plan,” “consortium,” “unit of general local government,” “jurisdiction,” and “State” are defined in 24 CFR part 91. For PHAs, “jurisdiction” is defined in 24 CFR 982.4. The following additional definitions are provided solely for purposes of §§ 5.150 through 5.180 and related amendments in 24 CFR parts 91, 92, 570, 574, 576, and 903:
              
                Affirmatively furthering fair housing means taking meaningful actions, in addition to combating discrimination, that overcome patterns of segregation and foster inclusive communities free from barriers that restrict access to opportunity based on protected characteristics. Specifically, affirmatively furthering fair housing means taking meaningful actions that, taken together, address significant disparities in housing needs and in access to opportunity, replacing segregated living patterns with truly integrated and balanced living patterns, transforming racially and ethnically concentrated areas of poverty into areas of opportunity, and fostering and maintaining compliance with civil rights and fair housing laws. The duty to affirmatively further fair housing extends to all of a program participant's activities and programs relating to housing and urban development.
              
                Assessment of Fair Housing (assessment or AFH) means the analysis undertaken pursuant to § 5.154 that includes an analysis of fair housing data, an assessment of fair housing issues and contributing factors, and an identification of fair housing priorities and goals, and is conducted and submitted to HUD using the Assessment Tool. The AFH may be conducted and submitted by an individual program participant (individual AFH), or may be a single AFH conducted and submitted by two or more program participants (joint AFH) or two or more program participants, where at least two of which are consolidated plan program participants (regional AFH).
              
                Assessment Tool refers collectively to any forms or templates and the accompanying instructions provided by HUD that program participants must use to conduct and submit an AFH pursuant to § 5.154. HUD may provide different Assessment Tools for different types of program participants. In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. Chapter 35) (PRA), the Assessment Tool will be subject to periodic notice and opportunity to comment in order to maintain the approval of the Assessment Tool as granted by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the PRA.
              
                Community participation, as required in § 5.158, means a solicitation of views and recommendations from members of the community and other interested parties, a consideration of the views and recommendations received, and a process for incorporating such views and recommendations into decisions and outcomes. For HUD regulations implementing the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, the statutory term for “community participation” is “citizen participation,” and, therefore, the regulations in 24 CFR parts 91, 92, 570, 574, and 576 use this term.
              
                Consolidated plan program participant means any entity specified in § 5.154(b)(1).
              
                Contributing factor. See definition of “fair housing contributing factor” in this section.
              
                Data. The term “data” refers collectively to the sources of data provided in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this definition. When identification of the specific source of data in paragraph (1) or (2) is necessary, the specific source (HUD-provided data or local data) will be stated.
              (1) HUD-provided data. As more fully addressed in the Assessment Tool, the term “HUD-provided data” refers to HUD-provided metrics, statistics, and other quantified information required to be used with the Assessment Tool. HUD-provided data will not only be provided to program participants but will be posted on HUD's Web site for availability to all of the public;
              (2) Local data. As more fully addressed in the Assessment Tool, the term “local data” refers to metrics, statistics, and other quantified information, subject to a determination of statistical validity by HUD, relevant to the program participant's geographic areas of analysis, that can be found through a reasonable amount of search, are readily available at little or no cost, and are necessary for the completion of the AFH using the Assessment Tool.
              
                Disability. (1) The term “disability” means, with respect to an individual:
              (i) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual;
              (ii) A record of such an impairment; or
              (iii) Being regarded as having such an impairment.
              (2) The term “disability” as used herein shall be interpreted consistent with the definition of such term under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008. This definition does not change the definition of “disability” or “disabled person” adopted pursuant to a HUD program statute for purposes of determining an individual's eligibility to participate in a housing program that serves a specified population.
              
                Disproportionate housing needs refers to a condition in which there are significant disparities in the proportion of members of a protected class experiencing a category of housing need when compared to the proportion of members of any other relevant groups or the total population experiencing that category of housing need in the applicable geographic area. For purposes of this definition, categories of housing need are based on such factors as cost burden, severe cost burden, overcrowding, and substandard housing conditions, as those terms are applied in the Assessment Tool.
              
                Fair housing choice means that individuals and families have the information, opportunity, and options to live where they choose without unlawful discrimination and other barriers related to race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, or disability. Fair housing choice encompasses:
              (1) Actual choice, which means the existence of realistic housing options;
              (2) Protected choice, which means housing that can be accessed without discrimination; and
              (3) Enabled choice, which means realistic access to sufficient information regarding options so that any choice is informed. For persons with disabilities, fair housing choice and access to opportunity include access to accessible housing and housing in the most integrated setting appropriate to an individual's needs as required under Federal civil rights law, including disability-related services that an individual needs to live in such housing.
              
                Fair housing contributing factor (or contributing factor) means a factor that creates, contributes to, perpetuates, or increases the severity of one or more fair housing issues. Goals in an AFH are designed to overcome one or more contributing factors and related fair housing issues, as provided in § 5.154.
              
                Fair housing issue means a condition in a program participant's geographic area of analysis that restricts fair housing choice or access to opportunity, and includes such conditions as ongoing local or regional segregation or lack of integration, racially or ethnically concentrated areas of poverty, significant disparities in access to opportunity, disproportionate housing needs, and evidence of discrimination or violations of civil rights law or regulations related to housing. Participation in “housing programs serving specified populations,” as defined in this section, does not present a fair housing issue of segregation, provided that such programs are administered by program participants so that the programs comply with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs); the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19), including the duty to affirmatively further fair housing; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794); the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12101, et seq.); and other Federal civil rights statutes and regulations.
              
                Fair housing enforcement and fair housing outreach capacity means the ability of a jurisdiction, and organizations located in the jurisdiction, to accept complaints of violations of fair housing laws, investigate such complaints, obtain remedies, engage in fair housing testing, and educate community members about fair housing laws and rights. This definition covers any State or local agency that enforces a law substantially equivalent to the Fair Housing Act (see 24 CFR part 115) and any organization participating in the Fair Housing Initiative Programs (see 24 CFR part 125).
              
                Geographic area means a jurisdiction, region, State, Core-Based Statistical Area (CBSA), or another applicable area (e.g., census tract, neighborhood, Zip code, block group, housing development, or portion thereof) relevant to the analysis required to complete the assessment of fair housing, as specified in the Assessment Tool.
              
                Housing programs serving specified populations. Housing programs serving specified populations are HUD and Federal housing programs, including designations in the programs, as applicable, such as HUD's Supportive Housing for the Elderly, Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities, homeless assistance programs under the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11301 et seq.), and housing designated under section 7 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437e), that:
              (1) Serve specific identified populations; and

              (2) Comply with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs); the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19), including the duty to affirmatively further fair housing; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794); the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12101, et seq.); and other Federal civil rights statutes and regulations.
              
                Insular area has the same meaning as provided in § 570.405.
              
                Integration means a condition, within the program participant's geographic area of analysis, as guided by the Assessment Tool, in which there is not a high concentration of persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, or having a disability or a particular type of disability when compared to a broader geographic area. For individuals with disabilities, integration also means that such individuals are able to access housing and services in the most integrated setting appropriate to the individual's needs. The most integrated setting is one that enables individuals with disabilities to interact with persons without disabilities to the fullest extent possible, consistent with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794). See 28 CFR part 35, appendix B (addressing 28 CFR 35.130 and providing guidance on the American with Disabilities Act regulation on nondiscrimination on the basis of disability in State and local government services).
              
                Joint participants refers to two or more program participants conducting and submitting a single AFH (a joint AFH), in accordance with § 5.156 and 24 CFR 903.15(a)(1) and (2), as applicable.
              
                Local knowledge. As more fully addressed in the Assessment Tool, local knowledge means information to be provided by the program participant that relates to the participant's geographic areas of analysis and that is relevant to the program participant's AFH, is known or becomes known to the program participant, and is necessary for the completion of the AFH using the Assessment Tool.
              
                Meaningful actions means significant actions that are designed and can be reasonably expected to achieve a material positive change that affirmatively furthers fair housing by, for example, increasing fair housing choice or decreasing disparities in access to opportunity.
              
                Program participants means any entities specified in § 5.154(b).
              
                Protected characteristics are race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, having a disability, and having a type of disability.
              
                Protected class means a group of persons who have the same protected characteristic; e.g., a group of persons who are of the same race are a protected class. Similarly, a person who has a mobility disability is a member of the protected class of persons with disabilities and a member of the protected class of persons with mobility disabilities.
              
                Qualified public housing agency (Qualified PHA). Refers to a PHA:
              
              (1) For which the sum of:
              (i) The number of public housing dwelling units administered by the PHA; and
              (ii) The number of vouchers under section 8(o) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)) administered by the PHA is 550 or fewer; and
              (2) That is not designated under section 6(j)(2) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 as a troubled PHA, and does not have a failing score under the Section 8 Management Assessment Program (SEMAP) during the prior 12 months.
              
                Racially or ethnically concentrated area of poverty means a geographic area with significant concentrations of poverty and minority populations.
              
                Regionally collaborating participants refers to joint participants, at least two of which are consolidated plan program participants. A PHA may participate in a regional assessment in accordance with PHA Plan participation requirements under 24 CFR 903.15(a)(1). Regionally collaborating participants conduct and submit a single AFH (regional AFH) in accordance with § 5.156.
              
                Segregation means a condition, within the program participant's geographic area of analysis, as guided by the Assessment Tool, in which there is a high concentration of persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, or having a disability or a type of disability in a particular geographic area when compared to a broader geographic area. For persons with disabilities, segregation includes a condition in which the housing or services are not in the most integrated setting appropriate to an individual's needs in accordance with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12101, et seq.), and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794). (See 28 CFR part 35, appendix B, addressing 25 CFR 35.130.) Participation in “housing programs serving specified populations” as defined in this section does not present a fair housing issue of segregation, provided that such programs are administered to comply with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs): The Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19), including the duty to affirmatively further fair housing: section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794); the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12101, et seq.); and other Federal civil rights statutes and regulations.
              
                Significant disparities in access to opportunity means substantial and measurable differences in access to educational, transportation, economic, and other important opportunities in a community, based on protected class related to housing.
            
            
              § 5.154
              Assessment of Fair Housing (AFH).
              (a) General. To develop a successful affirmatively furthering fair housing strategy, it is central to assess the elements and factors that cause, increase, contribute to, maintain, or perpetuate segregation, racially or ethnically concentrated areas of poverty, significant disparities in access to opportunity, and disproportionate housing needs. For HUD program participants already required to develop plans for effective uses of HUD funds consistent with the statutory requirements and goals governing such funds, an AFH will be integrated into such plans.
              (b) Requirement to submit an AFH. In furtherance of the statutory obligation to affirmatively further fair housing, an AFH must be developed following the AFH consultation, content, and submission requirements described in §§ 5.150 through 5.180, and submitted in a manner and form prescribed by HUD by the following entities:
              (1) Jurisdictions and Insular Areas that are required to submit consolidated plans for the following programs:
              (i) The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program (see 24 CFR part 570, subparts D and I);
              (ii) The Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG) program (see 24 CFR part 576);
              (iii) The HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) program (see 24 CFR part 92); and
              (iv) The Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program (see 24 CFR part 574).
              (2) Public housing agencies (PHAs) receiving assistance under sections 8 or 9 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f or 42 U.S.C.1437g).
              (c) Fair housing data. Program participants will use HUD-provided data, as defined within the definition of “data” in § 5.152, and supplement the HUD-provided data, as needed, with local data and local knowledge, as guided by the Assessment Tool.
              (d) Content. Using the Assessment Tool prescribed by HUD, each program participant shall conduct an AFH for the purpose of examining its programs, jurisdiction, and region, and identifying goals to affirmatively further fair housing and to inform fair housing strategies in the consolidated plan, annual action plan, the PHA Plan and any other plan incorporated therein, and community plans including, but not limited to, education, transportation, or environmental related plans. The AFH's analysis, goals, and priorities will address integration and segregation; racially or ethnically concentrated areas of poverty; disparities in access to opportunity; and disproportionate housing needs based on race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, and disability. The AFH will assess the jurisdiction's fair housing enforcement and fair housing outreach capacity. At a minimum, the AFH will include the following elements:
              (1) Summary of fair housing issues and capacity. The AFH must include a summary of fair housing issues in the jurisdiction, including any findings, lawsuits, enforcement actions, settlements, or judgments related to fair housing or other civil rights laws, an assessment of compliance with existing fair housing laws and regulations, and an assessment of the jurisdiction's fair housing enforcement and fair housing outreach capacity.
              (2) Analysis of data. Using HUD-provided data, local data, local knowledge, including information gained through community participation, and the Assessment Tool, the program participant will undertake the analysis required by this section. This analysis will address the following to the extent the data or local knowledge are informative of the following:
              (i) Identification of integration and segregation patterns and trends based on race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, and disability within the jurisdiction and region;
              (ii) Identification of racially or ethnically concentrated areas of poverty within the jurisdiction and region;
              (iii) Identification of significant disparities in access to opportunity for any protected class within the jurisdiction and region; and
              (iv) Identification of disproportionate housing needs for any protected class within the jurisdiction and region.
              (3) Assessment of fair housing issues. Using the Assessment Tool provided by HUD, the AFH will identify the contributing factors for segregation, racially or ethnically concentrated areas of poverty, disparities in access to opportunity, and disproportionate housing needs as identified under paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
              (4) Identification of fair housing priorities and goals. Consistent with the identification of fair housing issues, and the analysis and assessment conducted under paragraphs (d)(1) through (3) of this section, the AFH must:
              (i) Identify and discuss the fair housing issues arising from the assessment; and
              (ii) Identify significant contributing factors, prioritize such factors, and justify the prioritization of the contributing factors that will be addressed in the program participant's fair housing goals. In prioritizing contributing factors, program participants shall give highest priority to those factors that limit or deny fair housing choice or access to opportunity, or negatively impact fair housing or civil rights compliance; and
              (iii) Set goals for overcoming the effects of contributing factors as prioritized in accordance with paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of this section. For each goal, a program participant must identify one or more contributing factors that the goal is designed to address, describe how the goal relates to overcoming the identified contributing factor(s) and related fair housing issue(s), and identify the metrics and milestones for determining what fair housing results will be achieved. For instance, where segregation in a development or geographic area is determined to be a fair housing issue, with at least one significant contributing factor, HUD would expect the AFH to include one or more goals to reduce the segregation.
              (5) Strategies and actions. To implement goals and priorities in an AFH, strategies and actions shall be included in program participants' consolidated plans, Annual Action Plans, and PHA Plans (including any plans incorporated therein), and need not be reflected in their AFH. Strategies and actions must affirmatively further fair housing and may include, but are not limited to, enhancing mobility strategies and encouraging development of new affordable housing in areas of opportunity, as well as place-based strategies to encourage community revitalization, including preservation of existing affordable housing, including HUD-assisted housing.
              (6) Summary of community participation. The AFH must include a concise summary of the community participation process, public comments, and efforts made to broaden community participation in the development of the AFH; a summary of the comments, views, and recommendations, received in writing, or orally at public hearings, during the community participation process; and a summary of any comments, views, and recommendations not accepted by the program participant and the reasons for nonacceptance.
              (7) Review of progress achieved since submission of prior AFH. For each AFH submitted after the first AFH submission, the program participant will provide a summary of progress achieved in meeting the goals and associated metrics and milestones of the prior AFH, and identify any barriers that impeded or prevented achievement of goals.
            
            
              § 5.156
              Joint and Regional AFHs.
              (a) General. For the purposes of sharing resources and addressing fair housing issues from a broader perspective, program participants are encouraged to collaborate to conduct and submit a single AFH, either a joint AFH or regional AFH (as defined in § 5.152), for the purpose of evaluating fair housing issues and contributing factors.
              (1) Collaborating program participants, whether joint participants or regionally collaborating participants, need not be located in contiguous jurisdictions and may cross State boundaries, provided that the collaborating program participants are located within the same Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA), as defined by the United States Office of Management and Budget (OMB) at the time of submission of the joint or regional AFH.
              (2) Program participants, whether contiguous or noncontiguous, that are either not located within the same CBSA or that are not located within the same State and seek to collaborate on an AFH, must submit a written request to HUD for approval of the collaboration, stating why the collaboration is appropriate. The collaboration may proceed upon approval by HUD.

              (3) Collaborating program participants must designate, through express written consent, one participant as the lead entity to oversee the submission of the joint or regional AFH on behalf of all collaborating program participants. When collaborating to submit a joint or regional AFH, program participants may divide work as they choose, but all program participants are accountable for the analysis and any joint goals and priorities, and each collaborating program participant must sign the AFH submitted to HUD. Collaborating program participants are also accountable for their individual analysis, goals, and priorities to be included in the collaborative AFH.
              (4) Program participants that intend to prepare either a joint or regional AFH shall promptly notify HUD of such intention and provide HUD with a copy of their written agreement.
              (b) Coordinating program years and submission deadlines. (1) To the extent practicable, all collaborating program participants must be on the same program year and fiscal year (as applicable) before submission of the joint AFH or regional AFH. (See § 5.160 and 24 CFR 91.10 and 903.5.) The applicable procedures for changing consolidated plan program participant program year start dates, if necessary, are described in 24 CFR 91.10. The applicable procedures for changing PHA fiscal year beginning dates, if necessary, are described in 24 CFR part 903.
              (2) If alignment of a program year or fiscal year is not practicable, the submission deadline for a joint AFH or regional AFH must be based on the designated lead entity's program year start date or fiscal year beginning date (as applicable), as provided in § 5.160(c). Within 12 months after the date of AFH acceptance, each collaborating program participant that has a program year start date, or fiscal year beginning date, earlier than the designated lead entity must make appropriate revisions to its full consolidated plan (as described in § 91.15(b)(2) of this chapter), or PHA Plan and any plan incorporated therein, to incorporate strategies and proposed actions consistent with the fair housing goals, issues, and other elements identified in the joint AFH or regional AFH.
              (c) Procedures for withdrawal from a joint or regional collaboration. A program participant that, for any reason, decides to withdraw from a previously arranged collaborative AFH must promptly notify HUD of the withdrawal. HUD will work with the withdrawing program participant, as well as the remaining collaborative participants, to determine whether a new submission date is needed for the withdrawing participant or the remaining participants. If a new submission date is needed for the withdrawing participant or the remaining participants, HUD will establish a submission date that is as close as feasible to the originally intended submission date and is no later than the original joint or regional submission date unless good cause for an extension is shown.
              (d) Community participation. Collaborating program participants must have a plan for community participation that complies with the requirements of §§ 5.150 through 5.180. The community participation process must include residents, and other interested members of the public, in the jurisdictions of each collaborating program participant, and not just those of the lead entity. In addition, the community participation process must be conducted in a manner sufficient for each consolidated plan program participant collaborating in a joint AFH or regional AFH to certify that it is following its applicable citizen participation plan, and for each PHA, collaborating in a joint AFH or regional AFH, to satisfy the notice and comment requirements in 24 CFR part 903. To the extent that public notice and comment periods provided in §§ 5.150 through 5.180 or in the consolidated plan or PHA plan regulations differ, the longer period shall apply. A material change that requires any collaborating program participant to revise its AFH pursuant to § 5.164(a)(1) will trigger a requirement to revise the joint or regional AFH.
              (e) Content of the joint or regional AFH. A joint or regional AFH must include the elements required under § 5.154(d). A joint or regional AFH does not relieve each collaborating program participant from its obligation to analyze and address local and regional fair housing issues and contributing factors that affect housing choice, and to set priorities and goals for its geographic area to overcome the effects of contributing factors and related fair housing issues.
            
            
              § 5.158
              Community participation, consultation, and coordination.
              (a) General. To ensure that the AFH is informed by meaningful community participation, program participants must give the public reasonable opportunities for involvement in the development of the AFH and in the incorporation of the AFH into the consolidated plan, PHA Plan, and other required planning documents. To ensure that the AFH, the consolidated plan, and the PHA Plan and any plan incorporated therein are informed by meaningful community participation, program participants should employ communications means designed to reach the broadest audience. Such communications may be met, as appropriate, by publishing a summary of each document in one or more newspapers of general circulation, and by making copies of each document available on the Internet, on the program participant's official government Web site, and as well at libraries, government offices, and public places. Program participants shall ensure that all aspects of community participation are conducted in accordance with fair housing and civil rights laws, including title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the regulations at 24 CFR part 1; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the regulations at 24 CFR part 8; and the Americans with Disabilities Act and the regulations at 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, as applicable. At a minimum, whether a program participant is preparing an AFH individually or in combination with other program participants, AFH community participation must include the following for consolidated plan program participants and PHAs (as applicable):
              (1) Consolidated plan program participants. The consolidated plan program participant must follow the policies and procedures described in its applicable citizen participation plan, adopted pursuant to 24 CFR part 91 (see 24 CFR 91.105, 91.115, and 91.401), in the process of developing the AFH, obtaining community feedback, and addressing complaints. The jurisdiction must consult with the agencies and organizations identified in consultation requirements at 24 CFR part 91 (see 24 CFR 91.100, 91.110, and 91.235).
              (2) PHAs. PHAs must follow the policies and procedures described in 24 CFR 903.13, 903.15, 903.17, and 903.19 in the process of developing the AFH, obtaining Resident Advisory Board and community feedback, and addressing complaints.
              (b) Coordination. (1) As described in 903.15, a PHA may fulfill its responsibility to conduct an AFH by:
              (i) Participating with a consolidated plan program participant, including State jurisdictions; or
              (ii) Participating with one or more PHAs in the planning, and preparation of the AFH; or
              (iii) Preparing its own AFH.
              (2) When working with other program participants, PHAs are encouraged to enter into Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) to clearly define the functions, level of member participation, method of dispute resolution, and decisionmaking process of the program participants, in the creation of the AFH.
            
            
              § 5.160
              Submission requirements.
              (a) First AFH—(1) Submission deadline for program participants. (i) For each program participant listed in this paragraph (a)(1)(i), the first AFH shall be submitted no later than 270 calendar days prior to the start of:
              (A) For consolidated plan participants not covered in paragraph (a)(1)(i)(B) or (C) of this section, the program year that begins on or after January 1, 2017 for which a new consolidated plan is due, as provided in 24 CFR 91.15(b)(2); and
              (B) For consolidated plan participants whose fiscal year (FY) 2015 CDBG grant is $500,000 or less, the program year that begins on or after January 1, 2018 for which a new consolidated plan is due, as provided in 24 CFR 91.15(b)(2); and

              (C) For consolidated plan participants that are Insular Areas or States, the program year that begins on or after January 1, 2018 for which a new consolidated plan is due, as provided in 24 CFR 91.15(b)(2); and
              
              (D) For PHAs, except for qualified PHAs, the PHA's fiscal year that begins on or after January 1, 2018 for which a new 5-year plan is due, as provided in 24 CFR 903.5; and
              (E) For qualified PHAs, the PHA's fiscal year that begins on or after January 1, 2019 for which a new 5-year plan is due, as provided in 24 CFR 903.5; and
              (F) For joint or regional program participants, the date provided under this paragraph (a)(1) or under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, dependent upon the program participant that is selected to be the lead entity, as provided in § 5.156(b)(2).
              (ii) If the time frame specified in this paragraph (a)(1) would result in a first AFH submission date that is less than 9 months after the date of publication of the Assessment Tool that is applicable to the program participant or lead entity, the participant(s)' submission deadline will be extended as specified in that Assessment Tool publication to a date that will not be less than 9 months from the date of publication of the Assessment Tool.
              (2) Exceptions to the first submission deadline for recently completed Regional Analysis of Impediments (RAI). An entitlement jurisdiction subject to the submission deadline in paragraph (a)(1) of this section is not required to submit an AFH by the deadline specified in such paragraph if the entitlement jurisdiction has completed a HUD-approved RAI in accordance with a grant awarded under HUD's FY 2010 or 2011 Sustainable Communities Competition and submitted the RAI within 30 months prior to the date when the program participant's AFH is due as provided under this section.
              (3) Compliance with existing requirements until first AFH submission. Except as provided in paragraph (a)(4) of this section, until such time as program participants are required to submit an AFH, the program participant shall continue to conduct an analysis of impediments, as required of the program participant by one or more of the HUD programs listed in § 5.154, in accordance with requirements in effect prior to August 17, 2015.
              (4) New program participants. For a new program participant that has not submitted a consolidated plan or PHA plan as of August 17, 2015, HUD will provide the new program participant with a deadline for submission of its first AFH and the strategies and actions to implement an accepted AFH, which shall be incorporated into the program participant's consolidated plan or PHA plan, as applicable, within 18 months of the start date of its first program year or fiscal year, as applicable.
              (b) Second and subsequent AFHs. After the first AFH, for all program participants, subsequent AFHs are due 195 calendar days before the start of the first year of the next 3 to 5-year cycle (as applicable), as described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section; that is, the subsequent AFH is to precede the next strategic plan under 24 CFR 91.15(b)(2) or 5-year plan under 24 CFR 903.5.
              (c) Collaborative AFHs. All collaborative program participants, whether joint participants or regionally collaborating participants, will select a lead entity and submit the AFH according to that entity's schedule.
              (d) Frequency. All program participants shall submit an AFH no less frequently than once every 5 years, or at such time agreed upon in writing by HUD and the program participant, in order to coordinate the AFH submission with time frames used for consolidated plans, participation in a regional AFH, cooperation agreements, PHA Plans, or other plans. (See 24 CFR 91.15(b)(2) and 903.15.)
              (e) Certification. Each program participant, including program participants submitting a joint or regional AFH, must certify that it will take meaningful actions to further the goals identified in its AFH conducted in accordance with the requirements in §§ 5.150 through 5.180 and 24 CFR 91.225(a)(1), 91.325(a)(1), 91.425(a)(1), 570.487(b)(1), 570.601, 903.7(o), and 903.15(d), as applicable. The certification will be required at the time a program participant submits its first AFH and for each AFH thereafter. If a PHA Plan, consolidated plan, Action Plan, or other submission requiring a civil rights-related certification is due prior to the time of submission of the AFH, the participant will complete a certification, in a form provided by HUD, that it will affirmatively further fair housing, or complete such other certification that HUD may require in accordance with applicable program regulations in effect before August 17, 2015.
              [80 FR 42352, July 16, 2015; 80 FR 46487, Aug. 5, 2015]
            
            
              § 5.162
              Review of AFH.
              (a) Review and acceptance of AFH—(1) General. HUD's review of an AFH is to determine whether the program participant has met the requirements for providing its analysis, assessment, and goal setting, as set forth in § 5.154(d). The AFH will be deemed accepted after 60 calendar days after the date that HUD receives the AFH, unless on or before that date, HUD has provided notification that HUD does not accept the AFH. In its notification, HUD will inform the program participant in writing of the reasons why HUD has not accepted the AFH and the actions that the program participant may take to resolve the nonacceptance.
              (2) Meaning of “acceptance”. HUD's acceptance of an AFH means only that, for purposes of administering HUD program funding, HUD has determined that the program participant has provided an AFH that meets the required elements, as set forth in § 5.154(d). Acceptance does not mean that the program participant has complied with its obligation to affirmatively further fair housing under the Fair Housing Act; has complied with other provisions of the Fair Housing Act; or has complied with other civil rights laws and regulations.
              (b) Nonacceptance of an AFH. (1) HUD will not accept an AFH if HUD finds that the AFH or a portion of the AFH is inconsistent with fair housing or civil rights requirements or is substantially incomplete. In connection with a regional or joint AFH, HUD's determination to not accept the AFH with respect to one program participant does not necessarily affect the acceptance of the AFH with respect to another program participant.
              (i) The following are examples of an AFH that is inconsistent with fair housing and civil rights requirements:
              (A) HUD determines that the analysis of fair housing issues, fair housing contributing factors, goals, or priorities contained in the AFH would result in policies or practices that would operate to discriminate in violation of the Fair Housing Act or other civil rights laws;
              (B) The AFH does not identify policies or practices as fair housing contributing factors, even though they result in the exclusion of a protected class from areas of opportunity.
              (ii) The following are examples of an AFH that is substantially incomplete:
              (A) The AFH was developed without the required community participation or the required consultation;
              (B) The AFH fails to satisfy a required element in §§ 5.150 through 5.180. Failure to satisfy a required element includes an assessment in which priorities or goals are materially inconsistent with the data or other evidence available to the program participant or in which priorities or goals are not designed to overcome the effects of contributing factors and related fair housing issues.
              (2) HUD will provide written notification to the program participant, including each program participant involved in a collaborative AFH (joint or regional AFH), of HUD's nonacceptance of the AFH and the written notification will specify the reasons why the AFH was not accepted and will provide guidance on how the AFH should be revised in order to be accepted.
              (c) Revisions and resubmission. HUD will provide a program participant, including each program participant involved in a collaborative AFH, with a time period to revise and resubmit the AFH, which shall be no less than 45 calendar days after the date on which HUD provides written notification that it does not accept the AFH. The revised AFH will be deemed accepted after 30 calendar days of the date by which HUD receives the revised AFH, unless on or before that date HUD has provided notification that HUD does not accept the revised AFH.
              (d) Accepted AFH as requirement for consolidated plan and PHA Plan approval. If a program participant does not have an accepted AFH, HUD will disapprove a consolidated plan (see 24 CFR 91.500) or a PHA Plan (see 24 CFR 903.23) except where delayed submission is otherwise permitted under § 5.156 or § 5.160.
              
              (1) If a consolidated plan program participant fails to submit an AFH as required by § 5.160, HUD may establish an alternative date for the jurisdiction to submit its consolidated plan, but in no event past the August 16 deadline provided in 24 CFR 91.15. Failure to submit a consolidated plan by August 16 of the Federal fiscal year for which funds are appropriated will automatically result in the loss of the CDBG funds to which the jurisdiction would otherwise be entitled.
              (2) If a PHA fails to submit the AFH in accordance with § 5.160, the PHA must have an accepted AFH no later than 75 calendar days before the commencement of the PHA's fiscal year to avoid any potential impacts on funding.
            
            
              § 5.164
              Revising an accepted AFH.
              (a) General—(1) Minimum criteria for revising the AFH. An AFH previously accepted by HUD must be revised and submitted to HUD for review under the following circumstances:

              (i) A material change occurs. A material change is a change in circumstances in the jurisdiction of a program participant that affects the information on which the AFH is based to the extent that the analysis, the fair housing contributing factors, or the priorities and goals of the AFH no longer reflect actual circumstances. Examples include Presidentially declared disasters, under title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.), in the program participant's area that are of such a nature as to significantly impact the steps a program participant may need to take to affirmatively further fair housing; significant demographic changes; new significant contributing factors in the participant's jurisdiction; and civil rights findings, determinations, settlements (including Voluntary Compliance Agreements), or court orders; or
              (ii) Upon HUD's written notification specifying a material change that requires the revision.
              (2) Criteria for revising the AFH. The criteria that will be used in determining when revisions to the AFH are appropriate must be specified in the citizen participation plan adopted under the consolidated plan pursuant to 24 CFR part 91, and the public participation procedures and significant amendment process required under 24 CFR part 903. Such criteria must include, at a minimum, the circumstances described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
              (3) Revised AFH. A revision pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section consists of preparing and submitting amended analyses, assessments, priorities, and goals that take into account the material change, including any new fair housing issues and contributing factors that may arise as a result of the material change. A revision may not necessarily require the submission of an entirely new AFH. The revision need only focus on the material change and appropriate adjustments to the analyses, assessments, priorities, or goals.
              (b) Timeframe for revision. (1) Where a revision is required under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section, such revision shall be submitted within 12 months of the onset of the material change, or at such later date as HUD may provide. Where the material change is the result of a Presidentially declared disaster, such time shall be automatically extended to the date that is 2 years after the date upon which the disaster declaration is made, and HUD may extend such deadline, upon request, for good cause shown.
              (2)(i) Where a revision is required under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, HUD will specify a date by which the program participant must submit the revision of the AFH to HUD, taking into account the material change, the program participant's capacity, and the need for a valid AFH to guide planning activities. HUD may extend the due date upon written request by the program participant that describes the reasons the program participant is unable to make the deadline.

              (ii) On or before 30 calendar days following the date of HUD's written notification under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, the program participant may advise HUD in writing of its belief that a revision to the AFH is not required. The program participant must state with specificity the reasons for its belief that a revision is not required. HUD will respond on or before 30 calendar days following the date of the receipt of the program participant's correspondence and will advise the program participant in writing whether HUD agrees or disagrees with the program participant. If HUD disagrees, the program participant must proceed with the revision. HUD may establish a new due date that is later than the date specified in its original notification.
              (c) Community participation. Revisions to an AFH, as described in this section, are subject to community participation. The jurisdiction must follow the notice and comment process applicable to consolidated plan substantial amendments under the jurisdiction's citizen participation plan adopted pursuant to 24 CFR part 91 (see 24 CFR 91.105, 91.115, and 91.401). A consortium must follow the participation process applicable to consolidated plan substantial amendments under the consortium's citizen participation plan adopted pursuant to 24 CFR 91.401. Insular areas submitting an abbreviated consolidated plan shall follow the citizen participation requirements of 24 CFR 570.441. The PHA must follow the notice and comment process applicable to significant amendments or modifications pursuant to 24 CFR 903.13, 903.15, 903.17, and 903.21.
              (d) Submission to HUD of the revised AFH. Upon completion, any revision to the AFH must be made public and submitted to HUD at the time of the revision.
              (e) PHAs. Upon any revision to the AFH pursuant to §§ 5.150 through 5.180, PHAs must revise their PHA Plan within 12 months, consistent with the AFH revision, and pursuant to 24 CFR 903.15(c).
            
            
              § 5.166
              AFFH certification.
              (a) Certifications. Program participants must certify that they will affirmatively further fair housing when required by statutes and regulations governing HUD programs. Such certifications are made in accordance with applicable program regulations. Consolidated plan program participants are subject to the certification requirements in 24 CFR part 91, and PHA Plan program participants are subject to the certification requirements in 24 CFR part 903.
              (b) Procedure for challenging the validity of an AFFH certification. (1) For consolidated plan program participants, HUD's challenge to the validity of an AFFH certification will be based on procedures and standards specified in 24 CFR part 91.
              (2) For PHA Plan program participants, HUD's challenge to the validity of an AFFH certification will be based on procedures and standards specified in 24 CFR part 903.
            
            
              § 5.168
              Recordkeeping.
              (a) General. Each program participant must establish and maintain sufficient records to enable HUD to determine whether the program participant has met the requirements of this subpart. A PHA not preparing its own AFH in accordance with 24 CFR 903.15(a)(3) must maintain a copy of the applicable AFH and records reflecting actions to affirmatively further fair housing as described in 24 CFR 903.7(o). All program participants shall make these records available for HUD inspection. At a minimum, the following records are needed for each consolidated plan program participant and each PHA that prepares its own AFH:
              (1) Information and records relating to the program participant's AFH and any significant revisions to the AFH, including, but not limited to, statistical data, studies, and other diagnostic tools used by the jurisdiction; and any policies, procedures, or other documents relating to the analysis or preparation of the AFH;
              (2) Records demonstrating compliance with the consultation and community participation requirements of §§ 5.150 through 5.180 and applicable program regulations, including the names of organizations involved in the development of the AFH, summaries or transcripts of public meetings or hearings, written public comments, public notices and other correspondence, distribution lists, surveys, or interviews (as applicable);

              (3) Records demonstrating the actions the program participant has taken to affirmatively further fair housing, including activities carried out in furtherance of the assessment; the program participant's AFFH goals and strategies set forth in its AFH, consolidated plan, or PHA Plan, and any plan incorporated therein; and the actions the program participant has carried out to promote or support the goals identified in accordance with § 5.154 during the preceding 5 years;
              (4) Where courts or an agency of the United States Government or of a State government has found that the program participant has violated any applicable nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements set forth in § 5.105(a) or any applicable civil rights-related program requirement, documentation related to the underlying judicial or administrative finding and affirmative measures that the program participant has taken in response.
              (5) Documentation relating to the program participant's efforts to ensure that housing and community development activities (including those assisted under programs administered by HUD) are in compliance with applicable nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements set forth in § 5.105(a) and applicable civil rights related program requirements;
              (6) Records demonstrating that consortium members, units of general local government receiving allocations from a State, or units of general local government participating in an urban county have conducted their own or contributed to the jurisdiction's assessment (as applicable) and documents demonstrating their actions to affirmatively further fair housing; and
              (7) Any other evidence relied upon by the program participant to support its affirmatively furthering fair housing certification.
              (b) Retention period. All records must be retained for such period as may be specified in the applicable program regulations.
            
            
              §§ 5.167-5.180
              [Reserved]
            
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and Employer Identification Numbers; Procedures for Obtaining Income Information
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3543, 3544, and 11901 et seq.
            
          
          
            Source:
            61 FR 11113, Mar. 18, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5.210
            Purpose, applicability, and Federal preemption.
            (a) Purpose. This subpart B requires applicants for and participants in covered HUD programs to disclose, and submit documentation to verify, their Social Security Numbers (SSNs). This subpart B also enables HUD and PHAs to obtain income information about applicants and participants in the covered programs through computer matches with State Wage Information Collection Agencies (SWICAs) and Federal agencies, in order to verify an applicant's or participant's eligibility for or level of assistance. The purpose of this subpart B is to enable HUD to decrease the incidence of fraud, waste, and abuse in the covered programs.
            (b) Applicability. (1) This subpart B applies to mortgage and loan insurance and coinsurance and housing assistance programs contained in chapter II, subchapter B, and chapters VIII and IX of this title.
            (2) The information covered by consent forms described in this subpart involves income information from SWICAs, and wages, net earnings from self-employment, payments of retirement income, and unearned income as referenced at 26 U.S.C. 6103. In addition, consent forms may authorize the collection of other information from applicants and participants to determine eligibility or level of benefits.
            (c) Federal preemption. This subpart B preempts any State law, including restrictions and penalties, that governs the collection and use of income information to the extent State law is inconsistent with this subpart.
            [61 FR 11113, Mar. 18, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000]
          
          
            
            § 5.212
            Compliance with the Privacy Act and other requirements.
            (a) Compliance with the Privacy Act. The collection, maintenance, use, and dissemination of SSNs, EINs, any information derived from SSNs and Employer Identification Numbers (EINs), and income information under this subpart shall be conducted, to the extent applicable, in compliance with the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a) and all other provisions of Federal, State, and local law.
            (b) Privacy Act notice. All assistance applicants shall be provided with a Privacy Act notice at the time of application. All participants shall be provided with a Privacy Act notice at each annual income recertification.
          
          
            § 5.214
            Definitions.
            In addition to the definitions in § 5.100, the following definitions apply to this subpart B:
            
              Assistance applicant. Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 3543(b) and 3544(a)(2), this term means the following:
            (1) For any program under 24 CFR parts 215, 221, 236, 290, or 891, or any program under Section 8 of the 1937 Act: A family or individual that seeks rental assistance under the program.
            (2) For the public housing program: A family or individual that seeks admission to the program.
            (3) For any program under 24 CFR part 235: A homeowner or cooperative member seeking homeownership assistance (including where the individual seeks to assume an existing mortgage).
            
              Computer match means the automated comparison of data bases containing records about individuals.
            
              Computer matching agreement means the agreement that describes the responsibilities and obligations of the parties participating in a computer match.
            
              Consent form means any consent form approved by HUD to be signed by assistance applicants and participants for the purpose of obtaining income information from employers and SWICAs; return information from the Social Security Administration (including wages, net earnings from self-employment, and payments of retirement income), as referenced at 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7)(A); and return information for unearned income from the Internal Revenue Service, as referenced at 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7)(B). The consent forms expire after a certain time and may authorize the collection of other information from assistance applicants or participants to determine eligibility or level of benefits as provided in §§ 813.109, 913.109, and 950.315 of this title.
            
              Employer Identification Number (EIN) means the nine-digit taxpayer identifying number that is assigned to an individual, trust, estate, partnership, association, company, or corporation pursuant to sections 6011(b), or corresponding provisions of prior law, or 6109 of the Internal Revenue Code.
            
              Entity applicant. (1) Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 3543(b), 3544(a)(2), and paragraph (2) of this definition, this term means a partnership, corporation, or any other association or entity, other than an individual owner applicant, that seeks to participate as a private owner in any of the following:
            (i) The project-based assistance programs under Section 8 of the 1937 Act;
            (ii) The programs in 24 CFR parts 215, 221, or 236; or
            (iii) The other mortgage and loan insurance programs in 24 CFR parts 201 through 267, except that the term “entity applicant” does not include a mortgagee or lender.
            (2) The term does not include a public entity, such as a PHA, IHA, or State Housing Finance Agency.
            
              Federal agency means a department of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
            
              Income information means information relating to an individual's income, including:
            (1) All employment income information known to current or previous employers or other income sources that HUD or the processing entity determines is necessary for purposes of determining an assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility for, or level of assistance in, a covered program;

            (2) All information about wages, as defined in the State's unemployment compensation law, including any Social Security Number; name of the employee; quarterly wages of the employee; and the name, full address, telephone number, and, when known, Employer Identification Number of an employer reporting wages under a State unemployment compensation law;
            (3) With respect to unemployment compensation:
            (i) Whether an individual is receiving, has received, or has applied for unemployment compensation;
            (ii) The amount of unemployment compensation the individual is receiving or is entitled to receive; and
            (iii) The period with respect to which the individual actually received such compensation;
            (4) Unearned IRS income and self-employment, wages and retirement income as described in the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7); and
            (5) Wage, social security (Title II), and supplemental security income (Title XVI) data obtained from the Social Security Administration.
            
              Individual owner applicant. Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 3543(b), 3544(a)(2), or paragraph (2) of this definition, this term means:
            (1) An individual who seeks to participate as a private owner in any of:
            (i) The project-based assistance programs under Section 8 of the 1937 Act; or
            (ii) The programs in 24 CFR parts 215, 221, 235 (without homeownership assistance), or 236, including where the individual seeks to assume an existing mortgage; or
            (2) An individual who:
            (i) Either: (A) Applies for a mortgage or loan insured or coinsured under any of the programs referred to in paragraph (1)(iii) of the definition of “entity applicant” in this section; or
            (B) Seeks to assume an existing mortgage or loan; and
            (ii) Intends to hold the mortgaged property in his or her individual right.
            
              IRS means the Internal Revenue Service.
            
              Owner means the person or entity (or employee of an owner) that leases an assisted dwelling unit to an eligible family and includes, when applicable, a mortgagee.
            
              Participant. Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 3543(b) and 3544(a)(2), this term has the following meaning:
            (1) For any program under 24 CFR part 891, or Section 8 of the 1937 Act: A family receiving rental assistance under the program;
            (2) For the public housing program: A family or individual that is assisted under the program;
            (3) For 24 CFR parts 215, 221, 236, and 290: A tenant or qualified tenant under any of the programs; and
            (4) For 24 CFR part 235: A homeowner or a cooperative member receiving homeownership assistance.
            
              Processing entity means the person or entity that, under any of the programs covered under this subpart B, is responsible for making eligibility and related determinations and an income reexamination. (In the Section 8 and public housing programs, the “processing entity” is the “responsible entity” as defined in § 5.100.)
            
              Social Security Number (SSN) means the nine-digit number that is assigned to a person by the Social Security Administration and that identifies the record of the person's earnings reported to the Social Security Administration. The term does not include a number with a letter as a suffix that is used to identify an auxiliary beneficiary.
            
              SSA means the Social Security Administration.
            
              State Wage Information Collection Agency (SWICA) means the State agency, including any Indian tribal agency, receiving quarterly wage reports from employers in the State, or an alternative system that has been determined by the Secretary of Labor to be as effective and timely in providing employment-related income and eligibility information.
            [61 FR 11113, Mar. 18, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998; 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000]
          
          
            
            Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and Employer Identification Numbers for Applicants and Participants in Certain HUD Programs
            
              § 5.216
              Disclosure and verification of Social Security and Employer Identification Numbers.
              (a) General. The requirements of this section apply to applicants and participants as described in this section, except that this section is inapplicable to individuals who do not contend eligible immigration status under subpart E of this part (see § 5.508).
              (b) Disclosure required of assistance applicants. Each assistance applicant must submit the following information to the processing entity when the assistance applicant's eligibility under the program involved is being determined.
              (1) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to the assistance applicant and to each member of the assistance applicant's household; and
              (2) The documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify each such SSN.
              (c) Disclosure required of individual owner applicants. Each individual owner applicant must submit the following information to the processing entity when the individual owner applicant's eligibility under the program involved is being determined:
              (1) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to the individual owner applicant and to each member of the individual owner applicant's household who will be obligated to pay the debt evidenced by the mortgage or loan documents; and
              (2) The documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify each such SSN.
              (d) Disclosure required of certain officials of entity applicants. Each officer, director, principal stockholder, or other official of an entity applicant must submit the following information to the processing entity when the entity applicant's eligibility under the program involved is being determined:
              (1) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to each such individual; and
              (2) The documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify each SSN.
              (e) Disclosure required of participants—(1) Initial disclosure. (i) Each participant, except those age 62 or older as of January 31, 2010, whose initial determination of eligibility was begun before January 31, 2010, must submit the information described in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section, if the participant has:
              (A) Not previously disclosed a SSN;
              (B) Previously disclosed a SSN that HUD or the SSA determined was invalid; or
              (C) Been issued a new SSN.
              (ii) Each participant subject to the disclosure requirements under paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section must submit the following information to the processing entity at the next interim or regularly scheduled reexamination or recertification of family composition or income, or other reexamination or recertification for the program involved:
              (A) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to the participant and to each member of the participant's household; and
              (B) The documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify each such SSN.
              (2) Subsequent disclosure. Once a participant has disclosed and the processing entity has verified each SSN, the following rules apply:
              (i) Addition of new household member who is at least 6 years of age or under the age of 6 and has an assigned SSN. When the participant requests to add a new household member who is at least 6 years of age, or is under the age of 6 and has an assigned SSN, the participant must provide the following to the processing entity at the time of the request, or at the time of processing the interim reexamination or recertification of family composition that includes the new member(s):
              (A) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to each new member; and

              (B) The documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify the SSN for each new member.
              
              (ii) Addition of new household member who is under the age of 6 and has no assigned SSN. (A) When a participant requests to add a new household member who is under the age of 6 and has not been assigned a SSN, the participant shall be required to provide the complete and accurate SSN assigned to each new child and the documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify the SSN for each new child within 90 calendar days of the child being added to the household.
              (B) The processing entity shall grant an extension of one additional 90-day period if the processing entity, in its discretion, determines that the participant's failure to comply was due to circumstances that could not have reasonably been foreseen and were outside the control of the participant. During the period that the processing entity is awaiting documentation of a SSN, the processing entity shall include the child as part of the assisted household and the child shall be entitled to all the benefits of being a household member. If, upon expiration of the provided time period, the participant fails to produce a SSN, the processing entity shall follow the provisions of § 5.218.
              (iii) Assignment of new SSN. If the participant or any member of the participant's household has been assigned a new SSN, the participant must submit the following to the processing entity at either the time of receipt of the new SSN; at the next interim or regularly scheduled reexamination or recertification of family composition or income, or other reexamination or recertification; or at such earlier time specified by the processing entity:
              (A) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to the participant or household member involved; and
              (B) The documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify the SSN of each individual.
              (f) Disclosure required of entity applicants. Each entity applicant must submit the following information to the processing entity when the entity applicant's eligibility under the program involved is being determined:
              (1) Any complete and accurate EIN assigned to the entity applicant; and
              (2) The documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(2) of this section to verify the EIN.
              (g) Required documentation—(1) SSN. The documentation necessary to verify the SSN of an individual who is required to disclose his or her SSN under paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section is:
              (i) A valid SSN card issued by the SSA;
              (ii) An original document issued by a federal or state government agency, which contains the name of the individual and the SSN of the individual, along with other identifying information of the individual; or
              (iii) Such other evidence of the SSN as HUD may prescribe in administrative instructions.
              (2) EIN. The documentation necessary to verify an EIN of an entity applicant that is required to disclose its EIN under paragraph (f) of this section is the official, written communication from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) assigning the EIN to the entity applicant, or such other evidence of the EIN as HUD may prescribe in administrative instructions.
              (h) Effect on assistance applicants. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (h)(2) and (3) of this section, if the processing entity determines that the assistance applicant is otherwise eligible to participate in a program, the assistance applicant may retain its place on the waiting list for the program but cannot become a participant until it can provide the documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to verify the SSN of each member of the household.

              (2) For applicants to the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Program for Homeless Individuals under 24 CFR part 882, subpart H, the documentation required in paragraph (g)(1) of this section must be provided to the processing entity within 90 calendar days from the date of admission into the program. The processing entity shall grant an extension of one additional 90-day period if the processing entity, in its discretion, determines that the applicant's failure to comply was due to circumstances that could not have reasonably been foreseen and were outside the control of the applicant. If, upon expiration of the provided time period, the individual fails to produce a SSN, the processing entity shall follow the provisions of § 5.218.
              (3) If a child under the age of 6 years was added to the assistance applicant household within the 6-month period prior to the household's date of admission (or, for the HCV program, the date of voucher issuance), the assistance applicant may become a participant, so long as the documentation required in paragraph (g)(1) of this section is provided to the processing entity within 90 calendar days from the date of admission into the program (or, for the HCV program, the effective date of the Housing Assistance Payment contract). The processing entity must grant an extension of one additional 90-day period if the processing entity determines that, in its discretion, the assistance applicant's failure to comply was due to circumstances that could not reasonably have been foreseen and were outside the control of the assistance applicant. If the applicant family fails to produce the documentation required in paragraph (g)(1) of this section within the required time period, the processing entity must follow the provisions of § 5.218.
              (i) Rejection of documentation. The processing entity must not reject documentation referred to in paragraph (g) of this section, except as HUD may otherwise prescribe through publicly issued notice.
              [74 FR 68932, Dec. 29, 2009, as amended at 81 FR 12369, Mar. 8, 2016]
            
            
              § 5.218
              Penalties for failing to disclose and verify Social Security and Employer Identification Numbers.
              (a) Denial of eligibility of assistance applicants and individual owner applicants. The processing entity must deny the eligibility of an assistance applicant or individual owner applicant in accordance with the provisions governing the program involved, if the assistance or individual owner applicant does not meet the applicable SSN disclosure, documentation, and verification requirements as specified in § 5.216.
              (b) Denial of eligibility of entity applicants. The processing entity must deny the eligibility of an entity applicant in accordance with the provisions governing the program involved; if:
              (1) The entity applicant does not meet the EIN disclosure, documentation, and verification requirements specified in § 5.216; or
              (2) Any of the officials of the entity applicant referred to in § 5.216(d) does not meet the applicable SSN disclosure, and documentation and verification requirements specified in § 5.216.
              (c) Termination of assistance or termination of tenancy of participants. (1) The processing entity must terminate the assistance or terminate the tenancy, or both, of a participant and the participant's household, in accordance with the provisions governing the program involved, if the participant does not meet the applicable SSN disclosure, documentation, and verification requirements specified in § 5.216.
              (2) The processing entity may defer termination and provide the participant with an additional 90 calendar days to disclose a SSN, but only if the processing entity, in its discretion, determines that:
              (i) The failure to meet these requirements was due to circumstances that could not have reasonably been foreseen and were outside the control of the participant; and
              (ii) There is a reasonable likelihood that the participant will be able to disclose a SSN by the deadline.
              (3) Failure of the participant to disclose a SSN by the deadline specified in paragraph (c)(2) of this section will result in termination of the assistance or tenancy, or both, of the participant and the participant's household.
              (d) Cross reference. Individuals should consult the regulations and administrative instructions for the programs covered under this subpart B for further information on the use of SSNs and EINs in determinations regarding eligibility.
              [61 FR 11113, Mar. 18, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 4840, Jan. 27, 2009; 74 FR 68933, Dec. 29, 2009]
            
          
          
            
            Procedures for Obtaining Income Information About Applicants and Participants
            
              § 5.230
              Consent by assistance applicants and participants.
              (a) Required consent by assistance applicants and participants. Each member of the family of an assistance applicant or participant who is at least 18 years of age, and each family head and spouse regardless of age, shall sign one or more consent forms.
              (b) Consent authorization—(1) To whom and when. The assistance applicant shall submit the signed consent forms to the processing entity when eligibility under a covered program is being determined. A participant shall sign and submit consent forms at the next regularly scheduled income reexamination. Assistance applicants and participants shall be responsible for the signing and submitting of consent forms by each applicable family member.
              (2) Subsequent consent forms—special cases. Participants are required to sign and submit consent forms at the next interim or regularly scheduled income reexamination under the following circumstances:
              (i) When any person 18 years or older becomes a member of the family;
              (ii) When a member of the family turns 18 years of age; and
              (iii) As required by HUD or the PHA in administrative instructions.
              (c) Consent form—contents. The consent form required by this section shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
              (1) A provision authorizing HUD and PHAs to obtain from SWICAs any information or materials necessary to complete or verify the application for participation and to maintain continued assistance under a covered program; and
              (2) A provision authorizing HUD, PHAs, or the owner responsible for determining eligibility for or the level of assistance to verify with previous or current employers income information pertinent to the assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility for or level of assistance under a covered program;
              (3) A provision authorizing HUD to request income return information from the IRS and the SSA for the sole purpose of verifying income information pertinent to the assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility or level of benefits; and
              (4) A statement that the authorization to release the information requested by the consent form expires 15 months after the date the consent form is signed.
            
            
              § 5.232
              Penalties for failing to sign consent forms.
              (a) Denial or termination of benefits. In accordance with the provisions governing the program involved, if the assistance applicant or participant, or any member of the assistance applicant's or participant's family, does not sign and submit the consent form as required in § 5.230, then:
              (1) The processing entity shall deny assistance to and admission of an assistance applicant;
              (2) Assistance to, and the tenancy of, a participant may be terminated.
              (b) Cross references. Individuals should consult the regulations and administrative instructions for the programs covered under this subpart B for further information on the use of income information in determinations regarding eligibility.
            
            
              § 5.233
              Mandated use of HUD's Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) System.
              (a) Programs subject to this section and requirements. (1) The requirements of this section apply to entities administering assistance under the:
              (i) Public Housing program under 24 CFR part 960;
              (ii) Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program under 24 CFR part 982;
              (iii) Moderate Rehabilitation program under 24 CFR part 882;
              (iv) Project-based Voucher program under 24 CFR part 983;
              (v) Project-based Section 8 programs under 24 CFR parts 880, 881, 883, 884, 886, and 891;
              (vi) Section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C. 1701q);
              (vii) Section 811 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 8013);

              (viii) Sections 221(d)(3) and 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715l(d)(3) and 1715z-1); and
              
              (ix) Rent Supplement program under section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (12 U.S.C. 1701s).
              (2) Processing entities must use HUD's EIV system in its entirety:
              (i) As a third party source to verify tenant employment and income information during mandatory reexaminations or recertifications of family composition and income, in accordance with § 5.236, and administrative guidance issued by HUD; and
              (ii) To reduce administrative and subsidy payment errors in accordance with HUD administrative guidance.
              (b) Penalties for noncompliance. Failure to use the EIV system in its entirety may result in the imposition of sanctions and/or the assessment of disallowed costs associated with any resulting incorrect subsidy or tenant rent calculations, or both.
              [74 FR 68934, Dec. 29, 2009]
            
            
              § 5.234
              Requests for information from SWICAs and Federal agencies; restrictions on use.
              (a) Information available from SWICAs and Federal agencies—to whom and what. Income information will generally be obtained through computer matching agreements between HUD and a SWICA or Federal agency, or between a PHA and a SWICA, as described in paragraph (c) of this section. Certification that the applicable assistance applicants and participants have signed appropriate consent forms and have received the necessary Privacy Act notice is required, as follows:
              (1) When HUD requests the computer match, the processing entity shall certify to HUD; and
              (2) When the PHA requests the computer match, the PHA shall certify to the SWICA.
              (b) Restrictions on use of information. The restrictions of 42 U.S.C. 3544(c)(2)(A) apply to the use by HUD or a PHA of income information obtained from a SWICA. The restrictions of 42 U.S.C. 3544(c)(2)(A) and of 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7) apply to the use by HUD or a PHA of income information obtained from the IRS or SSA.
              (c) Computer matching agreements. Computer matching agreements shall specify the purpose and the legal authority for the match, and shall include a description of the records to be matched, a statement regarding disposition of information generated through the match, a description of the administrative and technical safeguards to be used in protecting the information obtained through the match, a description of the use of records, the restrictions on duplication and redisclosure, a certification, and the amount that will be charged for processing a request.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2508-0008)
            
            
              § 5.236
              Procedures for termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of assistance based on information obtained from a SWICA or Federal agency.
              (a) Termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of assistance. The provisions of 42 U.S.C. 3544(c)(2)(B) and (C) shall govern the termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of benefits for an assistance applicant or participant based on income information obtained from a SWICA or a Federal agency. Procedures necessary to comply with these provisions are provided in paragraph (b) of this section.
              (b) Procedures for independent verification. (1) Any determination or redetermination of family income verified in accordance with this paragraph must be carried out in accordance with the requirements and procedures applicable to the individual covered program. Independent verification of information obtained from a SWICA or a Federal agency may be:
              (i) By HUD;
              (ii) In the case of the public housing program, by a PHA; or
              (iii) In the case of any Section 8 program, by a PHA acting as contract administrator under an ACC.
              (2) Upon receiving income information from a SWICA or a Federal agency, HUD or, when applicable, the PHA shall compare the information with the information about a family's income that was:

              (i) Provided by the assistance applicant or participant to the PHA; or
              
              (ii) Obtained by the owner (or mortgagee, as applicable) from the assistance applicant or participant or from his or her employer.
              (3) When the income information reveals an employer or other income source that was not disclosed by the assistance applicant or participant, or when the income information differs substantially from the information received from the assistance applicant or participant or from his or her employer:
              (i) HUD or, as applicable or directed by HUD, the PHA shall request the undisclosed employer or other income source to furnish any information necessary to establish an assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility for or level of assistance in a covered program. This information shall be furnished in writing, as directed to:
              (A) HUD, with respect to programs under parts 221, 235, 236, or 290 of this title;
              (B) The responsible entity (as defined in § 5.100) in the case of the public housing program or any Section 8 program.
              (C) The owner or mortgagee, as applicable, with respect to the rent supplement, Section 221(d)(3) BMIR, Section 235 homeownership assistance, or Section 236 programs.
              (ii) HUD or the PHA may verify the income information directly with an assistance applicant or participant. Such verification procedures shall not include any disclosure of income information prohibited under paragraph (b)(6) of this section.
              (4) HUD and the PHA shall not be required to pursue these verification procedures when the sums of money at issue are too small to raise an inference of fraud or justify the expense of independent verification and the procedures related to termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of assistance.
              (5) Based on the income information received from a SWICA or Federal agency, HUD or the PHA, as appropriate, may inform an owner (or mortgagee) that an assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility for or level of assistance is uncertain and needs to be verified. The owner (or mortgagee) shall then confirm the assistance applicant's or participant's income information by checking the accuracy of the information with the employer or other income source, or directly with the family.
              (6) Nondisclosure of Income information. Neither HUD nor the PHA may disclose income information obtained from a SWICA directly to an owner (unless a PHA is the owner). Disclosure of income information obtained from the SSA or IRS is restricted under 26 U.S.C. § 6103(l)(7) and 42 U.S.C. 3544.
              (c) Opportunity to contest. HUD, the PHA, or the owner (or mortgagee, as applicable) shall promptly notify any assistance applicant or participant in writing of any adverse findings made on the basis of the information verified in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section. The assistance applicant or participant may contest the findings in the same manner as applies to other information and findings relating to eligibility factors under the applicable program. Termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of assistance shall be carried out in accordance with requirements and procedures applicable to the individual covered program, and shall not occur until the expiration of any notice period provided by the statute or regulations governing the program.
              [61 FR 11113, Mar. 18, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000; 74 FR 68934, Dec. 29, 2009]
            
            
              § 5.238
              Criminal and civil penalties.
              Persons who violate the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 3544 or 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7) with respect to the use and disclosure of income information may be subject to civil or criminal penalties under 42 U.S.C. 3544(c)(3), 26 U.S.C. 7213(a), or 18 U.S.C. 1905.
            
            
              § 5.240
              Family disclosure of income information to the responsible entity and verification.
              (a) This section applies to families that reside in dwelling units with assistance under the public housing program, the Section 8 tenant-based assistance programs, or for which project-based assistance is provided under the Section 8, Section 202, or Section 811 program.

              (b) The family must promptly furnish to the responsible entity any letter or other notice by HUD to a member of the family that provides information concerning the amount or verification of family income.
              (c) The responsible entity must verify the accuracy of the income information received from the family, and change the amount of the total tenant payment, tenant rent or Section 8 housing assistance payment, or terminate assistance, as appropriate, based on such information.
              [65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Pet Ownership for the Elderly or Persons With Disabilities
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 1701r-1 and 3535(d).
          
          
            General Requirements
            
              § 5.300
              Purpose.
              (a) This subpart implements section 227 of the Housing and Urban-Rural Recovery Act of 1983 (12 U.S.C. 1701r-1) as it pertains to projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities under:
              (1) The housing programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner;
              (2) Projects assisted under the programs contained in chapter VIII of this title 24; and
              (3) The public housing program.
              (b) [Reserved]
              [61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.303
              Exclusion for animals that assist, support, or provide service to persons with disabilities.
              (a) This subpart C does not apply to animals that are used to assist, support, or provide service to persons with disabilities. Project owners and PHAs may not apply or enforce any policies established under this subpart against animals that are necessary as a reasonable accommodation to assist, support, or provide service to persons with disabilities. This exclusion applies to animals that reside in projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities, as well as to animals that visit these projects.
              (b) Nothing in this subpart C:
              (1) Limits or impairs the rights of persons with disabilities;
              (2) Authorizes project owners or PHAs to limit or impair the rights of persons with disabilities; or
              (3) Affects any authority that project owners or PHAs may have to regulate animals that assist, support, or provide service to persons with disabilities, under federal, state, or local law.
              [73 FR 63838, Oct. 27, 2008]
            
            
              § 5.306
              Definitions.
              
                Common household pet means:
              (1) For purposes of Housing programs: A domesticated animal, such as a dog, cat, bird, rodent (including a rabbit), fish, or turtle, that is traditionally kept in the home for pleasure rather than for commercial purposes. Common household pet does not include reptiles (except turtles). If this definition conflicts with any applicable State or local law or regulation defining the pets that may be owned or kept in dwelling accommodations, the State or local law or regulation shall apply. This definition shall not include animals that are used to assist persons with disabilities.
              (2) For purposes of Public Housing programs: PHAs may define the term “common household pet” under § 5.318.
              
                Elderly or disabled family means:
              (1) For purposes of Housing programs: An elderly person, a person with a disability, or an elderly or disabled family for purposes of the program under which a project for the elderly or persons with disabilities is assisted or has its mortgage insured.
              (2) For purposes of Public Housing programs: (i) An elderly person, a person with a disability, or an elderly or disabled family as defined in § 5.403 in subpart A of this part.
              (ii) [Reserved]
              
                Housing programs means:
              (1) The housing programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner; and
              (2) The programs contained in chapter VIII of this title 24 that assist rental projects that meet the definition of project for the elderly or persons with disabilities in this subpart C.
              
                Project for the elderly or persons with disabilities means:
              
              (1) For purposes of Housing programs: (i) A specific rental or cooperative multifamily property that, unless currently owned by HUD, is subject to a first mortgage, and:
              (A) That is assisted under statutory authority identified by HUD through notice;
              (B) That was designated for occupancy by elderly or disabled families when funds for the project were reserved, or when the commitment to insure the mortgage was issued or, of not then so designated, that is designated for such occupancy in an effective amendment to the regulatory agreement covering the project, made pursuant to the project owner's request, and that is assisted or insured under one of the programs identified by HUD through notice; or
              (C) For which preference in tenant selection is given for all units in the project to elderly or disabled families and that is owned by HUD or assisted under one of the programs identified by HUD through notice.
              (ii) This term does not include health and care facilities that have mortgage insurance under the National Housing Act. This term also does not include any of the project owner's other property that does not meet the criteria contained in any one of paragraphs (1)(i)(A) through (C) of this definition, even if the property is adjacent to or under joint or common management with such specific property.
              (2) For purposes of Public Housing programs: Any project assisted under title I of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (other than under section 8 or 17 of the Act), including any building within a mixed-use project, that was designated for occupancy by the elderly or persons with disabilities at its inception or, although not so designated, for which the PHA gives preference in tenant selection (with HUD approval) for all units in the project (or for a building within a mixed-use project) to elderly or disabled families. For purposes of this part, this term does not include projects assisted the Low-Rent Housing Homeownership Opportunity program or under title II of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
              
                Project owner means an owner (including HUD, where HUD is the owner) or manager of a project for the elderly or persons with disabilities, or an agent authorized to act for an owner or manager of such housing.
              
                Public Housing Agency (PHA) is defined in § 5.100.
              [61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.309
              Prohibition against discrimination.
              Except as otherwise specifically authorized under this subpart no project owner or PHA that owns or manages a project for the elderly or persons with disabilities may:
              (a) As a condition of tenancy or otherwise, prohibit or prevent any tenant of such housing from owning common household pets or having such pets living in the tenant's dwelling unit; or
              (b) Restrict or discriminate against any person in connection with admission to, or continued occupancy of, such housing by reason of the person's ownership of common household pets or the presence of such pets in the person's dwelling unit.
            
            
              § 5.312
              Notice to tenants.
              (a) During the development of pet rules as described in §§ 5.353 or 5.380, the project owner or PHA shall serve written notice on all tenants of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities in occupancy at the time of service, stating that:
              (1) Tenants are permitted to own and keep common household pets in their dwelling units, in accordance with the pet rules (if any) promulgated under this subpart C;
              (2) Animals that are used to assist persons with disabilities are excluded from the requirements of this subpart C, as provided in § 5.303;
              (3) Tenants may, at any time, request a copy of any current pet rule developed under this subpart C (as well as any current proposed rule or proposed amendment to an existing rule); and
              (4) Tenants may request that their leases be amended under § 5.321 to permit common household pets.

              (b) The project owner or PHA shall provide to each applicant for tenancy when he or she is offered a dwelling unit in a project for the elderly or persons with disabilities, the written notice specified in paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section.
              (c) If a PHA chooses not to promulgate pet rules, the notice shall be served within 60 days of the effective date of this part. PHAs shall serve notice under this section in accordance with their normal service of notice procedures.
            
            
              § 5.315
              Content of pet rules: General requirements.
              (a) Housing programs. The project owner shall prescribe reasonable rules to govern the keeping of common household pets. The pet rules must include the mandatory rules described in § 5.350 and may, unless otherwise noted in this subpart C, include other discretionary provisions as provided in § 5.318.
              (b) Public Housing programs. (1) PHAs may choose not to promulgate rules governing the keeping of common household pets or may include rules as provided in § 5.318. PHAs may elect to include provisions based on those in § 5.350. If they so choose, the PHAs may modify the provisions in § 5.350 in any manner consistent with this subpart C.
              (2) If PHAs choose to promulgate pet rules, tenants must be permitted to own and keep pets in their units in accordance with the terms and conditions of their leases, the provisions of this subpart C, and any applicable State or local law or regulation governing the owning or keeping of pets in dwelling accommodations.
              (3) PHAs that choose not to promulgate pet rules, shall not impose, by lease modification or otherwise, any requirement that is inconsistent with the provisions of this subpart C.
              (c) Use of discretion. (1) This subpart C does not define with specificity the limits of the project owners' or PHAs' discretion to promulgate pet rules. Where a project owner or PHA has discretion to prescribe pet rules under this subpart C, the pet rules should be:
              (i) Reasonably related to furthering a legitimate interest of the project owner or PHA, such as the owner's or PHA's interest in providing a decent, safe, and sanitary living environment for existing and prospective tenants and in protecting and preserving the physical condition of the project and the owner's or PHA's financial interest in it; and
              (ii) Drawn narrowly to achieve the owner's or PHA's legitimate interests, without imposing unnecessary burdens and restrictions on pet owners and prospective pet owners.
              (2) Where a project owner or PHA has discretion to prescribe pet rules under this subpart C, the owner or PHA may vary the rules' content among projects and within individual projects, based on factors such as the size, type, location, and occupancy of the project or its units, provided that the applicable rules are reasonable and do not conflict with any applicable State or local law or regulation governing the owning or keeping of pets in dwelling accommodations.
              (d) Conflict with State or local law. The pet rules adopted by the project owner or PHA shall not conflict with applicable State or local law or regulations. If such a conflict may exist, the State and local law or regulations shall apply.
            
            
              § 5.318
              Discretionary pet rules.
              Pet rules promulgated by project owners and PHAs may include, but are not limited to, consideration of the following factors:
              (a) Definitions of “common household pet”—(1) For Public Housing programs. The pet rules established by a PHA may contain a reasonable definition of a common household pet.
              (2) For Housing programs. Project owners wishing to define “common household pet” in their pet rules must use the Housing programs definition of the term in § 5.306.
              (b) Density of tenants and pets. (1)(i) The pet rules established under this section may take into account tenant and pet density. The pet rules may place reasonable limitations on the number of common household pets that may be allowed in each dwelling unit. In the case of group homes, the pet rules may place reasonable limitations on the number of common household pets that may be allowed in each home.
              (ii) For Housing programs. Under these rules, project owners may limit the number of four-legged, warm-blooded pets to one pet in each dwelling unit or group home.
              (iii) Other than the limitations described in this paragraph (b)(1), the pet rules may not limit the total number of pets allowed in the project.
              (2) As used in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the term “group home” means:
              (i) For purposes of Housing programs. A small, communal living arrangement designed specifically for individuals who are chronically mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically disabled who require a planned program of continual supportive services or supervision (other than continual nursing, medical or psychiatric care).
              (ii) For purposes of Public Housing programs. A dwelling or dwelling unit for the exclusive residential use of elderly persons or persons with disabilities who are not capable of living completely independently and who require a planned program of continual supportive services or supervision (other than continual nursing, medical or psychiatric care).
              (c) Pet size and pet type. The pet rules may place reasonable limitations on the size, weight, and type of common household pets allowed in the project.
              (d) Potential financial obligations of tenants—(1) Pet deposits. The pet rules may require tenants who own or keep pets in their units to pay a refundable pet deposit. In the case of project owners, this pet deposit shall be limited to those tenants who own or keep cats or dogs in their units. This deposit is in addition to any other financial obligation generally imposed on tenants of the project. The project owner or PHA may use the pet deposit only to pay reasonable expenses directly attributable to the presence of the pet in the project, including (but not limited to) the cost of repairs and replacements to, and fumigation of, the tenant's dwelling unit and, for project owners, the cost of animal care facilities under § 5.363. The project owner or PHA shall refund the unused portion of the pet deposit to the tenant within a reasonable time after the tenant moves from the project or no longer owns or keeps a pet (or a cat or dog in the case of project owners) in the dwelling unit.
              (2) Housing programs: Maximum pet deposit. (i) Pet deposits for the following tenants shall not exceed an amount periodically fixed by HUD through notice.
              (A) Tenants whose rents are subsidized (including tenants of a HUD-owned project, whose rents were subsidized before HUD acquired it) under one of the programs identified by HUD through notice.
              (B) Tenants who live in a project assisted (including tenants who live in a HUD-owned project that was assisted before HUD acquired it) under one of the programs identified by HUD through notice.
              (C) For all other tenants of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities, the pet deposit shall not exceed one month's rent at the time the pet is brought onto the premises.
              (ii) In establishing the maximum amount of pet deposit under paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section, HUD will consider factors such as:
              (A) Projected, estimated expenses directly attributable to the presence of pets in the project;
              (B) The ability of project owners to offset such expenses by use of security deposits or HUD-reimbursable expenses; and
              (C) The low income status of tenants of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities.
              (iii) For pet deposits subject to paragraph (d)(2)(i)(A) of this section, the pet rules shall provide for gradual accumulation of the deposit by the pet owner through an initial payment not to exceed $50 when the pet is brought onto the premises, and subsequent monthly payments not to exceed $10 per month until the amount of the deposit is reached.
              (iv) For pet deposits subject to paragraphs (d)(2)(i)(B) and (C) of this section, the pet rules may provide for gradual accumulation of the deposit by the pet owner.
              (v) The project owner may (subject to the HUD-prescribed limits) increase the amount of the pet deposit by amending the house pet rules in accordance with § 5.353.

              (A) For pet deposits subject to paragraph (d)(2)(i)(A) of this section, the house pet rules shall provide for gradual accumulation of any such increase not to exceed $10 per month for all deposit amounts that are being accumulated.
              (B) [Reserved]
              (vi) Any pet deposit that is established within the parameters set forth by paragraph (d)(2) of this section shall be deemed reasonable for purposes of this subpart C.
              (3) Public Housing programs: Maximum pet deposit. The maximum amount of pet deposit that may be charged by the PHA, on a per dwelling unit basis, shall not exceed the higher of the Total Tenant Payment (as defined in 24 CFR 913.102) or such reasonable fixed amount as the PHA may require. The pet rules may permit gradual accumulation of the pet deposit by the pet owner.
              (4) Housing programs: Waste removal charge. The pet rules may permit the project owner to impose a separate waste removal charge of up to five dollars ($5) per occurrence on pet owners that fail to remove pet waste in accordance with the prescribed pet rules. Any pet waste removal charge that is within this five dollar ($5) limitation shall be deemed to be a reasonable amount for the purposes of this subpart C.
              (5) The pet deposit (for Housing and Public Housing programs) and waste removal charge (for Housing programs) are not part of the rent payable by the tenant. Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section for Housing programs and, paragraph (d) of this section and 24 CFR 966.4(b) for Public Housing programs, project owners or PHAs may not prescribe pet rules that impose additional financial obligations on pet owners that are designed to compensate the project owner or PHA for costs associated with the presence of pets in the project, including (but not limited to) requiring pet owners:
              (i) To obtain liability or other insurance to cover damage caused by the pet;
              (ii) To agree to be strictly liable for all damages caused by the pet where this liability is not otherwise imposed by State or local law, or
              (iii) To indemnify the project owner for pet-related litigation and attorney's fees.
              (e) Standards of pet care. The pet rules may prescribe standards of pet care and handling, but must be limited to those necessary to protect the condition of the tenant's unit and the general condition of the project premises, or to protect the health or safety of present tenants, project employees, and the public. The pet rules may not require pet owners to have any pet's vocal cords removed. Permitted rules may:
              (1) Bar pets from specified common areas (such as lobbies, laundry rooms, and social rooms), unless the exclusion will deny a pet reasonable ingress and egress to the project or building.
              (2) Require the pet owner to control noise and odor caused by a pet.
              (3) Housing programs: Project owners may also:
              (i) Require pet owners to have their dogs and cats spayed or neutered; and
              (ii) Limit the length of time that a pet may be left unattended in a dwelling unit.
              (f) Pet licensing. The pet rules may require pet owners to license their pets in accordance with applicable State and local laws and regulations. (Failure of the pet rules to contain this requirement does not relieve the pet owner of responsibility for complying with applicable State and local pet licensing requirements.)
              (g) Public Housing programs: Designated pet areas. (1) PHAs may designate buildings, floors of buildings, or sections of buildings as no-pet areas where pets generally may not be permitted. Similarly, the pet rules may designate buildings, floors of buildings, or sections of buildings for residency generally by pet-owning tenants. The PHA may direct such initial tenant moves as may be necessary to establish pet and no-pet areas. The PHA may not refuse to admit (or delay admission of) an applicant for tenancy on the grounds that the applicant's admission would violate a pet or no-pet area. The PHA may adjust the pet and no-pet areas or may direct such additional moves as may be necessary (or both) to accommodate such applicants for tenancy or to meet the changing needs of existing tenants.

              (2) Project owners may not designate pet areas in buildings in their pet rules.
              
              (h) Pets temporarily on the premises. The pet rules may exclude from the project pets not owned by a tenant that are to be kept temporarily on the project premises. For the purposes of paragraph (h) of this section, pets are to be kept “temporarily” if they are to be kept in the tenant's dwelling accommodations for a period of less than 14 consecutive days and nights. HUD, however, encourages project owners and PHAs to permit the use of a visiting pet program sponsored by a humane society, or other nonprofit organization.
            
            
              § 5.321
              Lease provisions.
              (a) Lease provisions. (1) PHAs which have established pet rules and project owners shall ensure that the leases for all tenants of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities:
              (i) State that tenants are permitted to keep common household pets in their dwelling units (subject to the provisions of this subpart and the pet rules);
              (ii) Shall incorporate by reference the pet rules promulgated by the project owner or PHA;
              (iii) Shall provide that the tenant agrees to comply with these rules; and
              (iv) Shall state that violation of these rules may be grounds for removal of the pet or termination of the pet owner's tenancy (or both), in accordance with the provisions of this subpart and applicable regulations and State or local law.
              (2) [Reserved]
              (b) Where a PHA has not established pet rules, the leases of all tenants of such projects shall not contain any provisions prohibiting the owning or keeping of common household pets, and shall state that owning and keeping of such pets will be subject to the general obligations imposed on the PHA and tenants in the lease and any applicable State or local law or regulation governing the owning or keeping of pets in dwelling accommodations.
            
            
              § 5.324
              Implementation of lease provisions.
              The lease for each tenant of a project for the elderly or persons with disabilities who is admitted on or after the date on which this subpart C is implemented shall contain the lease provisions described in § 5.321 and, if applicable, § 5.360. The lease for each tenant who occupies a unit in such a project under lease on the date of implementation of this part shall be amended to include the provisions described in § 5.321 and, if applicable, § 5.360:
              (a) For Housing programs:
              (1) Upon renewal of the lease and in accordance with any applicable regulation; and
              (2) When a Housing program tenant registers a common household pet under § 5.350
              (b) For Public Housing programs:
              (1) Upon annual reexamination of tenant income in accordance with any applicable regulation; and
              (2) When a Public Housing program tenant wishes to own or keep a common household pet in his or her unit.
            
            
              § 5.327
              Nuisance or threat to health or safety.
              Nothing in this subpart C prohibits a project owner, PHA, or an appropriate community authority from requiring the removal of any pet from a project, if the pet's conduct or condition is duly determined to constitute, under the provisions of State or local law, a nuisance or a threat to the health or safety of other occupants of the project or of other persons in the community where the project is located.
            
          
          
            Pet Ownership Requirements for Housing Programs
            
              § 5.350
              Mandatory pet rules for housing programs.
              
                Mandatory rules. The project owner must prescribe the following pet rules:
              (a) Inoculations. The pet rules shall require pet owners to have their pets inoculated in accordance with State and local laws.
              (b) Sanitary standards. (1) The pet rules shall prescribe sanitary standards to govern the disposal of pet waste. These rules may:
              (i) Designate areas on the project premises for pet exercise and the deposit of pet waste;

              (ii) Forbid pet owners from exercising their pets or permitting their pets to deposit waste on the project premises outside the designated areas;
              
              (iii) Require pet owners to remove and properly dispose of all removable pet waste; and
              (iv) Require pet owners to remove pets from the premises to permit the pet to exercise or deposit waste, if no area in the project is designated for such purposes.
              (2) In the case of cats and other pets using litter boxes, the pet rules may require the pet owner to change the litter (but not more than twice each week), may require pet owners to separate pet waste from litter (but not more than once each day), and may prescribe methods for the disposal of pet waste and used litter.
              (c) Pet restraint. The pet rules shall require that all cats and dogs be appropriately and effectively restrained and under the control of a responsible individual while on the common areas of the project.
              (d) Registration. (1) The pet rules shall require pet owners to register their pets with the project owner. The pet owner must register the pet before it is brought onto the project premises, and must update the registration at least annually. The project owner may coordinate the annual update with the annual reexamination of tenant income, if applicable. The registration must include:
              (i) A certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or a State or local authority empowered to inoculate animals (or designated agent of such an authority) stating that the pet has received all inoculations required by applicable State and local law;
              (ii) Information sufficient to identify the pet and to demonstrate that it is a common household pet; and
              (iii) The name, address, and phone number of one or more responsible parties who will care for the pet if the pet owner dies, is incapacitated, or is otherwise unable to care for the pet.
              (2) The project owner may require the pet owner to provide additional information necessary to ensure compliance with any discretionary rules prescribed under § 5.318, and shall require the pet owner to sign a statement indicating that he or she has read the pet rules and agrees to comply with them.
              (3) The pet rules shall permit the project owner to refuse to register a pet if:
              (i) The pet is not a common household pet;
              (ii) The keeping of the pet would violate any applicable house pet rule;
              (iii) The pet owner fails to provide complete pet registration information or fails annually to update the pet registration; or
              (iv) The project owner reasonably determines, based on the pet owner's habits and practices, that the pet owner will be unable to keep the pet in compliance with the pet rules and other lease obligations. The pet's temperament may be considered as a factor in determining the prospective pet owner's ability to comply with the pet rules and other lease obligations.
              (4) The project owner may not refuse to register a pet based on a determination that the pet owner is financially unable to care for the pet or that the pet is inappropriate, based on the therapeutic value to the pet owner or the interests of the property or existing tenants.
              (5) The pet rules shall require the project owner to notify the pet owner if the project owner refuses to register a pet. The notice shall state the basis for the project owner's action and shall be served on the pet owner in accordance with the requirements of § 5.353(f)(1)(i) or (ii). The notice of refusal to register a pet may be combined with a notice of pet violation as required in § 5.356.
            
            
              § 5.353
              Housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.
              (a) General. Project owners shall use the procedures specified in this section to promulgate the pet rules referred to in §§ 5.318 and 5.350.
              (b) Development and notice of proposed pet rules. Project owners shall develop proposed rules to govern the owning or keeping of common household pets in projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities. Notice of the proposed pet rules shall be served on each tenant of the project as provided in paragraph (f) of this section. The notice shall:
              (1) Include the text of the proposed rules;
              
              (2) State that tenants or tenant representatives may submit written comments on the rules; and
              (3) State that all comments must be submitted to the project owner no later than 30 days from the effective date of the notice of the proposed rules.
              (4) The notice may also announce the date, time, and place for a meeting to discuss the proposed rules (as provided in paragraph (c) of this section).
              (c) Tenant consultation. Tenants or tenant representatives may submit written comments on the proposed pet rules to the project owner by the date specified in the notice of proposed rules. In addition, the owner may schedule one or more meetings with tenants during the comment period to discuss the proposed rules. Tenants and tenant representatives may make oral comments on the proposed rules at these meetings. The project owner must consider comments made at these meetings only if they are summarized, reduced to writing, and submitted to the project owner before the end of the comment period.
              (d) Development and notice of final pet rules. The project owner shall develop the final rules after reviewing tenants' written comments and written summaries of any owner-tenant meetings. The project owner may meet with tenants and tenant representatives to attempt to resolve issues raised by the comments. Subject to this subpart C, the content of the final pet rules, however, is within the sole discretion of the project owner. The project owner shall serve on each tenant of the project, a notice of the final pet rules as provided in paragraph (f) of this section. The notice must include the text of the final pet rules and must specify the effective date of the final pet rules.
              (e) Amendment of pet rules. The project owner may amend the pet rules at any time by following the procedure for the development of pet rules specified in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section.
              (f) Service of notice. (1) The project owner must serve the notice required under this section by:
              (i) Sending a letter by first class mail, properly stamped and addressed to the tenant at the dwelling unit, with a proper return address; or
              (ii) Serving a copy of the notice on any adult answering the door at the tenant's leased dwelling unit, or if no adult responds, by placing the notice under or through the door, if possible, or else by attaching the notice to the door; or
              (iii) For service of notice to tenants of a high-rise building, posting the notice in at least three conspicuous places within the building and maintaining the posted notices intact and in legible form for 30 days. For purposes of paragraph (f) of this section, a high-rise building is a structure that is equipped with an elevator and has a common lobby.
              (2) For purposes of computing time periods following service of the notice, service is effective on the day that all notices are delivered or mailed, or in the case of service by posting, on the day that all notices are initially posted.
            
            
              § 5.356
              Housing programs: Pet rule violation procedures.
              (a) Notice of pet rule violation. If a project owner determines on the basis of objective facts, supported by written statements, that a pet owner has violated a rule governing the owning or keeping of pets; the project owner may serve a written notice of pet rule violation on the pet owner in accordance with § 5.353(f)(1)(i) or (ii). The notice of pet rule violation must:
              (1) Contain a brief statement of the factual basis for the determination and the pet rule or rules alleged to be violated;
              (2) State that the pet owner has 10 days from the effective date of service of the notice to correct the violation (including, in appropriate circumstances, removal of the pet) or to make a written request for a meeting to discuss the violation;
              (3) State that the pet owner is entitled to be accompanied by another person of his or her choice at the meeting; and

              (4) State that the pet owner's failure to correct the violation, to request a meeting, or to appear at a requested meeting may result in initiation of procedures to terminate the pet owner's tenancy.
              
              (b)(1) Pet rule violation meeting. If the pet owner makes a timely request for a meeting to discuss an alleged pet rule violation, the project owner shall establish a mutually agreeable time and place for the meeting but no later than 15 days from the effective date of service of the notice of pet rule violation (unless the project owner agrees to a later date). At the pet rule violation meeting, the pet owner and project owner shall discuss any alleged pet rule violation and attempt to correct it. The project owner may, as a result of the meeting, give the pet owner additional time to correct the violation.
              (2) Notice for pet removal. If the pet owner and project owner are unable to resolve the pet rule violation at the pet rule violation meeting, or if the project owner determines that the pet owner has failed to correct the pet rule violation within any additional time provided for this purpose under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the project owner may serve a written notice on the pet owner in accordance with § 5.353(f)(1) (i) or (ii) (or at the meeting, if appropriate), requiring the pet owner to remove the pet. The notice must:
              (i) Contain a brief statement of the factual basis for the determination and the pet rule or rules that have been violated;
              (ii) State that the pet owner must remove the pet within 10 days of the effective date of service of the notice of pet removal (or the meeting, if notice is served at the meeting); and
              (iii) State that failure to remove the pet may result in initiation of procedures to terminate the pet owner's tenancy.
              (c) Initiation of procedures to remove a pet or terminate the pet owner's tenancy. (1) The project owner may not initiate procedures to terminate a pet owner's tenancy based on a pet rule violation, unless:
              (i) The pet owner has failed to remove the pet or correct a pet rule violation within the applicable time period specified in this section (including any additional time permitted by the owner); and
              (ii) The pet rule violation is sufficient to begin procedures to terminate the pet owner's tenancy under the terms of the lease and applicable regulations.
              (2) The project owner may initiate procedures to remove a pet under § 5.327 at any time, in accordance with the provisions of applicable State or local law.
            
            
              § 5.359
              Housing programs: Rejection of units by applicants for tenancy.
              (a) An applicant for tenancy in a project for the elderly or persons with disabilities may reject a unit offered by a project owner if the unit is in close proximity to a dwelling unit in which an existing tenant of the project owns or keeps a common household pet. An applicant's rejection of a unit under this section shall not adversely affect his or her application for tenancy in the project, including (but not limited to) his or her position on the project waiting list or qualification for any tenant selection preference.
              (b) Nothing in this subpart C imposes a duty on project owners to provide alternate dwelling units to existing or prospective tenants because of the proximity of common household pets to a particular unit or the presence of such pets in the project.
            
            
              § 5.360
              Housing programs: Additional lease provisions.
              (a) Inspections. In addition to other inspections permitted under the lease, the leases for all Housing program tenants of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities may state that the project owner may, after reasonable notice to the tenant and during reasonable hours, enter and inspect the premises. The lease shall permit entry and inspection only if the project owner has received a signed, written complaint alleging (or the project owner has reasonable grounds to believe) that the conduct or condition of a pet in the dwelling unit constitutes, under applicable State or local law, a nuisance or a threat to the health or safety of the occupants of the project or other persons in the community where the project is located.
              (b) Emergencies. (1) If there is no State or local authority (or designated agent of such an authority) authorized under applicable State or local law to remove a pet that becomes vicious, displays symptoms of severe illness, or demonstrates other behavior that constitutes an immediate threat to the health or safety of the tenancy as a whole, the project owner may place a provision in tenant leases permitting the project owner to enter the premises (if necessary), remove the pet, and take such action with respect to the pet as may be permissible under State and local law, which may include placing it in a facility that will provide care and shelter for a period not to exceed 30 days.
              (2) The lease shall permit the project owner to enter the premises and remove the pet or take such other permissible action only if the project owner requests the pet owner to remove the pet from the project immediately, and the pet owner refuses to do so, or if the project owner is unable to contact the pet owner to make a removal request. The lease may not contain a provision relieving the project owner from liability for wrongful removal of a pet. The cost of the animal care facility shall be paid as provided in § 5.363.
              (3) The project owner may place a provision in tenant leases permitting the project owner to enter the premises, remove the pet, and place the pet in a facility that will provide care and shelter, in accordance with the provisions of § 5.363. The lease may not contain a provision relieving the project owner from liability for wrongful removal of a pet.
            
            
              § 5.363
              Housing programs: Protection of the pet.
              (a) If the health or safety of a pet is threatened by the death or incapacity of the pet owner, or by other factors that render the pet owner unable to care for the pet, the project owner may contact the responsible party or parties listed in the pet registration required under § 5.350(d)(1)(iii).
              (b) If the responsible party or parties are unwilling or unable to care for the pet, or the project owner, despite reasonable efforts, has been unable to contact the responsible party or parties, the project owner may contact the appropriate State or local authority (or designated agent of such an authority) and request the removal of the pet.
              (c) If there is no State or local authority (or designated agent of such an authority) authorized to remove a pet under these circumstances and the project owner has placed a provision in the lease agreement (as described in § 5.360(c)(2)), the project owner may enter the pet owner's unit, remove the pet, and place the pet in a facility that will provide care and shelter until the pet owner or a representative of the pet owner is able to assume responsibility for the pet, but not longer than 30 days.
              (d) The cost of the animal care facility provided under this section shall be borne by the pet owner. If the pet owner (or the pet owner's estate) is unable or unwilling to pay, the cost of the animal care facility may be paid from the pet deposit, if imposed under the pet rules.
            
          
          
            Pet Ownership Requirements for Public Housing Programs
            
              § 5.380
              Public housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.
              PHAs that choose to promulgate pet rules shall consult with tenants of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities administered by them with respect to their promulgation and subsequent amendment. PHAs shall develop the specific procedures governing tenant consultation, but these procedures must be designed to give tenants (or, if appropriate, tenant councils) adequate opportunity to review and comment upon the pet rules before they are issued for effect. PHAs are solely responsible for the content of final pet rules, but must give consideration to tenant comments. PHAs shall send to the responsible HUD field office, copies of the final (or amended) pet rules, as well as summaries or copies of all tenant comments received in the course of the tenant consultation.
            
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Definitions for Section 8 and Public Housing Assistance Under the United States Housing Act of 1937
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 1437a and 3535(d).
          
          
            
            Source:
            61 FR 5665, Feb. 13, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5.400
            Applicability.
            This part applies to public housing and Section 8 programs.
            [61 FR 5665, Feb. 13, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000]
          
          
            § 5.403
            Definitions.
            
              Annual contributions contract (ACC) means the written contract between HUD and a PHA under which HUD agrees to provide funding for a program under the 1937 Act, and the PHA agrees to comply with HUD requirements for the program.
            
              Applicant means a person or a family that has applied for housing assistance.
            
              Disabled family means a family whose head (including co-head), spouse, or sole member is a person with a disability. It may include two or more persons with disabilities living together, or one or more persons with disabilities living with one or more live-in aides.
            
              Displaced family means a family in which each member, or whose sole member, is a person displaced by governmental action, or a person whose dwelling has been extensively damaged or destroyed as a result of a disaster declared or otherwise formally recognized pursuant to Federal disaster relief
            
              Elderly family means a family whose head (including co-head), spouse, or sole member is a person who is at least 62 years of age. It may include two or more persons who are at least 62 years of age living together, or one or more persons who are at least 62 years of age living with one or more live-in aides.
            
              Family includes, but is not limited to, the following, regardless of actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status:
            (1) A single person, who may be an elderly person, displaced person, disabled person, near-elderly person, or any other single person; or
            (2) A group of persons residing together, and such group includes, but is not limited to:
            (i) A family with or without children (a child who is temporarily away from the home because of placement in foster care is considered a member of the family);
            (ii) An elderly family;
            (iii) A near-elderly family;
            (iv) A disabled family;
            (v) A displaced family; and
            (vi) The remaining member of a tenant family.
            
              Live-in aide means a person who resides with one or more elderly persons, or near-elderly persons, or persons with disabilities, and who:
            (1) Is determined to be essential to the care and well-being of the persons;
            (2) Is not obligated for the support of the persons; and
            (3) Would not be living in the unit except to provide the necessary supportive services.
            
              Near-elderly family means a family whose head (including co-head), spouse, or sole member is a person who is at least 50 years of age but below the age of 62; or two or more persons, who are at least 50 years of age but below the age of 62, living together; or one or more persons who are at least 50 years of age but below the age of 62, living with one or more live-in aides.
            
              Person with disabilities:
            
            (1) Means a person who:
            (i) Has a disability, as defined in 42 U.S.C. 423;
            (ii) Is determined, pursuant to HUD regulations, to have a physical, mental, or emotional impairment that:
            (A) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration;
            (B) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently, and
            (C) Is of such a nature that the ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable housing conditions; or
            (iii) Has a developmental disability as defined in 42 U.S.C. 6001.
            (2) Does not exclude persons who have the disease of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or any conditions arising from the etiologic agent for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome;
            (3) For purposes of qualifying for low-income housing, does not include a person whose disability is based solely on any drug or alcohol dependence; and

            (4) Means “individual with handicaps”, as defined in § 8.3 of this title, for purposes of reasonable accommodation and program accessibility for persons with disabilities.
            [61 FR 5665, Feb. 13, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998; 65 FR 16715, Mar. 29, 2000; 77 FR 5674, Feb. 3, 2012]
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Restrictions on Assistance to Noncitizens
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 1436a and 3535(d).
          
          
            § 5.500
            Applicability.
            (a) Covered programs/assistance. This subpart E implements Section 214 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1436a). Section 214 prohibits HUD from making financial assistance available to persons who are not in eligible status with respect to citizenship or noncitizen immigration status. This subpart E is applicable to financial assistance provided under:
            (1) Section 235 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z) (the Section 235 Program);
            (2) Section 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-1) (tenants paying below market rent only) (the Section 236 Program);
            (3) Section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (12 U.S.C. 1701s) (the Rent Supplement Program); and

            (4) The United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S. C. 1437 et seq.) which covers:
            (i) HUD's Public Housing Programs;
            (ii) The Section 8 Housing Assistance Programs; and
            (iii) The Housing Development Grant Programs (with respect to low income units only).
            (b) Covered individuals and entities—(1) Covered individuals/persons and families. The provisions of this subpart E apply to both applicants for assistance and persons already receiving assistance covered under this subpart E.
            (2) Covered entities. The provisions of this subpart E apply to Public Housing Agencies (PHAs), project (or housing) owners, and mortgagees under the Section 235 Program. The term “responsible entity” is used in this subpart E to refer collectively to these entities, and is further defined in § 5.504.
          
          
            § 5.502
            Requirements concerning documents.
            For any notice or document (decision, declaration, consent form, etc.) that this subpart E requires the responsible entity to provide to an individual, or requires the responsible entity to obtain the signature of an individual, the responsible entity, where feasible, must arrange for the notice or document to be provided to the individual in a language that is understood by the individual if the individual is not proficient in English. (See 24 CFR 8.6 of HUD's regulations for requirements concerning communications with persons with disabilities.)
          
          
            § 5.504
            Definitions.
            (a) The definitions 1937 Act, HUD, Public Housing Agency (PHA), and Section 8 are defined in subpart A of this part.
            (b) As used in this subpart E:
            
              Child means a member of the family other than the family head or spouse who is under 18 years of age.
            
              Citizen means a citizen or national of the United States.
            
              Evidence of citizenship or eligible status means the documents which must be submitted to evidence citizenship or eligible immigration status. (See § 5.508(b).)
            
              Family has the same meaning as provided in the program regulations of the relevant Section 214 covered program.
            
              Head of household means the adult member of the family who is the head of the household for purposes of determining income eligibility and rent.
            
              Housing covered programs means the following programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for Housing:
            (1) Section 235 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z) (the Section 235 Program);
            (2) Section 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-1) (tenants paying below market rent only) (the Section 236 Program); and
            (3) Section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (12 U.S.C. 1701s) (the Rent Supplement Program).
            
              INS means the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service.
            
              Mixed family means a family whose members include those with citizenship or eligible immigration status, and those without citizenship or eligible immigration status.
            
              National means a person who owes permanent allegiance to the United States, for example, as a result of birth in a United States territory or possession.
            
              Noncitizen means a person who is neither a citizen nor national of the United States.
            
              Project owner means the person or entity that owns the housing project containing the assisted dwelling unit.
            
              Public Housing covered programs means the public housing programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing under title I of the 1937 Act. This definition does not encompass HUD's Indian Housing programs administered under title II of the 1937 Act. Further, this term does not include those programs providing assistance under section 8 of the 1937 Act. (See definition of “Section 8 Covered Programs” in this section.)
            
              Responsible entity means the person or entity responsible for administering the restrictions on providing assistance to noncitizens with ineligible immigrations status. The entity responsible for administering the restrictions on providing assistance to noncitizens with ineligible immigration status under the various covered programs is as follows:
            (1) For the Section 235 Program, the mortgagee.
            (2) For Public Housing, the Section 8 Rental Certificate, the Section 8 Rental Voucher, and the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation programs, the PHA administering the program under an ACC with HUD.
            (3) For all other Section 8 programs, the Section 236 Program, and the Rent Supplement Program, the owner.
            
              Section 8 covered programs means all HUD programs which assist housing under Section 8 of the 1937 Act, including Section 8-assisted housing for which loans are made under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959.
            
              Section 214 means section 214 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1436a).
            
              Section 214 covered programs is the collective term for the HUD programs to which the restrictions imposed by Section 214 apply. These programs are set forth in § 5.500.
            
              Tenant means an individual or a family renting or occupying an assisted dwelling unit. For purposes of this subpart E, the term tenant will also be used to include a homebuyer, where appropriate.
          
          
            § 5.506
            General provisions.
            (a) Restrictions on assistance. Financial assistance under a Section 214 covered program is restricted to:
            (1) Citizens; or
            (2) Noncitizens who have eligible immigration status under one of the categories set forth in Section 214 (see 42 U.S.C. 1436a(a)).
            (b) Family eligibility for assistance. (1) A family shall not be eligible for assistance unless every member of the family residing in the unit is determined to have eligible status, as described in paragraph (a) of this section, or unless the family meets the conditions set forth in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
            (2) Despite the ineligibility of one or more family members, a mixed family may be eligible for one of the three types of assistance provided in §§ 5.516 and 5.518. A family without any eligible members and receiving assistance on June 19, 1995 may be eligible for temporary deferral of termination of assistance as provided in §§ 5.516 and 5.518.
            (c) Preferences. Citizens of the Republic of Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau who are eligible for assistance under paragraph (a)(2) of this section are entitled to receive local preferences for housing assistance, except that, within Guam, such citizens who have such local preference will not be entitled to housing assistance in preference to any United States citizen or national resident therein who is otherwise eligible for such assistance.
            [61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 65273, Oct. 23, 2002]
          
          
            
            § 5.508
            Submission of evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status.
            (a) General. Eligibility for assistance or continued assistance under a Section 214 covered program is contingent upon a family's submission to the responsible entity of the documents described in paragraph (b) of this section for each family member. If one or more family members do not have citizenship or eligible immigration status, the family members may exercise the election not to contend to have eligible immigration status as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, and the provisions of §§ 5.516 and 5.518 shall apply.
            (b) Evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status. Each family member, regardless of age, must submit the following evidence to the responsible entity.
            (1) For U.S. citizens or U.S. nationals, the evidence consists of a signed declaration of U.S. citizenship or U.S. nationality. The responsible entity may request verification of the declaration by requiring presentation of a United States passport or other appropriate documentation, as specified in HUD guidance.
            (2) For noncitizens who are 62 years of age or older or who will be 62 years of age or older and receiving assistance under a Section 214 covered program on September 30, 1996 or applying for assistance on or after that date, the evidence consists of:
            (i) A signed declaration of eligible immigration status; and
            (ii) Proof of age document.
            (3) For all other noncitizens, the evidence consists of:
            (i) A signed declaration of eligible immigration status;
            (ii) One of the INS documents referred to in § 5.510; and
            (iii) A signed verification consent form.
            (c) Declaration. (1) For each family member who contends that he or she is a U.S. citizen or a noncitizen with eligible immigration status, the family must submit to the responsible entity a written declaration, signed under penalty of perjury, by which the family member declares whether he or she is a U.S. citizen or a noncitizen with eligible immigration status.
            (i) For each adult, the declaration must be signed by the adult.
            (ii) For each child, the declaration must be signed by an adult residing in the assisted dwelling unit who is responsible for the child.
            (2) For Housing covered programs: The written declaration may be incorporated as part of the application for housing assistance or may constitute a separate document.
            (d) Verification consent form—(1) Who signs. Each noncitizen who declares eligible immigration status (except certain noncitizens who are 62 years of age or older as described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section) must sign a verification consent form as follows.
            (i) For each adult, the form must be signed by the adult.
            (ii) For each child, the form must be signed by an adult residing in the assisted dwelling unit who is responsible for the child.
            (2) Notice of release of evidence by responsible entity. The verification consent form shall provide that evidence of eligible immigration status may be released by the responsible entity without responsibility for the further use or transmission of the evidence by the entity receiving it, to:
            (i) HUD, as required by HUD; and
            (ii) The INS for purposes of verification of the immigration status of the individual.
            (3) Notice of release of evidence by HUD. The verification consent form also shall notify the individual of the possible release of evidence of eligible immigration status by HUD. Evidence of eligible immigration status shall only be released to the INS for purposes of establishing eligibility for financial assistance and not for any other purpose. HUD is not responsible for the further use or transmission of the evidence or other information by the INS.
            (e) Individuals who do not contend that they have eligible status. If one or more members of a family elect not to contend that they have eligible immigration status, and other members of the family establish their citizenship or eligible immigration status, the family may be eligible for assistance under §§ 5.516 and 5.518, or § 5.520, despite the fact that no declaration or documentation of eligible status is submitted for one or more members of the family. The family, however, must identify in writing to the responsible entity, the family member (or members) who will elect not to contend that he or she has eligible immigration status.
            (f) Notification of requirements of Section 214—(1) When notice is to be issued. Notification of the requirement to submit evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status, as required by this section, or to elect not to contend that one has eligible status as provided by paragraph (e) of this section, shall be given by the responsible entity as follows:
            (i) Applicant's notice. The notification described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section shall be given to each applicant at the time of application for assistance. Applicants whose applications are pending on June 19, 1995, shall be notified of the requirement to submit evidence of eligible status as soon as possible after June 19, 1995.
            (ii) Notice to tenants. The notification described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section shall be given to each tenant at the time of, and together with, the responsible entity's notice of regular reexamination of income, but not later than one year following June 19, 1995.
            (iii) Timing of mortgagor's notice. A mortgagor receiving Section 235 assistance must be provided the notification described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section and any additional requirements imposed under the Section 235 Program.
            (2) Form and content of notice. The notice shall:
            (i) State that financial assistance is contingent upon the submission and verification, as appropriate, of evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status as required by paragraph (a) of this section;
            (ii) Describe the type of evidence that must be submitted, and state the time period in which that evidence must be submitted (see paragraph (g) of this section concerning when evidence must be submitted); and
            (iii) State that assistance will be prorated, denied or terminated, as appropriate, upon a final determination of ineligibility after all appeals have been exhausted (see § 5.514 concerning INS appeal, and informal hearing process) or, if appeals are not pursued, at a time to be specified in accordance with HUD requirements. Tenants also shall be informed of how to obtain assistance under the preservation of families provisions of §§ 5.516 and 5.518.
            (g) When evidence of eligible status is required to be submitted. The responsible entity shall require evidence of eligible status to be submitted at the times specified in paragraph (g) of this section, subject to any extension granted in accordance with paragraph (h) of this section.
            (1) Applicants. For applicants, responsible entities must ensure that evidence of eligible status is submitted not later than the date the responsible entity anticipates or has knowledge that verification of other aspects of eligibility for assistance will occur (see § 5.512(a)).
            (2) Tenants. For tenants, evidence of eligible status is required to be submitted as follows:
            (i) For financial assistance under a Section 214 covered program, with the exception of Section 235 assistance payments, the required evidence shall be submitted at the first regular reexamination after June 19, 1995, in accordance with program requirements.
            (ii) For financial assistance in the form of Section 235 assistance payments, the mortgagor shall submit the required evidence in accordance with requirements imposed under the Section 235 Program.
            (3) New occupants of assisted units. For any new occupant of an assisted unit (e.g., a new family member comes to reside in the assisted unit), the required evidence shall be submitted at the first interim or regular reexamination following the person's occupancy.
            (4) Changing participation in a HUD program. Whenever a family applies for admission to a Section 214 covered program, evidence of eligible status is required to be submitted in accordance with the requirements of this subpart unless the family already has submitted the evidence to the responsible entity for a Section 214 covered program.
            (5) One-time evidence requirement for continuous occupancy. For each family member, the family is required to submit evidence of eligible status only one time during continuously assisted occupancy under any Section 214 covered program.
            (h) Extensions of time to submit evidence of eligible status—(1) When extension must be granted. The responsible entity shall extend the time, provided in paragraph (g) of this section, to submit evidence of eligible immigration status if the family member:
            (i) Submits the declaration required under § 5.508(a) certifying that any person for whom required evidence has not been submitted is a noncitizen with eligible immigration status; and
            (ii) Certifies that the evidence needed to support a claim of eligible immigration status is temporarily unavailable, additional time is needed to obtain and submit the evidence, and prompt and diligent efforts will be undertaken to obtain the evidence.
            (2) Thirty-day extension period. Any extension of time, if granted, shall not exceed thirty (30) days. The additional time provided should be sufficient to allow the individual the time to obtain the evidence needed. The responsible entity's determination of the length of the extension needed shall be based on the circumstances of the individual case.
            (3) Grant or denial of extension to be in writing. The responsible entity's decision to grant or deny an extension as provided in paragraph (h)(1) of this section shall be issued to the family by written notice. If the extension is granted, the notice shall specify the extension period granted (which shall not exceed thirty (30) days). If the extension is denied, the notice shall explain the reasons for denial of the extension.
            (i) Failure to submit evidence or to establish eligible status. If the family fails to submit required evidence of eligible immigration status within the time period specified in the notice, or any extension granted in accordance with paragraph (h) of this section, or if the evidence is timely submitted but fails to establish eligible immigration status, the responsible entity shall proceed to deny, prorate or terminate assistance, or provide continued assistance or temporary deferral of termination of assistance, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of §§ 5.514, 5.516, and 5.518.
            (ii) [Reserved]
            [61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60538, Nov. 29, 1996; 64 FR 25731, May 12, 1999]
          
          
            § 5.510
            Documents of eligible immigration status.
            (a) General. A responsible entity shall request and review original documents of eligible immigration status. The responsible entity shall retain photocopies of the documents for its own records and return the original documents to the family.
            (b) Acceptable evidence of eligible immigration status. Acceptable evidence of eligible immigration status shall be the original of a document designated by INS as acceptable evidence of immigration status in one of the six categories mentioned in § 5.506(a) for the specific immigration status claimed by the individual.
            [61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996; 64 FR 25731, May 12, 1999]
          
          
            § 5.512
            Verification of eligible immigration status.
            (a) General. Except as described in paragraph (b) of this section and § 5.514, no individual or family applying for assistance may receive such assistance prior to the verification of the eligibility of at least the individual or one family member. Verification of eligibility consistent with § 5.514 occurs when the individual or family members have submitted documentation to the responsible entity in accordance with § 5.508.
            (b) PHA election to provide assistance before verification. A PHA that is a responsible entity under this subpart may elect to provide assistance to a family before the verification of the eligibility of the individual or one family member.
            (c) Primary verification—(1) Automated verification system. Primary verification of the immigration status of the person is conducted by the responsible entity through the INS automated system (INS Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE)). The INS SAVE system provides access to names, file numbers and admission numbers of noncitizens.
            (2) Failure of primary verification to confirm eligible immigration status. If the INS SAVE system does not verify eligible immigration status, secondary verification must be performed.
            (d) Secondary verification—(1) Manual search of INS records. Secondary verification is a manual search by the INS of its records to determine an individual's immigration status. The responsible entity must request secondary verification, within 10 days of receiving the results of the primary verification, if the primary verification system does not confirm eligible immigration status, or if the primary verification system verifies immigration status that is ineligible for assistance under a Section 214 covered program.
            (2) Secondary verification initiated by responsible entity. Secondary verification is initiated by the responsible entity forwarding photocopies of the original INS documents required for the immigration status declared (front and back), attached to the INS document verification request form G-845S (Document Verification Request), or such other form specified by the INS to a designated INS office for review. (Form G-845S is available from the local INS Office.)
            (3) Failure of secondary verification to confirm eligible immigration status. If the secondary verification does not confirm eligible immigration status, the responsible entity shall issue to the family the notice described in § 5.514(d), which includes notification of the right to appeal to the INS of the INS finding on immigration status (see § 5.514(d)(4)).
            (e) Exemption from liability for INS verification. The responsible entity shall not be liable for any action, delay, or failure of the INS in conducting the automated or manual verification.
            [61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996; 64 FR 25731, May 12, 1999]
          
          
            § 5.514
            Delay, denial, reduction or termination of assistance.
            (a) General. Assistance to a family may not be delayed, denied, reduced or terminated because of the immigration status of a family member except as provided in this section.
            (b) Restrictions on delay, denial, reduction or termination of assistance—(1) Restrictions on reduction, denial or termination of assistance for applicants and tenants. Assistance to an applicant or tenant shall not be delayed, denied, reduced, or terminated, on the basis of ineligible immigration status of a family member if:
            (i) The primary and secondary verification of any immigration documents that were timely submitted has not been completed;
            (ii) The family member for whom required evidence has not been submitted has moved from the assisted dwelling unit;
            (iii) The family member who is determined not to be in an eligible immigration status following INS verification has moved from the assisted dwelling unit;
            (iv) The INS appeals process under § 5.514(e) has not been concluded;
            (v) Assistance is prorated in accordance with § 5.520; or
            (vi) Assistance for a mixed family is continued in accordance with §§ 5.516 and 5.518; or
            (vii) Deferral of termination of assistance is granted in accordance with §§ 5.516 and 5.518.
            (2) Restrictions on delay, denial, reduction or termination of assistance pending fair hearing for tenants. In addition to the factors listed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, assistance to a tenant cannot be delayed, denied, reduced or terminated until the completion of the informal hearing described in paragraph (f) of this section.
            (c) Events causing denial or termination of assistance—(1) General. Assistance to an applicant shall be denied, and a tenant's assistance shall be terminated, in accordance with the procedures of this section, upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
            (i) Evidence of citizenship (i.e., the declaration) and eligible immigration status is not submitted by the date specified in § 5.508(g) or by the expiration of any extension granted in accordance with § 5.508(h);

            (ii) Evidence of citizenship and eligible immigration status is timely submitted, but INS primary and secondary verification does not verify eligible immigration status of a family member; and
            (A) The family does not pursue INS appeal or informal hearing rights as provided in this section; or
            (B) INS appeal and informal hearing rights are pursued, but the final appeal or hearing decisions are decided against the family member; or
            (iii) The responsible entity determines that a family member has knowingly permitted another individual who is not eligible for assistance to reside (on a permanent basis) in the public or assisted housing unit of the family member. Such termination shall be for a period of not less than 24 months. This provision does not apply to a family if the ineligibility of the ineligible individual was considered in calculating any proration of assistance provided for the family.
            (2) Termination of assisted occupancy. For termination of assisted occupancy, see paragraph (i) of this section.
            (d) Notice of denial or termination of assistance. The notice of denial or termination of assistance shall advise the family:
            (1) That financial assistance will be denied or terminated, and provide a brief explanation of the reasons for the proposed denial or termination of assistance;
            (2) That the family may be eligible for proration of assistance as provided under § 5.520;
            (3) In the case of a tenant, the criteria and procedures for obtaining relief under the provisions for preservation of families in §§ 5.514 and 5.518;
            (4) That the family has a right to request an appeal to the INS of the results of secondary verification of immigration status and to submit additional documentation or a written explanation in support of the appeal in accordance with the procedures of paragraph (e) of this section;
            (5) That the family has a right to request an informal hearing with the responsible entity either upon completion of the INS appeal or in lieu of the INS appeal as provided in paragraph (f) of this section;
            (6) For applicants, the notice shall advise that assistance may not be delayed until the conclusion of the INS appeal process, but assistance may be delayed during the pendency of the informal hearing process.
            (e) Appeal to the INS—(1) Submission of request for appeal. Upon receipt of notification by the responsible entity that INS secondary verification failed to confirm eligible immigration status, the responsible entity shall notify the family of the results of the INS verification, and the family shall have 30 days from the date of the responsible entity's notification, to request an appeal of the INS results. The request for appeal shall be made by the family communicating that request in writing directly to the INS. The family must provide the responsible entity with a copy of the written request for appeal and proof of mailing.
            (2) Documentation to be submitted as part of appeal to INS. The family shall forward to the designated INS office any additional documentation or written explanation in support of the appeal. This material must include a copy of the INS document verification request form G-845S (used to process the secondary verification request) or such other form specified by the INS, and a cover letter indicating that the family is requesting an appeal of the INS immigration status verification results.
            (3) Decision by INS—(i) When decision will be issued. The INS will issue to the family, with a copy to the responsible entity, a decision within 30 days of its receipt of documentation concerning the family's appeal of the verification of immigration status. If, for any reason, the INS is unable to issue a decision within the 30 day time period, the INS will inform the family and responsible entity of the reasons for the delay.
            (ii) Notification of INS decision and of informal hearing procedures. When the responsible entity receives a copy of the INS decision, the responsible entity shall notify the family of its right to request an informal hearing on the responsible entity's ineligibility determination in accordance with the procedures of paragraph (f) of this section.
            (4) No delay, denial, reduction, or termination of assistance until completion of INS appeal process; direct appeal to INS.
              Pending the completion of the INS appeal under this section, assistance may not be delayed, denied, reduced or terminated on the basis of immigration status.
            (f) Informal hearing—(1) When request for hearing is to be made. After notification of the INS decision on appeal, or in lieu of request of appeal to the INS, the family may request that the responsible entity provide a hearing. This request must be made either within 30 days of receipt of the notice described in paragraph (d) of this section, or within 30 days of receipt of the INS appeal decision issued in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.
            (2) Informal hearing procedures—(i) Tenants assisted under a Section 8 covered program: For tenants assisted under a Section 8 covered program, the procedures for the hearing before the responsible entity are set forth in:
            (A) For Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation assistance: 24 CFR part 882;
            (B) For Section 8 tenant-based assistance: 24 CFR part 982; or
            (C) For Section 8 project-based certificate program: 24 CFR part 983.
            (ii) Tenants assisted under any other Section 8 covered program or a Public Housing covered program: For tenants assisted under a Section 8 covered program not listed in paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section or a Public Housing covered program, the procedures for the hearing before the responsible entity are set forth in 24 CFR part 966.
            (iii) Families under Housing covered programs and applicants for assistance under all covered programs. For all families under Housing covered programs (applicants as well as tenants already receiving assistance) and for applicants for assistance under all covered programs, the procedures for the informal hearing before the responsible entity are as follows:
            (A) Hearing before an impartial individual. The family shall be provided a hearing before any person(s) designated by the responsible entity (including an officer or employee of the responsible entity), other than a person who made or approved the decision under review, and other than a person who is a subordinate of the person who made or approved the decision;
            (B) Examination of evidence. The family shall be provided the opportunity to examine and copy at the individual's expense, at a reasonable time in advance of the hearing, any documents in the possession of the responsible entity pertaining to the family's eligibility status, or in the possession of the INS (as permitted by INS requirements), including any records and regulations that may be relevant to the hearing;
            (C) Presentation of evidence and arguments in support of eligible status. The family shall be provided the opportunity to present evidence and arguments in support of eligible status. Evidence may be considered without regard to admissibility under the rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings;
            (D) Controverting evidence of the responsible entity. The family shall be provided the opportunity to controvert evidence relied upon by the responsible entity and to confront and cross-examine all witnesses on whose testimony or information the responsible entity relies;
            (E) Representation. The family shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney, or other designee, at the family's expense, and to have such person make statements on the family's behalf;
            (F) Interpretive services. The family shall be entitled to arrange for an interpreter to attend the hearing, at the expense of the family, or responsible entity, as may be agreed upon by the two parties to the proceeding; and
            (G) Hearing to be recorded. The family shall be entitled to have the hearing recorded by audiotape (a transcript of the hearing may, but is not required to, be provided by the responsible entity).
            (3) Hearing decision. The responsible entity shall provide the family with a written final decision, based solely on the facts presented at the hearing, within 14 days of the date of the informal hearing. The decision shall state the basis for the decision.
            (g) Judicial relief. A decision against a family member, issued in accordance with paragraphs (e) or (f) of this section, does not preclude the family from exercising the right, that may otherwise be available, to seek redress directly through judicial procedures.
            (h) Retention of documents. The responsible entity shall retain for a minimum of 5 years the following documents that may have been submitted to the responsible entity by the family, or provided to the responsible entity as part of the INS appeal or the informal hearing process:
            (1) The application for financial assistance;
            (2) The form completed by the family for income reexamination;
            (3) Photocopies of any original documents (front and back), including original INS documents;
            (4) The signed verification consent form;
            (5) The INS verification results;
            (6) The request for an INS appeal;
            (7) The final INS determination;
            (8) The request for an informal hearing; and
            (9) The final informal hearing decision.
            (i) Termination of assisted occupancy. (1) Under Housing covered programs, and in the Section 8 covered programs other than the Section 8 Rental Certificate, Rental Voucher, and Moderate Rehabilitation programs, assisted occupancy is terminated by:
            (i) If permitted under the lease, the responsible entity notifying the tenant that because of the termination of assisted occupancy the tenant is required to pay the HUD-approved market rent for the dwelling unit.
            (ii) The responsible entity and tenant entering into a new lease without financial assistance.
            (iii) The responsible entity evicting the tenant. While the tenant continues in occupancy of the unit, the responsible entity may continue to receive assistance payments if action to terminate the tenancy under an assisted lease is promptly initiated and diligently pursued, in accordance with the terms of the lease, and if eviction of the tenant is undertaken by judicial action pursuant to State and local law. Action by the responsible entity to terminate the tenancy and to evict the tenant must be in accordance with applicable HUD regulations and other HUD requirements. For any jurisdiction, HUD may prescribe a maximum period during which assistance payments may be continued during eviction proceedings and may prescribe other standards of reasonable diligence for the prosecution of eviction proceedings.
            (2) In the Section 8 Rental Certificate, Rental Voucher, and Moderate Rehabilitation programs, assisted occupancy is terminated by terminating assistance payments. (See provisions of this section concerning termination of assistance.) The PHA shall not make any additional assistance payments to the owner after the required procedures specified in this section have been completed. In addition, the PHA shall not approve a lease, enter into an assistance contract, or process a portability move for the family after those procedures have been completed.
            [61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996; 64 FR 25731, May 12, 1999]
          
          
            § 5.516
            Availability of preservation assistance to mixed families and other families.
            (a) Assistance available for tenant mixed families—(1) General. Preservation assistance is available to tenant mixed families, following completion of the appeals and informal hearing procedures provided in § 5.514. There are three types of preservation assistance:
            (i) Continued assistance (see paragraph (a) of § 5.518);
            (ii) Temporary deferral of termination of assistance (see paragraph (b) of § 5.518); or
            (iii) Prorated assistance (see § 5.520, a mixed family must be provided prorated assistance if the family so requests).
            (2) Availability of assistance—(i) For Housing covered programs: One of the three types of assistance described is available to tenant mixed families assisted under a National Housing Act or 1965 HUD Act covered program, depending upon the family's eligibility for such assistance. Continued assistance must be provided to a mixed family that meets the conditions for eligibility for continued assistance.
            (ii) For Section 8 or Public Housing covered programs. One of the three types of assistance described may be available to tenant mixed families assisted under a Section 8 or Public Housing covered program.
            (b) Assistance available for applicant mixed families. Prorated assistance is also available for mixed families applying for assistance as provided in § 5.520.
            (c) Assistance available to other families in occupancy. Temporary deferral of termination of assistance may be available to families receiving assistance under a Section 214 covered program on June 19, 1995, and who have no members with eligible immigration status, as set forth in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section.
            (1) For Housing covered programs: Temporary deferral of termination of assistance is available to families assisted under a Housing covered program.
            (2) For Section 8 or Public Housing covered programs: The responsible entity may make temporary deferral of termination of assistance to families assisted under a Section 8 or Public Housing covered program.
            (d) Section 8 covered programs: Discretion afforded to provide certain family preservation assistance—(1) Project owners. With respect to assistance under a Section 8 Act covered program administered by a project owner, HUD has the discretion to determine under what circumstances families are to be provided one of the two statutory forms of assistance for preservation of the family (continued assistance or temporary deferral of assistance). HUD is exercising its discretion by specifying the standards in this section under which a project owner must provide one of these two types of assistance to a family. However, project owners and PHAs must offer prorated assistance to eligible mixed families.
            (2) PHAs. The PHA, rather than HUD, has the discretion to determine the circumstances under which a family will be offered one of the two statutory forms of assistance (continued assistance or temporary deferral of termination of assistance). The PHA must establish its own policy and criteria to follow in making its decision. In establishing the criteria for granting continued assistance or temporary deferral of termination of assistance, the PHA must incorporate the statutory criteria, which are set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) of § 5.518. However, the PHA must offer prorated assistance to eligible families.
            [61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996; 64 FR 25732, May 12, 1999]
          
          
            § 5.518
            Types of preservation assistance available to mixed families and other families.
            (a) Continued assistance—(1) General. A mixed family may receive continued housing assistance if all of the following conditions are met (a mixed family assisted under a Housing covered program must be provided continued assistance if the family meets the following conditions):
            (i) The family was receiving assistance under a Section 214 covered program on June 19, 1995;
            (ii) The family's head of household or spouse has eligible immigration status as described in § 5.506; and
            (iii) The family does not include any person (who does not have eligible immigration status) other than the head of household, any spouse of the head of household, any parents of the head of household, any parents of the spouse, or any children of the head of household or spouse.
            (2) Proration of continued assistance. A family entitled to continued assistance before November 29, 1996 is entitled to continued assistance as described in paragraph (a) of this section. A family entitled to continued assistance after November 29, 1996 shall receive prorated assistance as described in § 5.520.
            (b) Temporary deferral of termination of assistance—(1) Eligibility for this type of assistance. If a mixed family qualifies for prorated assistance (and does not qualify for continued assistance), but decides not to accept prorated assistance, or if a family has no members with eligible immigration status, the family may be eligible for temporary deferral of termination of assistance if necessary to permit the family additional time for the orderly transition of those family members with ineligible status, and any other family members involved, to other affordable housing. Other affordable housing is used in the context of transition of an ineligible family from a rent level that reflects HUD assistance to a rent level that is unassisted; the term refers to housing that is not substandard, that is of appropriate size for the family and that can be rented for an amount not exceeding the amount that the family pays for rent, including utilities, plus 25 percent.
            (2) Housing covered programs: Conditions for granting temporary deferral of termination of assistance. The responsible entity shall grant a temporary deferral of termination of assistance to a mixed family if the family is assisted under a Housing covered program and one of the following conditions is met:
            (i) The family demonstrates that reasonable efforts to find other affordable housing of appropriate size have been unsuccessful (for purposes of this section, reasonable efforts include seeking information from, and pursuing leads obtained from the State housing agency, the city government, local newspapers, rental agencies and the owner);
            (ii) The vacancy rate for affordable housing of appropriate size is below five percent in the housing market for the area in which the project is located; or
            (iii) The consolidated plan, as described in 24 CFR part 91 and if applicable to the covered program, indicates that the local jurisdiction's housing market lacks sufficient affordable housing opportunities for households having a size and income similar to the family seeking the deferral.
            (3) Time limit on deferral period. If temporary deferral of termination of assistance is granted, the deferral period shall be for an initial period not to exceed six months. The initial period may be renewed for additional periods of six months, but the aggregate deferral period for deferrals provided after November 29, 1996 shall not exceed a period of eighteen months. The aggregate deferral period for deferrals granted prior to November 29, 1996 shall not exceed 3 years. These time periods do not apply to a family which includes a refugee under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act or an individual seeking asylum under section 208 of that Act.
            (4) Notification requirements for beginning of each deferral period. At the beginning of each deferral period, the responsible entity must inform the family of its ineligibility for financial assistance and offer the family information concerning, and referrals to assist in finding, other affordable housing.
            (5) Determination of availability of affordable housing at end of each deferral period. (i) Before the end of each deferral period, the responsible entity must satisfy the applicable requirements of either paragraph (b)(5)(i)(A) or (B) of this section. Specifically, the responsible entity must:
            (A) For Housing covered programs: Make a determination that one of the two conditions specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section continues to be met (note: affordable housing will be determined to be available if the vacancy rate is five percent or greater), the owner's knowledge and the tenant's evidence indicate that other affordable housing is available; or
            (B) For Section 8 or Public Housing covered programs: Make a determination of the availability of affordable housing of appropriate size based on evidence of conditions which when taken together will demonstrate an inadequate supply of affordable housing for the area in which the project is located, the consolidated plan (if applicable, as described in 24 CFR part 91), the responsible entity's own knowledge of the availability of affordable housing, and on evidence of the tenant family's efforts to locate such housing.
            (ii) The responsible entity must also:

            (A) Notify the tenant family in writing, at least 60 days in advance of the expiration of the deferral period, that termination will be deferred again (provided that the granting of another deferral will not result in aggregate deferral periods that exceeds the maximum deferral period). This time period does not apply to a family which includes a refugee under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act or an individual seeking asylum under section 208 of that Act, and a determination was made that other affordable housing is not available; or
            

            (B) Notify the tenant family in writing, at least 60 days in advance of the expiration of the deferral period, that termination of financial assistance will not be deferred because either granting another deferral will result in aggregate deferral periods that exceed the maximum deferral period (unless the family includes a refugee under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act or an individual seeking asylum under section 208 of that Act), or a determination has been made that other affordable housing is available.
            (c) Option to select proration of assistance at end of deferral period. A family who is eligible for, and receives temporary deferral of termination of assistance, may request, and the responsible entity shall provide proration of assistance at the end of the deferral period if the family has made a good faith effort during the deferral period to locate other affordable housing.
            (d) Notification of decision on family preservation assistance. A responsible entity shall notify the family of its decision concerning the family's qualification for family preservation assistance. If the family is ineligible for family preservation assistance, the notification shall state the reasons, which must be based on relevant factors. For tenant families, the notice also shall inform the family of any applicable appeal rights.
            [61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996; 64 FR 25732, May 12, 1999]
          
          
            § 5.520
            Proration of assistance.
            (a) Applicability. This section applies to a mixed family other than a family receiving continued assistance, or other than a family who is eligible for and requests and receives temporary deferral of termination of assistance. An eligible mixed family who requests prorated assistance must be provided prorated assistance.
            (b) Method of prorating assistance for Housing covered programs—(1) Proration under Rent Supplement Program. If the household participates in the Rent Supplement Program, the rent supplement paid on the household's behalf shall be the rent supplement the household would otherwise be entitled to, multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of which is the number of people in the household and the numerator of which is the number of eligible persons in the household;
            (2) Proration under Section 235 Program. If the household participates in the Section 235 Program, the interest reduction payments paid on the household's behalf shall be the payments the household would otherwise be entitled to, multiplied by a fraction the denominator of which is the number of people in the household and the numerator of which is the number of eligible persons in the household;
            (3) Proration under Section 236 Program without the benefit of additional assistance. If the household participates in the Section 236 Program without the benefit of any additional assistance, the household's rent shall be increased above the rent the household would otherwise pay by an amount equal to the difference between the market rate rent for the unit and the rent the household would otherwise pay multiplied by a fraction the denominator of which is the number of people in the household and the numerator of which is the number of ineligible persons in the household;
            (4) Proration under Section 236 Program with the benefit of additional assistance. If the household participates in the Section 236 Program with the benefit of additional assistance under the rent supplement, rental assistance payment or Section 8 programs, the household's rent shall be increased above the rent the household would otherwise pay by:
            (i) An amount equal to the difference between the market rate rent for the unit and the basic rent for the unit multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of which is the number of people in the household, and the numerator of which is the number of ineligible persons in the household, plus;
            (ii) An amount equal to the rent supplement, housing assistance payment or rental assistance payment the household would otherwise be entitled to multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of which is the number of people in the household and the numerator of which is the number of ineligible persons in the household.
            (c) Method of prorating assistance for Section 8 covered programs—(1) Section 8 assistance other than assistance provided for a tenancy under the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program. For Section 8 assistance other than assistance for a tenancy under the voucher program, the PHA must prorate the family's assistance as follows:
            (i) Step 1. Determine gross rent for the unit. (Gross rent is contract rent plus any allowance for tenant paid utilities).
            (ii) Step 2. Determine total tenant payment in accordance with section 5.613(a). (Annual income includes income of all family members, including any family member who has not established eligible immigration status.)
            (iii) Step 3. Subtract amount determined in paragraph (c)(1)(ii), (Step 2), from amount determined in paragraph (c)(1)(i), (Step 1).
            (iv) Step 4. Multiply the amount determined in paragraph (c)(1)(iii), (Step 3) by a fraction for which:
            (A) The numerator is the number of family members who have established eligible immigration status; and
            (B) The denominator is the total number of family members.
            (v) Prorated housing assistance. The amount determined in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) (Step 4) is the prorated housing assistance payment for a mixed family.
            (vi) No effect on contract rent. Proration of the housing assistance payment does not affect contract rent to the owner. The family must pay as rent the portion of contract rent not covered by the prorated housing assistance payment.
            (2) Assistance for a Section 8 voucher tenancy. For a tenancy under the voucher program, the PHA must prorate the family's assistance as follows:
            (i) Step 1. Determine the amount of the pre-proration housing assistance payment. (Annual income includes income of all family members, including any family member who has not established eligible immigration status.)
            (ii) Step 2. Multiply the amount determined in paragraph (c)(2)(i) (Step 1) by a fraction for which:
            (A) The numerator is the number of family members who have established eligible immigration status; and
            (B) The denominator is the total number of family members.
            (iii) Prorated housing assistance. The amount determined in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) (Step 2) is the prorated housing assistance payment for a mixed family.
            (iv) No effect on rent to owner. Proration of the housing assistance payment does not affect rent to owner. The family must pay the portion of rent to owner not covered by the prorated housing assistance payment.
            (d) Method of prorating assistance for Public Housing covered programs. (1) The PHA must prorate the family's assistance as follows:
            (i) Step 1. Determine the total tenant payment in accordance with section 5.628. (Annual income includes income of all family members, including any family member who has not established eligible immigration status.)
            (ii) Step 2. Subtract the total tenant payment from the PHA-established flat rent applicable to the unit. The result is the maximum subsidy for which the family could qualify if all members were eligible (“family maximum subsidy”).
            (iii) Step 3. Divide the family maximum subsidy by the number of persons in the family (all persons) to determine the maximum subsidy per each family member who has citizenship or eligible immigration status (“eligible family member”). The subsidy per eligible family member is the “member maximum subsidy.”
            (iv) Step 4. Multiply the member maximum subsidy by the number of family members who have citizenship or eligible immigration status (“eligible family members”).
            (2) The product of steps 1 through 4 of paragraphs (d)(1)(i) through (iv) of this section is the amount of subsidy for which the family is eligible (“eligible subsidy”). The family's rent is the PHA-established flat rent minus the amount of the eligible subsidy.
            (e) Method of prorating assistance when the mixed family's total tenant payment (TTP) is greater than the public housing flat rent. When the mixed family's TTP is greater than the flat rent, the PHA must use the TTP as the mixed family TTP. The PHA subtracts from the mixed family TTP any established utility allowance, and the sum becomes the mixed family rent.
            [61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998; 64 FR 13056, Mar. 16, 1999; 81 FR 12370, Mar. 8, 2016]
          
          
            
            § 5.522
            Prohibition of assistance to noncitizen students.
            (a) General. The provisions of §§ 5.516 and 5.518 permitting continued assistance or temporary deferral of termination of assistance for certain families do not apply to any person who is determined to be a noncitizen student as in paragraph (c)(2)(A) of Section 214 (42 U.S.C. 1436a(c)(2)(A)). The family of a noncitizen student may be eligible for prorated assistance, as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
            (b) Family of noncitizen students. (1) The prohibition on providing assistance to a noncitizen student as described in paragraph (a) of this section extends to the noncitizen spouse of the noncitizen student and minor children accompanying the student or following to join the student.
            (2) The prohibition on providing assistance to a noncitizen student does not extend to the citizen spouse of the noncitizen student and the children of the citizen spouse and noncitizen student.
          
          
            § 5.524
            Compliance with nondiscrimination requirements.
            The responsible entity shall administer the restrictions on use of assisted housing by noncitizens with ineligible immigration status imposed by this part in conformity with all applicable nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements, including, but not limited to, title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-5) and the implementing regulations in 24 CFR part 1, section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and the implementing regulations in 24 CFR part 8, the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and the implementing regulations in 24 CFR part 100.
          
          
            § 5.526
            Protection from liability for responsible entities and State and local government agencies and officials.
            (a) Protection from liability for responsible entities. Responsible entities are protected from liability as set forth in Section 214(e) (42 U.S.C 1436a(e)).
            (b) Protection from liability for State and local government agencies and officials. State and local government agencies and officials shall not be liable for the design or implementation of the verification system described in § 5.512, as long as the implementation by the State and local government agency or official is in accordance with prescribed HUD rules and requirements.
            [64 FR 25732, May 12, 1999]
          
          
            § 5.528
            Liability of ineligible tenants for reimbursement of benefits.
            Where a tenant has received the benefit of HUD financial assistance to which the tenant was not entitled because the tenant intentionally misrepresented eligible status, the ineligible tenant is responsible for reimbursing HUD for the assistance improperly paid. If the amount of the assistance is substantial, the responsible entity is encouraged to refer the case to the HUD Inspector General's office for further investigation. Possible criminal prosecution may follow based on the False Statements Act (18 U.S.C. 1001 and 1010).
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Section 8 and Public Housing, and Other HUD Assisted Housing Serving Persons with Disabilities: Family Income and Family Payment; Occupancy Requirements for Section 8 Project-Based Assistance
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437d, 1437f, 1437n, and 3535(d).
          
          
            Source:
            61 FR 54498, Oct. 18, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5.601
            Purpose and applicability.
            This subpart states HUD requirements on the following subjects:
            (a) Determining annual and adjusted income of families who apply for or receive assistance in the Section 8 (tenant-based and project-based) and public housing programs;
            (b) Determining payments by and utility reimbursements to families assisted in these programs;

            (c) Additional occupancy requirements that apply to the Section 8 project-based assistance programs. These additional requirements concern:
            
            (1) Income-eligibility and income-targeting when a Section 8 owner admits families to a Section 8 project or unit;
            (2) Owner selection preferences; and
            (3) Owner reexamination of family income and composition;
            (d) Determining adjusted income, as provided in § 5.611(a) and (b), for families who apply for or receive assistance under the following programs: HOME Investment Partnerships Program (24 CFR part 92); Rent Supplement Payments Program (24 CFR part 200, subpart W); Rental Assistance Payments Program (24 CFR part 236, subpart D); Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (24 CFR part 574); Shelter Plus Care Program (24 CFR part 582); Supportive Housing Program (McKinney Act Homeless Assistance) (24 CFR part 583); Section 202 Supportive Housing Program for the Elderly (24 CFR 891, subpart B); Section 202 Direct Loans for Housing for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities (24 CFR part 891, subpart E) and the Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities (24 CFR part 891, subpart C). Unless specified in the regulations for each of the programs listed in paragraph (d) of this section or in another regulatory section of this part 5, subpart F, the regulations in part 5, subpart F, generally are not applicable to these programs; and
            (e) Determining earned income disregard for persons with disabilities, as provided in § 5.617, for the following programs: HOME Investment Partnerships Program (24 CFR part 92); Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (24 CFR part 574); Supportive Housing Program (McKinney Act Homeless Assistance) (24 CFR part 583); and the Housing Choice Voucher Program (24 CFR part 982).
            [66 FR 6222, Jan. 19, 2001]
          
          
            § 5.603
            Definitions.
            As used in this subpart:
            (a) Terms found elsewhere in part 5—(1) Subpart A. The terms 1937 Act, elderly person, public housing, public housing agency (PHA), responsible entity and Section 8 are defined in § 5.100.
            (2) Subpart D. The terms “disabled family”, “elderly family”, “family”, “live-in aide”, and “person with disabilities” are defined in § 5.403.
            (b) The following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
            
              Adjusted income. See § 5.611.
            
              Annual income. See § 5.609.
            
              Child care expenses. Amounts anticipated to be paid by the family for the care of children under 13 years of age during the period for which annual income is computed, but only where such care is necessary to enable a family member to actively seek employment, be gainfully employed, or to further his or her education and only to the extent such amounts are not reimbursed. The amount deducted shall reflect reasonable charges for child care. In the case of child care necessary to permit employment, the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount of employment income that is included in annual income.
            
              Dependent. A member of the family (except foster children and foster adults) other than the family head or spouse, who is under 18 years of age, or is a person with a disability, or is a full-time student.
            
              Disability assistance expenses. Reasonable expenses that are anticipated, during the period for which annual income is computed, for attendant care and auxiliary apparatus for a disabled family member and that are necessary to enable a family member (including the disabled member) to be employed, provided that the expenses are neither paid to a member of the family nor reimbursed by an outside source.
            
              Economic self-sufficiency program. Any program designed to encourage, assist, train, or facilitate the economic independence of HUD-assisted families or to provide work for such families. These programs include programs for job training, employment counseling, work placement, basic skills training, education, English proficiency, workfare, financial or household management, apprenticeship, and any program necessary to ready a participant for work (including a substance abuse or mental health treatment program), or other work activities.
            
              Extremely low-income family. A very low-income family whose annual income does not exceed the higher of:

            (1) The poverty guidelines established by the Department of Health and Human Services applicable to the family of the size involved (except in the case of families living in Puerto Rico or any other territory or possession of the United States); or
            (2) Thirty (30) percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 30 percent of the area median income for the area if HUD finds that such variations are necessary because of unusually high or low family incomes.
            
              Full-time student. A person who is attending school or vocational training on a full-time basis.
            
              Imputed welfare income. See § 5.615.
            
              Low income family. A family whose annual income does not exceed 80 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 percent of the median income for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are necessary because of unusually high or low family incomes.
            
              Medical expenses. Medical expenses, including medical insurance premiums, that are anticipated during the period for which annual income is computed, and that are not covered by insurance.
            
              Monthly adjusted income. One twelfth of adjusted income.
            
              Monthly income. One twelfth of annual income.
            
              Net family assets. (1) Net cash value after deducting reasonable costs that would be incurred in disposing of real property, savings, stocks, bonds, and other forms of capital investment, excluding interests in Indian trust land and excluding equity accounts in HUD homeownership programs. The value of necessary items of personal property such as furniture and automobiles shall be excluded.
            (2) In cases where a trust fund has been established and the trust is not revocable by, or under the control of, any member of the family or household, the value of the trust fund will not be considered an asset so long as the fund continues to be held in trust. Any income distributed from the trust fund shall be counted when determining annual income under § 5.609.
            (3) In determining net family assets, PHAs or owners, as applicable, shall include the value of any business or family assets disposed of by an applicant or tenant for less than fair market value (including a disposition in trust, but not in a foreclosure or bankruptcy sale) during the two years preceding the date of application for the program or reexamination, as applicable, in excess of the consideration received therefor. In the case of a disposition as part of a separation or divorce settlement, the disposition will not be considered to be for less than fair market value if the applicant or tenant receives important consideration not measurable in dollar terms.
            (4) For purposes of determining annual income under § 5.609, the term “net family assets” does not include the value of a home currently being purchased with assistance under part 982, subpart M of this title. This exclusion is limited to the first 10 years after the purchase date of the home.
            
              Owner has the meaning provided in the relevant program regulations. As used in this subpart, where appropriate, the term “owner” shall also include a “borrower” as defined in part 891 of this title.
            
              Responsible entity. For § 5.611, in addition to the definition of “responsible entity” in § 5.100, and for § 5.617, in addition to only that part of the definition of “responsible entity” in § 5.100 which addresses the Section 8 program covered by § 5.617 (public housing is not covered by § 5.617), “responsible entity” means:
            (1) For the HOME Investment Partnerships Program, the participating jurisdiction, as defined in 24 CFR 92.2;
            (2) For the Rent Supplement Payments Program, the owner of the multifamily project;
            (3) For the Rental Assistance Payments Program, the owner of the Section 236 project;

            (4) For the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) program, the applicable “State” or “unit of general local government” or “nonprofit organization” as these terms are defined in 24 CFR 574.3, that administers the HOPWA Program;
            
            (5) For the Shelter Plus Care Program, the “Recipient” as defined in 24 CFR 582.5;
            (6) For the Supportive Housing Program, the “recipient” as defined in 24 CFR 583.5;
            (7) For the Section 202 Supportive Housing Program for the Elderly, the “Owner” as defined in 24 CFR 891.205;
            (8) For the Section 202 Direct Loans for Housing for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities), the “Borrower” as defined in 24 CFR 891.505; and
            (9) For the Section 811 Supportive Housing Program for Persons with Disabilities, the “owner” as defined in 24 CFR 891.305.
            
              Tenant rent. The amount payable monthly by the family as rent to the unit owner (Section 8 owner or PHA in public housing). (This term is not used in the Section 8 voucher program.)
            
              Total tenant payment. See § 5.628.
            
              Utility allowance. If the cost of utilities (except telephone) and other housing services for an assisted unit is not included in the tenant rent but is the responsibility of the family occupying the unit, an amount equal to the estimate made or approved by a PHA or HUD of the monthly cost of a reasonable consumption of such utilities and other services for the unit by an energy-conservative household of modest circumstances consistent with the requirements of a safe, sanitary, and healthful living environment.
            
              Utility reimbursement. The amount, if any, by which the utility allowance for a unit, if applicable, exceeds the total tenant payment for the family occupying the unit. (This definition is not used in the Section 8 voucher program, or for a public housing family that is paying a flat rent.)
            
              Very low income family. A family whose annual income does not exceed 50 percent of the median family income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 50 percent of the median income for the area if HUD finds that such variations are necessary because of unusually high or low family incomes.
            
              Welfare assistance. Welfare or other payments to families or individuals, based on need, that are made under programs funded, separately or jointly, by Federal, State or local governments (including assistance provided under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, as that term is defined under the implementing regulations issued by the Department of Health and Human Services at 45 CFR 260.31).
            
              Work activities. See definition at section 407(d) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 607(d)).
            [61 FR 54498, Oct. 18, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16716, Mar. 29, 2000; 65 FR 55161, Sept. 12, 2000; 66 FR 6223, Jan. 19, 2001; 67 FR 47432, July 18, 2002; 81 FR 12370, Mar. 8, 2016]
          
          
            Family Income
            
              § 5.609
              Annual income.
              (a) Annual income means all amounts, monetary or not, which:
              (1) Go to, or on behalf of, the family head or spouse (even if temporarily absent) or to any other family member; or
              (2) Are anticipated to be received from a source outside the family during the 12-month period following admission or annual reexamination effective date; and
              (3) Which are not specifically excluded in paragraph (c) of this section.
              (4) Annual income also means amounts derived (during the 12-month period) from assets to which any member of the family has access.
              (b) Annual income includes, but is not limited to:
              (1) The full amount, before any payroll deductions, of wages and salaries, overtime pay, commissions, fees, tips and bonuses, and other compensation for personal services;

              (2) The net income from the operation of a business or profession. Expenditures for business expansion or amortization of capital indebtedness shall not be used as deductions in determining net income. An allowance for depreciation of assets used in a business or profession may be deducted, based on straight line depreciation, as provided in Internal Revenue Service regulations. Any withdrawal of cash or assets from the operation of a business or profession will be included in income, except to the extent the withdrawal is reimbursement of cash or assets invested in the operation by the family;
              (3) Interest, dividends, and other net income of any kind from real or personal property. Expenditures for amortization of capital indebtedness shall not be used as deductions in determining net income. An allowance for depreciation is permitted only as authorized in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. Any withdrawal of cash or assets from an investment will be included in income, except to the extent the withdrawal is reimbursement of cash or assets invested by the family. Where the family has net family assets in excess of $5,000, annual income shall include the greater of the actual income derived from all net family assets or a percentage of the value of such assets based on the current passbook savings rate, as determined by HUD;
              (4) The full amount of periodic amounts received from Social Security, annuities, insurance policies, retirement funds, pensions, disability or death benefits, and other similar types of periodic receipts, including a lump-sum amount or prospective monthly amounts for the delayed start of a periodic amount (except as provided in paragraph (c)(14) of this section);
              (5) Payments in lieu of earnings, such as unemployment and disability compensation, worker's compensation and severance pay (except as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section);
              (6) Welfare assistance payments. (i) Welfare assistance payments made under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program are included in annual income only to the extent such payments:
              (A) Qualify as assistance under the TANF program definition at 45 CFR 260.31; and
              (B) Are not otherwise excluded under paragraph (c) of this section.
              (ii) If the welfare assistance payment includes an amount specifically designated for shelter and utilities that is subject to adjustment by the welfare assistance agency in accordance with the actual cost of shelter and utilities, the amount of welfare assistance income to be included as income shall consist of:
              (A) The amount of the allowance or grant exclusive of the amount specifically designated for shelter or utilities; plus
              (B) The maximum amount that the welfare assistance agency could in fact allow the family for shelter and utilities. If the family's welfare assistance is ratably reduced from the standard of need by applying a percentage, the amount calculated under this paragraph shall be the amount resulting from one application of the percentage.
              (7) Periodic and determinable allowances, such as alimony and child support payments, and regular contributions or gifts received from organizations or from persons not residing in the dwelling;
              (8) All regular pay, special pay and allowances of a member of the Armed Forces (except as provided in paragraph (c)(7) of this section).

              (9) For section 8 programs only and as provided in 24 CFR 5.612, any financial assistance, in excess of amounts received for tuition and any other required fees and charges, that an individual receives under the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.), from private sources, or from an institution of higher education (as defined under the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002)), shall be considered income to that individual, except that financial assistance described in this paragraph is not considered annual income for persons over the age of 23 with dependent children. For purposes of this paragraph, “financial assistance” does not include loan proceeds for the purpose of determining income.
              (c) Annual income does not include the following:
              (1) Income from employment of children (including foster children) under the age of 18 years;
              (2) Payments received for the care of foster children or foster adults (usually persons with disabilities, unrelated to the tenant family, who are unable to live alone);

              (3) Lump-sum additions to family assets, such as inheritances, insurance payments (including payments under health and accident insurance and worker's compensation), capital gains and settlement for personal or property losses (except as provided in paragraph (b)(5) of this section);
              
              (4) Amounts received by the family that are specifically for, or in reimbursement of, the cost of medical expenses for any family member;
              (5) Income of a live-in aide, as defined in § 5.403;
              (6) Subject to paragraph (b)(9) of this section, the full amount of student financial assistance paid directly to the student or to the educational institution;
              (7) The special pay to a family member serving in the Armed Forces who is exposed to hostile fire;
              (8)(i) Amounts received under training programs funded by HUD;
              (ii) Amounts received by a person with a disability that are disregarded for a limited time for purposes of Supplemental Security Income eligibility and benefits because they are set aside for use under a Plan to Attain Self-Sufficiency (PASS);
              (iii) Amounts received by a participant in other publicly assisted programs which are specifically for or in reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred (special equipment, clothing, transportation, child care, etc.) and which are made solely to allow participation in a specific program;
              (iv) Amounts received under a resident service stipend. A resident service stipend is a modest amount (not to exceed $200 per month) received by a resident for performing a service for the PHA or owner, on a part-time basis, that enhances the quality of life in the development. Such services may include, but are not limited to, fire patrol, hall monitoring, lawn maintenance, resident initiatives coordination, and serving as a member of the PHA's governing board. No resident may receive more than one such stipend during the same period of time;
              (v) Incremental earnings and benefits resulting to any family member from participation in qualifying State or local employment training programs (including training programs not affiliated with a local government) and training of a family member as resident management staff. Amounts excluded by this provision must be received under employment training programs with clearly defined goals and objectives, and are excluded only for the period during which the family member participates in the employment training program;
              (9) Temporary, nonrecurring or sporadic income (including gifts);
              (10) Reparation payments paid by a foreign government pursuant to claims filed under the laws of that government by persons who were persecuted during the Nazi era;
              (11) Earnings in excess of $480 for each full-time student 18 years old or older (excluding the head of household and spouse);
              (12) Adoption assistance payments in excess of $480 per adopted child;
              (13) [Reserved]
              (14) Deferred periodic amounts from supplemental security income and Social Security benefits that are received in a lump sum amount or in prospective monthly amounts, or any deferred Department of Veterans Affairs disability benefits that are received in a lump sum amount or in prospective monthly amounts.
              (15) Amounts received by the family in the form of refunds or rebates under State or local law for property taxes paid on the dwelling unit;
              (16) Amounts paid by a State agency to a family with a member who has a developmental disability and is living at home to offset the cost of services and equipment needed to keep the developmentally disabled family member at home; or

              (17) Amounts specifically excluded by any other Federal statute from consideration as income for purposes of determining eligibility or benefits under a category of assistance programs that includes assistance under any program to which the exclusions set forth in 24 CFR 5.609(c) apply. A notice will be published in the Federal Register and distributed to PHAs and housing owners identifying the benefits that qualify for this exclusion. Updates will be published and distributed when necessary.
              (d) Annualization of income. If it is not feasible to anticipate a level of income over a 12-month period (e.g., seasonal or cyclic income), or the PHA believes that past income is the best available indicator of expected future income, the PHA may annualize the income anticipated for a shorter period, subject to a redetermination at the end of the shorter period.
              [61 FR 54498, Oct. 18, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 16716, Mar. 29, 2000; 67 FR 47432, July 18, 2002; 70 FR 77743, Dec. 30, 2005; 79 FR 36164, June 25, 2014; 81 FR 12370, Mar. 8, 2016]
            
            
              § 5.611
              Adjusted income.
              Adjusted income means annual income (as determined by the responsible entity, defined in § 5.100 and § 5.603) of the members of the family residing or intending to reside in the dwelling unit, after making the following deductions:
              (a) Mandatory deductions. In determining adjusted income, the responsible entity must deduct the following amounts from annual income:
              (1) $480 for each dependent;
              (2) $400 for any elderly family or disabled family;
              (3) The sum of the following, to the extent the sum exceeds three percent of annual income:
              (i) Unreimbursed medical expenses of any elderly family or disabled family; and
              (ii) Unreimbursed reasonable attendant care and auxiliary apparatus expenses for each member of the family who is a person with disabilities, to the extent necessary to enable any member of the family (including the member who is a person with disabilities) to be employed. This deduction may not exceed the earned income received by family members who are 18 years of age or older and who are able to work because of such attendant care or auxiliary apparatus; and
              (4) Any reasonable child care expenses necessary to enable a member of the family to be employed or to further his or her education.
              (b) Additional deductions. (1) For public housing, a PHA may adopt additional deductions from annual income. The PHA must establish a written policy for such deductions.
              (2) For the HUD programs listed in § 5.601(d), the responsible entity shall calculate such other deductions as required and permitted by the applicable program regulations.
              [66 FR 6223, Jan. 19, 2001]
            
            
              § 5.612
              Restrictions on assistance to students enrolled in an institution of higher education.
              No assistance shall be provided under section 8 of the 1937 Act to any individual who:
              (a) Is enrolled as a student at an institution of higher education, as defined under section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002);
              (b) Is under 24 years of age;
              (c) Is not a veteran of the United States military;
              (d) Is unmarried;
              (e) Does not have a dependent child;
              (f) Is not a person with disabilities, as such term is defined in section 3(b)(3)(E) of the 1937 Act and was not receiving assistance under section 8 of the 1937 Act as of November 30, 2005; and
              (g) Is not otherwise individually eligible, or has parents who, individually or jointly, are not eligible on the basis of income to receive assistance under section 8 of the 1937 Act.
              [70 FR 77743, Dec. 30, 2005, as amended at 73 FR 49333, Aug. 21, 2008]
            
            
              § 5.613
              Public housing program and Section 8 tenant-based assistance program: PHA cooperation with welfare agency.
              (a) This section applies to the public housing program and the Section 8 tenant-based assistance program.
              (b) The PHA must make best efforts to enter into cooperation agreements with welfare agencies under which such agencies agree:
              (1) To target public assistance, benefits and services to families receiving assistance in the public housing program and the Section 8 tenant-based assistance program to achieve self-sufficiency;
              (2) To provide written verification to the PHA concerning welfare benefits for families applying for or receiving assistance in these housing assistance programs.
              [65 FR 16717, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.615
              Public housing program and Section 8 tenant-based assistance program: How welfare benefit reduction affects family income.
              (a) Applicability. This section applies to covered families who reside in public housing (part 960 of this title) or receive Section 8 tenant-based assistance (part 982 of this title).
              (b) Definitions. The following definitions apply for purposes of this section:
              
                Covered families. Families who receive welfare assistance or other public assistance benefits (“welfare benefits”) from a State or other public agency (“welfare agency”) under a program for which Federal, State, or local law requires that a member of the family must participate in an economic self-sufficiency program as a condition for such assistance.
              
                Economic self-sufficiency program. See definition at § 5.603.
              
                Imputed welfare income. The amount of annual income not actually received by a family, as a result of a specified welfare benefit reduction, that is nonetheless included in the family's annual income for purposes of determining rent.
              
                Specified welfare benefit reduction.
              
              (1) A reduction of welfare benefits by the welfare agency, in whole or in part, for a family member, as determined by the welfare agency, because of fraud by a family member in connection with the welfare program; or because of welfare agency sanction against a family member for noncompliance with a welfare agency requirement to participate in an economic self-sufficiency program.
              (2) “Specified welfare benefit reduction” does not include a reduction or termination of welfare benefits by the welfare agency:
              (i) at expiration of a lifetime or other time limit on the payment of welfare benefits;
              (ii) because a family member is not able to obtain employment, even though the family member has complied with welfare agency economic self-sufficiency or work activities requirements; or
              (iii) because a family member has not complied with other welfare agency requirements.
              (c) Imputed welfare income. (1) A family's annual income includes the amount of imputed welfare income (because of a specified welfare benefits reduction, as specified in notice to the PHA by the welfare agency), plus the total amount of other annual income as determined in accordance with § 5.609.
              (2) At the request of the PHA, the welfare agency will inform the PHA in writing of the amount and term of any specified welfare benefit reduction for a family member, and the reason for such reduction, and will also inform the PHA of any subsequent changes in the term or amount of such specified welfare benefit reduction. The PHA will use this information to determine the amount of imputed welfare income for a family.
              (3) A family's annual income includes imputed welfare income in family annual income, as determined at the PHA's interim or regular reexamination of family income and composition, during the term of the welfare benefits reduction (as specified in information provided to the PHA by the welfare agency).
              (4) The amount of the imputed welfare income is offset by the amount of additional income a family receives that commences after the time the sanction was imposed. When such additional income from other sources is at least equal to the imputed welfare income, the imputed welfare income is reduced to zero.
              (5) The PHA may not include imputed welfare income in annual income if the family was not an assisted resident at the time of sanction.
              (d) Review of PHA decision—(1) Public housing. If a public housing tenant claims that the PHA has not correctly calculated the amount of imputed welfare income in accordance with HUD requirements, and if the PHA denies the family's request to modify such amount, the PHA shall give the tenant written notice of such denial, with a brief explanation of the basis for the PHA determination of the amount of imputed welfare income. The PHA notice shall also state that if the tenant does not agree with the PHA determination, the tenant may request a grievance hearing in accordance with part 966, subpart B of this title to review the PHA determination. The tenant is not required to pay an escrow deposit pursuant to § 966.55(e) for the portion of tenant rent attributable to the imputed welfare income in order to obtain a grievance hearing on the PHA determination.
              (2) Section 8 participant. A participant in the Section 8 tenant-based assistance program may request an informal hearing, in accordance with § 982.555 of this title, to review the PHA determination of the amount of imputed welfare income that must be included in the family's annual income in accordance with this section. If the family claims that such amount is not correctly calculated in accordance with HUD requirements, and if the PHA denies the family's request to modify such amount, the PHA shall give the family written notice of such denial, with a brief explanation of the basis for the PHA determination of the amount of imputed welfare income. Such notice shall also state that if the family does not agree with the PHA determination, the family may request an informal hearing on the determination under the PHA hearing procedure.
              (e) PHA relation with welfare agency. (1) The PHA must ask welfare agencies to inform the PHA of any specified welfare benefits reduction for a family member, the reason for such reduction, the term of any such reduction, and any subsequent welfare agency determination affecting the amount or term of a specified welfare benefits reduction. If the welfare agency determines a specified welfare benefits reduction for a family member, and gives the PHA written notice of such reduction, the family's annual incomes shall include the imputed welfare income because of the specified welfare benefits reduction.
              (2) The PHA is responsible for determining the amount of imputed welfare income that is included in the family's annual income as a result of a specified welfare benefits reduction as determined by the welfare agency, and specified in the notice by the welfare agency to the PHA. However, the PHA is not responsible for determining whether a reduction of welfare benefits by the welfare agency was correctly determined by the welfare agency in accordance with welfare program requirements and procedures, nor for providing the opportunity for review or hearing on such welfare agency determinations.
              (3) Such welfare agency determinations are the responsibility of the welfare agency, and the family may seek appeal of such determinations through the welfare agency's normal due process procedures. The PHA shall be entitled to rely on the welfare agency notice to the PHA of the welfare agency's determination of a specified welfare benefits reduction.
              [65 FR 16717, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.617
              Self-sufficiency incentives for persons with disabilities—Disallowance of increase in annual income.
              (a) Applicable programs. The disallowance of earned income provided by this section is applicable only to the following programs: HOME Investment Partnerships Program (24 CFR part 92); Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (24 CFR part 574); Supportive Housing Program (24 CFR part 583); and the Housing Choice Voucher Program (24 CFR part 982).
              (b) Definitions. The following definitions apply for purposes of this section.
              
                Baseline income. The annual income immediately prior to implementation of the disallowance described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section of a person with disabilities (who is a member of a qualified family).
              
                Disallowance. Exclusion from annual income.
              
                Previously unemployed includes a person with disabilities who has earned, in the twelve months previous to employment, no more than would be received for 10 hours of work per week for 50 weeks at the established minimum wage.
              
                Qualified family. A family residing in housing assisted under one of the programs listed in paragraph (a) of this section or receiving tenant-based rental assistance under one of the programs listed in paragraph (a) of this section.

              (1) Whose annual income increases as a result of employment of a family member who is a person with disabilities and who was previously unemployed for one or more years prior to employment;
              
              (2) Whose annual income increases as a result of increased earnings by a family member who is a person with disabilities during participation in any economic self-sufficiency or other job training program; or
              (3) Whose annual income increases, as a result of new employment or increased earnings of a family member who is a person with disabilities, during or within six months after receiving assistance, benefits or services under any state program for temporary assistance for needy families funded under Part A of Title IV of the Social Security Act, as determined by the responsible entity in consultation with the local agencies administering temporary assistance for needy families (TANF) and Welfare-to-Work (WTW) programs. The TANF program is not limited to monthly income maintenance, but also includes such benefits and services as one-time payments, wage subsidies and transportation assistance—provided that the total amount over a six-month period is at least $500.
              (c) Disallowance of increase in annual income—(1) Initial 12-month exclusion. During the 12-month period beginning on the date a member who is a person with disabilities of a qualified family is first employed or the family first experiences an increase in annual income attributable to employment, the responsible entity must exclude from annual income (as defined in the regulations governing the applicable program listed in paragraph (a) of this section) of a qualified family any increase in income of the family member who is a person with disabilities as a result of employment over prior income of that family member.
              (2) Second 12-month exclusion and phase-in. Upon the expiration of the 12-month period defined in paragraph (c)(1) of this section and for the subsequent 12-month period, the responsible entity must exclude from annual income of a qualified family at least 50 percent of any increase in income of such family member as a result of employment over the family member's baseline income.
              (3) Maximum 2-year disallowance. The disallowance of increased income of an individual family member who is a person with disabilities as provided in paragraph (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is limited to a lifetime 24-month period. The disallowance applies for a maximum of 12 months for disallowance under paragraph (c)(1) of this section and a maximum of 12 months for disallowance under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, during the 24- month period starting from the initial exclusion under paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
              (4) Effect of changes on currently participating families. Families eligible for and participating in the disallowance of earned income under this section prior to May 9, 2016 will continue to be governed by this section in effect as it existed immediately prior to that date (see 24 CFR parts 0 to 199, revised as of April 1, 2016).
              (d) Inapplicability to admission. The disallowance of increases in income as a result of employment of persons with disabilities under this section does not apply for purposes of admission to the program (including the determination of income eligibility or any income targeting that may be applicable).
              [66 FR 6223, Jan. 19, 2001, as amended at 67 FR 6820, Feb. 13, 2002; 81 FR 12370, Mar. 8, 2016]
            
          
          
            Family Payment
            
              § 5.628
              Total tenant payment.
              (a) Determining total tenant payment (TTP). Total tenant payment is the highest of the following amounts, rounded to the nearest dollar:
              (1) 30 percent of the family's monthly adjusted income;
              (2) 10 percent of the family's monthly income;
              (3) If the family is receiving payments for welfare assistance from a public agency and a part of those payments, adjusted in accordance with the family's actual housing costs, is specifically designated by such agency to meet the family's housing costs, the portion of those payments which is so designated; or

              (4) The minimum rent, as determined in accordance with § 5.630.
              
              (b) Determining TTP if family's welfare assistance is ratably reduced. If the family's welfare assistance is ratably reduced from the standard of need by applying a percentage, the amount calculated under paragraph (a)(3) of this section is the amount resulting from one application of the percentage.
              [65 FR 16718, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.630
              Minimum rent.
              (a) Minimum rent. (1) The PHA must charge a family no less than a minimum monthly rent established by the responsible entity, except as described in paragraph (b) of this section.
              (2) For the public housing program and the section 8 moderate rehabilitation, and certificate or voucher programs, the PHA may establish a minimum rent of up to $50.
              (3) For other section 8 programs, the minimum rent is $25.
              (b) Financial hardship exemption from minimum rent—(1) When is family exempt from minimum rent? The responsible entity must grant an exemption from payment of minimum rent if the family is unable to pay the minimum rent because of financial hardship, as described in the responsible entity's written policies. Financial hardship includes these situations:
              (i) When the family has lost eligibility for or is awaiting an eligibility determination for a Federal, State, or local assistance program, including a family that includes a member who is a noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence under the Immigration and Nationality Act who would be entitled to public benefits but for title IV of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act of 1996;
              (ii) When the family would be evicted because it is unable to pay the minimum rent;
              (iii) When the income of the family has decreased because of changed circumstances, including loss of employment;
              (iv) When a death has occurred in the family; and
              (v) Other circumstances determined by the responsible entity or HUD.
              (2) What happens if family requests a hardship exemption? (i) Public housing. (A) If a family requests a financial hardship exemption, the PHA must suspend the minimum rent requirement beginning the month following the family's request for a hardship exemption, and continuing until the PHA determines whether there is a qualifying financial hardship and whether it is temporary or long term.
              (B) The PHA must promptly determine whether a qualifying hardship exists and whether it is temporary or long term.
              (C) The PHA may not evict the family for nonpayment of minimum rent during the 90-day period beginning the month following the family's request for a hardship exemption.
              (D) If the PHA determines that a qualifying financial hardship is temporary, the PHA must reinstate the minimum rent from the beginning of the suspension of the minimum rent. The PHA must offer the family a reasonable repayment agreement, on terms and conditions established by the PHA, for the amount of back minimum rent owed by the family.
              (ii) All section 8 programs. (A) If a family requests a financial hardship exemption, the responsible entity must suspend the minimum rent requirement beginning the month following the family's request for a hardship exemption until the responsible entity determines whether there is a qualifying financial hardship, and whether such hardship is temporary or long term.
              (B) The responsible entity must promptly determine whether a qualifying hardship exists and whether it is temporary or long term.
              (C) If the responsible entity determines that a qualifying financial hardship is temporary, the PHA must not impose the minimum rent during the 90-day period beginning the month following the date of the family's request for a hardship exemption. At the end of the 90-day suspension period, the responsible entity must reinstate the minimum rent from the beginning of the suspension. The family must be offered a reasonable repayment agreement, on terms and conditions established by the responsible entity, for the amount of back rent owed by the family.
              (iii) All programs. (A) If the responsible entity determines there is no qualifying financial hardship exemption, the responsible entity must reinstate the minimum rent, including back rent owed from the beginning of the suspension. The family must pay the back rent on terms and conditions established by the responsible entity.
              (B) If the responsible entity determines a qualifying financial hardship is long term, the responsible entity must exempt the family from the minimum rent requirements so long as such hardship continues. Such exemption shall apply from the beginning of the month following the family's request for a hardship exemption until the end of the qualifying financial hardship.
              (C) The financial hardship exemption only applies to payment of the minimum rent (as determined pursuant to § 5.628(a)(4) and § 5.630), and not to the other elements used to calculate the total tenant payment (as determined pursuant to § 5.628(a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3)).
              (3) Public housing: Grievance hearing concerning PHA denial of request for hardship exemption. If a public housing family requests a hearing under the PHA grievance procedure, to review the PHA's determination denying or limiting the family's claim to a financial hardship exemption, the family is not required to pay any escrow deposit in order to obtain a grievance hearing on such issues.
              [65 FR 16718, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.632
              Utility reimbursements.
              (a) Applicability. This section is applicable to:
              (1) The Section 8 programs other than the Section 8 voucher program (for distribution of a voucher housing assistance payment that exceeds rent to owner, see § 982.514(b) of this title);
              (2) A public housing family paying an income-based rent (see § 960.253 of this title). (Utility reimbursement is not paid for a public housing family that is paying a flat rent.)
              (b) Payment of utility reimbursement. (1) The responsible entity pays a utility reimbursement if the utility allowance (for tenant-paid utilities) exceeds the amount of the total tenant payment. The responsible entity has the option of making utility reimbursement payments not less than once per calendar-year quarter, for reimbursements totaling $45 or less per quarter. In the event a family leaves the program in advance of its next quarterly reimbursement, the responsible entity must reimburse the family for a prorated share of the applicable reimbursement. PHAs and owners exercising this option must have a hardship policy in place for tenants.
              (2) In the public housing program (where the family is paying an income-based rent), the Section 8 moderate rehabilitation program and the Section 8 certificate or voucher program, the PHA may pay the utility reimbursement either to the family or directly to the utility supplier to pay the utility bill on behalf of the family. If the PHA elects to pay the utility supplier, the PHA must notify the family of the amount paid to the utility supplier.
              (3) In the other Section 8 programs, the owner must pay the utility reimbursement either:
              (i) To the family, or
              (ii) With consent of the family, to the utility supplier to pay the utility bill on behalf of the family.
              [65 FR 16719, Mar. 29, 2000, as amended at 82 FR 58339, Dec. 12, 2017]
            
            
              § 5.634
              Tenant rent.
              (a) Section 8 programs. For Section 8 programs other than the Section 8 voucher program, tenant rent is total tenant payment minus any utility allowance.
              (b) Public housing. See § 960.253 of this title for the determination of tenant rent.
              [65 FR 16719, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
          
          
            Section 8 Project-Based Assistance: Occupancy Requirements
            
              § 5.653
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Admission—Income-eligibility and income-targeting.
              (a) Applicability. This section describes requirements concerning income-eligibility and income-targeting that apply to the Section 8 project-based assistance programs, except for the moderate rehabilitation and the project-based certificate or voucher programs.
              
              (b) Who is eligible?—(1) Basic eligibility. An applicant must meet all eligibility requirements in order to receive housing assistance. At a minimum, the applicant must be a family, as defined in § 5.403, and must be income-eligible, as described in this section. Such eligible applicants include single persons.
              (2) Low income limit. No family other than a low income family is eligible for admission to the Section 8 project-based assistance programs. (This paragraph (b) does not apply to the Section 8 project-based voucher program under part 983 of this title.)
              (c) Targeting to extremely low income families. For each project assisted under a contract for project-based assistance, of the dwelling units that become available for occupancy in any fiscal year that are assisted under the contract, not less than 40 percent shall be available for leasing only by families that are extremely low income families at the time of admission.
              (d) Limitation on admission of non-very low income families—(1) Admission to units available before October 1, 1981. Not more than 25 percent of the Section 8 project-based dwelling units that were available for occupancy under Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments Contracts effective before October 1, 1981 and that are leased on or after that date shall be available for leasing by low income families other than very low income families. HUD reserves the right to limit the admission of low income families other than very low income families to these units.
              (2) Admission to units available on or after October 1, 1981. Not more than 15 percent of the Section 8 project-based dwelling units that initially become available for occupancy under Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) Contracts on or after October 1, 1981 shall be available for leasing by low income families other than families that are very low income families at the time of admission to the Section 8 program. Except with the prior approval of HUD under paragraphs (d)(3) and (d)(4) of this section, the owner may only lease such units to very low income families.
              (3) Request for exception. A request by an owner for approval of admission of low income families other than very low income families to section 8 project-based units must state the basis for requesting the exception and provide supporting data. Bases for exceptions that may be considered include the following:
              (i) Need for admission of a broader range of tenants to preserve the financial or management viability of a project because there is an insufficient number of potential applicants who are very low income families;
              (ii) Commitment of an owner to attaining occupancy by families with a broad range of incomes;
              (iii) Project supervision by a State Housing Finance Agency having a policy of occupancy by families with a broad range of incomes supported by evidence that the Agency is pursuing this goal throughout its assisted projects in the community, or a project with financing through Section 11(b) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437i) or under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 103); and
              (iv) Low-income families that otherwise would be displaced from a Section 8 project.
              (4) Action on request for exception. Whether to grant any request for exception is a matter committed by law to HUD's discretion, and no implication is intended to be created that HUD will seek to grant approvals up to the maximum limits permitted by statute, nor is any presumption of an entitlement to an exception created by the specification of certain grounds for exception that HUD may consider. HUD will review exceptions granted to owners at regular intervals. HUD may withdraw permission to exercise those exceptions for program applicants at any time that exceptions are not being used or after a periodic review, based on the findings of the review.
              (e) Income used for eligibility and targeting. Family annual income (see § 5.609) is used both for determination of income-eligibility and for income-targeting under this section.
              (f) Reporting. The Section 8 owner must comply with HUD-prescribed reporting requirements, including income reporting requirements that will permit HUD to maintain the data necessary to monitor compliance with income-eligibility and income-targeting requirements.
              [65 FR 16719, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.655
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Owner preferences in selection for a project or unit.
              (a) Applicability. This section applies to the section 8 project-based assistance programs. The section describes requirements concerning the Section 8 owner's selection of residents to occupy a project or unit, except for the moderate rehabilitation and the project-based certificate or voucher programs.
              (b) Selection—(1) Selection for owner's project or unit. Selection for occupancy of a project or unit is the function of the Section 8 owner. However, selection is subject to the income-eligibility and income-targeting requirements in § 5.653.
              (2) Tenant selection plan. The owner must adopt a written tenant selection plan in accordance with HUD requirements.
              (3) Amount of income. The owner may not select a family for occupancy of a project or unit in an order different from the order on the owner's waiting list for the purpose of selecting a relatively higher income family. However, an owner may select a family for occupancy of a project or unit based on its income in order to satisfy the targeting requirements of § 5.653(c).
              (4) Selection for particular unit. In selecting a family to occupy a particular unit, the owner may match family characteristics with the type of unit available, for example, number of bedrooms. If a unit has special accessibility features for persons with disabilities, the owner must first offer the unit to families which include persons with disabilities who require such features (see §§ 8.27 and 100.202 of this title).
              (5) Housing assistance limitation for single persons. A single person who is not an elderly or displaced person, a person with disabilities, or the remaining member of a resident family may not be provided a housing unit with two or more bedrooms.
              (c) Particular owner preferences. The owner must inform all applicants about available preferences and must give applicants an opportunity to show that they qualify for available preferences.
              (1) Residency requirements or preferences. (i) Residency requirements are prohibited. Although the owner is not prohibited from adopting a residency preference, the owner may only adopt or implement residency preferences in accordance with non-discrimination and equal opportunity requirements listed at § 5.105(a).
              (ii) A residency preference is a preference for admission of persons who reside in a specified geographic area (“residency preference area”).
              (iii) An owner's residency preference must be approved by HUD in one of the following methods:
              (A) Prior approval of the housing market area in the Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing plan (in accordance with § 108.25 of this title) as a residency preference area;
              (B) Prior approval of the residency preference area in the PHA plan of the jurisdiction in which the project is located;
              (C) Modification of the Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan, in accordance with § 108.25 of this title,
              (iv) Use of a residency preference may not have the purpose or effect of delaying or otherwise denying admission to a project or unit based on the race, color, ethnic origin, gender, religion, disability, or age of any member of an applicant family.
              (v) A residency preference must not be based on how long an applicant has resided or worked in a residency preference area.
              (vi) Applicants who are working or who have been notified that they are hired to work in a residency preference area must be treated as residents of the residency preference area. The owner may treat graduates of, or active participants in, education and training programs in a residency preference area as residents of the residency preference area if the education or training program is designed to prepare individuals for the job market.
              (2) Preference for working families. (i) The owner may adopt a preference for admission of working families (families where the head, spouse or sole member is employed). However, an applicant shall be given the benefit of the working family preference if the head and spouse, or sole member, is age 62 or older, or is a person with disabilities.
              (ii) If the owner adopts a preference for admission of working families, the owner must not give a preference based on the amount of earned income.
              (3) Preference for person with disabilities. The owner may adopt a preference for admission of families that include a person with disabilities. However, the owner may not adopt a preference for admission of persons with a specific disability.
              (4) Preference for victims of domestic violence. The owner should consider whether to adopt a preference for admission of families that include victims of domestic violence.
              (5) Preference for single persons who are elderly, displaced, homeless or persons with disabilities over other single persons. The owner may adopt a preference for admission of single persons who are age 62 or older, displaced, homeless, or persons with disabilities over other single persons.
              [65 FR 16720, Mar. 29, 2000]
            
            
              § 5.657
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Reexamination of family income and composition.
              (a) Applicability. This section states requirements for reexamination of family income and composition in the Section 8 project-based assistance programs, except for the moderate rehabilitation and the project-based certificate or voucher programs.
              (b) Regular reexamination. The owner must conduct a reexamination and redetermination of family income and composition at least annually.
              (c) Interim reexaminations. A family may request an interim reexamination of family income because of any changes since the last examination. The owner must make the interim reexamination within a reasonable time after the family request. The owner may adopt policies prescribing when and under what conditions the family must report a change in family income or composition.
              (d) Streamlined income determination—(1) General. An owner may elect to apply a streamlined income determination to families receiving fixed income as described in paragraph (d)(3) of this section.
              (2) Definition of “fixed income”. For purposes of this section, “fixed income” means periodic payments at reasonably predictable levels from one or more of the following sources:
              (i) Social Security, Supplemental Security Income, Supplemental Disability Insurance.
              (ii) Federal, state, local, or private pension plans.
              (iii) Annuities or other retirement benefit programs, insurance policies, disability or death benefits, or other similar types of periodic receipts.
              (iv) Any other source of income subject to adjustment by a verifiable COLA or current rate of interest.
              (3) Method of streamlined income determination. Owners using the streamlined income determination must adjust a family's income according to the percentage of a family's unadjusted income that is from fixed income.
              (i) When 90 percent or more of a family's unadjusted income consists of fixed income, owners using streamlined income determinations must apply a COLA or COLAs to the family's fixed-income sources, provided that the family certifies both that 90 percent or more of their unadjusted income is fixed income and that their sources of fixed income have not changed from the previous year. For non-fixed income, owners may choose, but are not required, to make appropriate adjustments pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.
              (ii) When less than 90 percent of a family's unadjusted income consists of fixed income, owners using streamlined income determinations must apply a COLA to each of the family's sources of fixed income. Owners must determine all other income pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.
              (4) COLA rate applied by owners. Owners using streamlined income determinations must adjust a family's fixed income using a COLA or current interest rate that applies to each specific source of fixed income and is available from a public source or through tenant-provided, third-party-generated documentation. If no public verification or tenant-provided documentation is available, then the owner must obtain third-party verification of the income amounts in order to calculate the change in income for the source.
              (5) Triennial verification. For any income determined pursuant to a streamlined income determination, an owner must obtain third-party verification of all income amounts every 3 years.
              [65 FR 16720, Mar. 29, 2000, as amended at 81 FR 12371, Mar. 8, 2016; 82 FR 58340, Dec. 12, 2017]
            
            
              § 5.659
              Family information and verification.
              (a) Applicability. This section states requirements for reexamination of family income and composition in the Section 8 project-based assistance programs, except for the moderate rehabilitation program and the project-based certificate or voucher programs.
              (b) Family obligation to supply information. (1) The family must supply any information that HUD or the owner determines is necessary in administration of the Section 8 program, including submission of required evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status (as provided by part 5, subpart E of this title). “Information” includes any requested certification, release or other documentation.
              (2) The family must supply any information requested by the owner or HUD for use in a regularly scheduled reexamination or an interim reexamination of family income and composition in accordance with HUD requirements.
              (3) For requirements concerning the following, see part 5, subpart B of this title:
              (i) Family verification and disclosure of social security numbers;
              (ii) Family execution and submission of consent forms for obtaining wage and claim information from State Wage Information Collection Agencies (SWICAs).
              (4) Any information supplied by the family must be true and complete.
              (c) Family release and consent. (1) As a condition of admission to or continued occupancy of a unit with Section 8 assistance, the owner must require the family head, and such other family members as the owner designates, to execute a HUD-approved release and consent form (including any release and consent as required under § 5.230 of this title) authorizing any depository or private source of income, or any Federal, State or local agency, to furnish or release to the owner or HUD such information as the owner or HUD determines to be necessary.
              (2) The use or disclosure of information obtained from a family or from another source pursuant to this release and consent shall be limited to purposes directly connected with administration of the Section 8 program.
              (d) Owner responsibility for verification. Except as allowed under paragraph (e), the owner must obtain and document in the family file third party verification of the following factors, or must document in the file why third party verification was not available:
              (1) Reported family annual income;
              (2) The value of assets;
              (3) Expenses related to deductions from annual income; and
              (4) Other factors that affect the determination of adjusted income.
              (e) Verification of assets. For a family with net assets equal to or less than $5,000, an owner may accept, for purposes of recertification of income, a family's declaration that it has net assets equal to or less than $5,000 without taking additional steps to verify the accuracy of the declaration, except as required in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
              (1) The declaration must state the amount of income the family expects to receive from such assets; this amount must be included in the family's income.
              (2) An owner must obtain third-party verification of all family assets every 3 years.
              [65 FR 16721, Mar. 29, 2000, as amended at 82 FR 58340, Dec. 12, 2017]
            
            
              § 5.661
              Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Approval for police or other security personnel to live in project.
              (a) Applicability. This section describes when a Section 8 owner may lease a Section 8 unit to police or other security personnel with continued Section 8 assistance for the unit. This section applies to the Section 8 project-based assistance programs.
              (b) Terms. (1) Security personnel means:
              (i) A police officer, or
              (ii) A qualified security professional, with adequate training and experience to provide security services for project residents.
              (2) Police officer means a person employed on a full-time basis as a duly licensed professional police officer by a Federal, State or local government or by any agency of these governments.
              (3) Security includes the protection of project residents, including resident project management from criminal or other activity that is a threat to person or property, or that arouses fears of such threat.
              (c) Owner application. (1) The owner may submit a written application to the contract administrator (PHA or HUD) for approval to lease an available unit in a Section 8 project to security personnel who would not otherwise be eligible for Section 8 assistance, for the purpose of increasing security for Section 8 families residing in the project.
              (2) The owner's application must include the following information:
              (i) A description of criminal activities in the project and the surrounding community, and the effect of criminal activity on the security of project residents.
              (ii) Qualifications of security personnel who will reside in the project, and the period of residence by such personnel. How owner proposes to check backgrounds and qualifications of any security personnel who will reside in the project.
              (iii) Full disclosure of any family relationship between the owner and any security personnel. For this purpose, “owner” includes a principal or other interested party.
              (iv) How residence by security personnel in a project unit will increase security for Section 8 assisted families residing in the project.
              (v) The amount payable monthly as rent to the unit owner by security personnel residing in the project (including a description of how this amount is determined), and the amount of any other compensation by the owner to such resident security personnel.
              (vi) The terms of occupancy by such security personnel. The lease by owner to the approved security personnel may provide that occupancy of the unit is authorized only while the security personnel is satisfactorily performing any agreed responsibilities and functions for project security.
              (vii) Other information as requested by the contract administrator.
              (d) Action by contract administrator. (1) The contract administrator shall have discretion to approve or disapprove owner's application, and to impose conditions for approval of occupancy by security personnel in a section 8 project unit.
              (2) Notice of approval by the contract administrator shall specify the term of such approved occupancy. Such approval may be withdrawn at the discretion of the contract administrator, for example, if the contract administrator determines that such occupancy is not providing adequate security benefits as proposed in the owner's application; or that security benefits from such occupancy are not a sufficient return for program costs.
              (e) Housing assistance payment and rent. (1) During approved occupancy by security personnel as provided in this section, the amount of the monthly housing assistance payment to the owner shall be equal to the contract rent (as determined in accordance with the HAP contract and HUD requirements) minus the amount (as approved by the contract administrator) of rent payable monthly as rent to the unit owner by such security personnel. The owner shall bear the risk of collecting such rent from such security personnel, and the amount of the housing assistance payment shall not be increased because of non-payment by such security personnel. The owner shall not be entitled to receive any vacancy payment for the period following occupancy by such security personnel.

              (2) In approving the amount of monthly rent payable by security personnel for occupancy of a contract unit, the contract administrator may consider whether security services to be performed are an adequate return for housing assistance payments on the unit, or whether the cost of security services should be borne by the owner from other project income.
              [65 FR 16721, Mar. 29, 2000]
              
                Effective Date Note:
                At 65 FR 16721, Mar. 29, 2000, § 5.661 was added. This section contains information collection and recordkeeping requirements and will not become effective until approval has been given by the Office of Management and Budget.
              
            
          
        
        
          Subpart G—Physical Condition Standards and Inspection Requirements
          
            Source:
            63 FR 46577, Sept. 1, 1998, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5.701
            Applicability.
            (a) This subpart applies to housing assisted under the HUD programs listed in 24 CFR 200.853(a).
            (b) This subpart applies to housing with mortgages insured or held by HUD, or housing that is receiving assistance from HUD, under the programs listed in 24 CFR 200.853(b).
            (c) This subpart also applies to Public Housing (housing receiving assistance under the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, other than under section 8 of the Act).
            (d) For purposes of this subpart, the term “HUD housing” means the types of housing listed in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section.
            [63 FR 46577, Sept. 1, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 77240, Dec. 8, 2000]
          
          
            § 5.703
            Physical condition standards for HUD housing that is decent, safe, sanitary and in good repair (DSS/GR).
            HUD housing must be decent, safe, sanitary and in good repair. Owners of housing described in § 5.701(a), mortgagors of housing described in § 5.701(b), and PHAs and other entities approved by HUD owning housing described in § 5.701(c), must maintain such housing in a manner that meets the physical condition standards set forth in this section in order to be considered decent, safe, sanitary and in good repair. These standards address the major areas of the HUD housing: the site; the building exterior; the building systems; the dwelling units; the common areas; and health and safety considerations.
            (a) Site. The site components, such as fencing and retaining walls, grounds, lighting, mailboxes/project signs, parking lots/driveways, play areas and equipment, refuse disposal, roads, storm drainage and walkways must be free of health and safety hazards and be in good repair. The site must not be subject to material adverse conditions, such as abandoned vehicles, dangerous walks or steps, poor drainage, septic tank back-ups, sewer hazards, excess accumulations of trash, vermin or rodent infestation or fire hazards.
            (b) Building exterior. Each building on the site must be structurally sound, secure, habitable, and in good repair. Each building's doors, fire escapes, foundations, lighting, roofs, walls, and windows, where applicable, must be free of health and safety hazards, operable, and in good repair.
            (c) Building systems. Each building's domestic water, electrical system, elevators, emergency power, fire protection, HVAC, and sanitary system must be free of health and safety hazards, functionally adequate, operable, and in good repair.
            (d) Dwelling units. (1) Each dwelling unit within a building must be structurally sound, habitable, and in good repair. All areas and aspects of the dwelling unit (for example, the unit's bathroom, call-for-aid (if applicable), ceiling, doors, electrical systems, floors, hot water heater, HVAC (where individual units are provided), kitchen, lighting, outlets/switches, patio/porch/balcony, smoke detectors, stairs, walls, and windows) must be free of health and safety hazards, functionally adequate, operable, and in good repair.
            (2) Where applicable, the dwelling unit must have hot and cold running water, including an adequate source of potable water (note for example that single room occupancy units need not contain water facilities).
            (3) If the dwelling unit includes its own sanitary facility, it must be in proper operating condition, usable in privacy, and adequate for personal hygiene and the disposal of human waste.

            (4) The dwelling unit must include at least one battery-operated or hard-wired smoke detector, in proper working condition, on each level of the unit.
            (e) Common areas. The common areas must be structurally sound, secure, and functionally adequate for the purposes intended. The basement/garage/carport, restrooms, closets, utility, mechanical, community rooms, day care, halls/corridors, stairs, kitchens, laundry rooms, office, porch, patio, balcony, and trash collection areas, if applicable, must be free of health and safety hazards, operable, and in good repair. All common area ceilings, doors, floors, HVAC, lighting, outlets/switches, smoke detectors, stairs, walls, and windows, to the extent applicable, must be free of health and safety hazards, operable, and in good repair. These standards for common areas apply, to a varying extent, to all HUD housing, but will be particularly relevant to congregate housing, independent group homes/residences, and single room occupancy units, in which the individual dwelling units (sleeping areas) do not contain kitchen and/or bathroom facilities.
            (f) Health and safety concerns. All areas and components of the housing must be free of health and safety hazards. These areas include, but are not limited to, air quality, electrical hazards, elevators, emergency/fire exits, flammable materials, garbage and debris, handrail hazards, infestation, and lead-based paint. For example, the buildings must have fire exits that are not blocked and have hand rails that are undamaged and have no other observable deficiencies. The housing must have no evidence of infestation by rats, mice, or other vermin, or of garbage and debris. The housing must have no evidence of electrical hazards, natural hazards, or fire hazards. The dwelling units and common areas must have proper ventilation and be free of mold, odor (e.g., propane, natural gas, methane gas), or other observable deficiencies. The housing must comply with all requirements related to the evaluation and reduction of lead-based paint hazards and have available proper certifications of such (see 24 CFR part 35).
            (g) Compliance with State and local codes. The physical condition standards in this section do not supersede or preempt State and local codes for building and maintenance with which HUD housing must comply. HUD housing must continue to adhere to these codes.
          
          
            § 5.705
            Uniform physical inspection requirements.
            Any entity responsible for conducting a physical inspection of HUD housing, to determine compliance with this subpart, must inspect such HUD housing annually in accordance with HUD-prescribed physical inspection procedures. The inspection must be conducted annually unless the program regulations governing the housing provide otherwise or unless HUD has provided otherwise by notice.
            [65 FR 77240, Dec. 8, 2000]
          
        
        
          Subpart H—Uniform Financial Reporting Standards
          
            § 5.801
            Uniform financial reporting standards.
            (a) Applicability. This subpart H implements uniform financial reporting standards for:

            (1) Public housing agencies (PHAs) receiving assistance under sections 5, 9, or 14 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437c, 1437g, and 1437l) (Public Housing);
            (2) PHAs as contract administrators for any Section 8 project-based or tenant-based housing assistance payments program, which includes assistance under the following programs:
            (i) Section 8 project-based housing assistance payments programs, including, but not limited to, the Section 8 New Construction, Substantial Rehabilitation, Loan Management Set-Aside, Property Disposition, and Moderate Rehabilitation (including the Single Room Occupancy program for homeless individuals);
            (ii) Section 8 Project-Based Certificate programs;
            (iii) Any program providing Section 8 project-based renewal contracts; and
            (iv) Section 8 tenant-based assistance under the Section 8 Certificate and Voucher program.

            (3) Owners of housing assisted under any Section 8 project-based housing assistance payments program:
            
            (i) Including, but not limited to, the Section 8 New Construction, Substantial Rehabilitation, Loan Management Set-Aside, and Property Disposition programs;
            (ii) Excluding the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Program (which includes the Single Room Occupancy program for homeless individuals) and the Section 8 Project-Based Certificate Program;
            (4) Owners of multifamily projects receiving direct or indirect assistance from HUD, or with mortgages insured, coinsured, or held by HUD, including but not limited to housing under the following HUD programs:
            (i) Section 202 Program of Supportive Housing for the Elderly;
            (ii) Section 811 Program of Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities;
            (iii) Section 202 loan program for projects for the elderly and handicapped (including 202/8 projects and 202/162 projects);

            (iv) Section 207 of the National Housing Act (NHA) (12 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (Rental Housing Insurance);
            (v) Section 213 of the NHA (Cooperative Housing Insurance);
            (vi) Section 220 of the NHA (Rehabilitation and Neighborhood Conservation Housing Insurance);
            (vii) Section 221(d) (3) and (5) of the NHA (Housing for Moderate Income and Displaced Families);
            (viii) Section 221(d)(4) of the NHA (Housing for Moderate Income and Displaced Families);
            (ix) Section 231 of the NHA (Housing for Elderly Persons);
            (x) Section 232 of the NHA (Mortgage Insurance for Nursing Homes, Intermediate Care Facilities, Board and Care Homes);
            (xi) Section 234(d) of the NHA (Rental) (Mortgage Insurance for Condominiums);
            (xii) Section 236 of the NHA (Rental and Cooperative Housing for Lower Income Families);
            (xiii) Section 241 of the NHA (Supplemental Loans for Multifamily Projects); and
            (5) HUD-approved Title I and Title II supervised and nonsupervised lenders and mortgagees.
            (6) Operators of projects with mortgages insured or held by HUD under section 232 of the Act (Mortgage Insurance for Nursing Homes, Intermediate Care Facilities, Board and Care Homes).
            (b) Submission of financial information. Entities (or individuals) to which this subpart is applicable must provide to HUD such financial information as required by HUD. Such information must be provided on an annual basis, except as required more frequently under paragraph (c)(4) of this section. This information must be:
            (1) Prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles as further defined by HUD in supplementary guidance;
            (2) Submitted electronically to HUD through the internet, or in such other electronic format designated by HUD, or in such non-electronic format as HUD may allow if the burden or cost of electronic reporting is determined by HUD to be excessive; and
            (3) Submitted in such form and substance as prescribed by HUD.
            (4) With respect to financial reports relating to properties insured under section 232 of the Act, concurrently with submitting the information to HUD, submitted to the mortgagee in a format and manner prescribed and/or approved by HUD.
            (c) Filing of financial reports. (1) For entities listed in paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section, the financial information to be submitted to HUD in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, must be submitted to HUD annually, no later than 60 days after the end of the fiscal year of the reporting period, and as otherwise provided by law (for public housing agencies, see also 24 CFR 903.33).
            (2) For entities listed in paragraphs (a)(3) and (4) of this section, the financial information to be submitted to HUD in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, must be submitted to HUD annually, no later than 90 days after the end of the fiscal year of the reporting period, and as otherwise provided by law.

            (3) For those entities listed in paragraph (a)(5) of this section, the financial information to be submitted to HUD in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section must be submitted to HUD annually, no later than 90 days after the end of the fiscal year (or within an extended time if an extension is granted at the sole discretion of the Secretary). An extension request must be received no earlier than 45 days and no later than 15 days prior to the submission deadline.
            (4) For entities listed in paragraph (a)(6) of this section, the financial information to be submitted to HUD in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section must be submitted to HUD on a quarterly and fiscal-year-to-date basis, within 60 calendar days of the end of each quarterly reporting period deadline, except that the final fiscal-year-end quarter and fiscal-year-to-date reports must be submitted to HUD within 90 calendar days of the end of the fiscal-year-end quarter, or within such additional time as may be provided by the Commissioner for good cause shown. HUD may direct that such forms be submitted to the lender or another third party in addition to or in lieu of submission to HUD.
            (i) The financial statements submitted by entities listed in paragraph (a)(6) of this section may, at the operator's option, be operator-certified rather than audited, provided, however, if the operator is also the borrower, then that entity's obligation to submit an annual audited financial statement (in addition to its obligation as an operator to submit financial information on a quarterly and year-to-date basis) remains and is not obviated.
            (ii) If HUD has reason to believe that a particular operator's operator-certified statements may be unreliable (for example, indicate a likely prohibited use of project funds), or are presented in a manner that is inconsistent with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, HUD may, on a case-by-case basis, require audited financial statements from the operator. With respect to facilities with FHA-insured or HUD-held Section 232 mortgages, HUD may request more frequent financial statements from the borrower and/or the operator on a case-by-case basis when the circumstances warrant. Nothing in this section limits HUD's ability to obtain further or more frequent information when appropriate pursuant to the applicable regulatory agreement.
            (d) Reporting compliance dates. Entities (or individuals) that are subject to the reporting requirements in this section must commence compliance with these requirements as follows:
            (1) For PHAs listed in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, the requirements of this section will begin with those PHAs with fiscal years ending September 30, 1999 and later. Unaudited financial statements will be required 60 days after the PHA's fiscal year end, and audited financial statements will then be required no later than 9 months after the PHA's fiscal year end, in accordance with the Single Audit Act and 2 CFR part 200, subpart F. A PHA with a fiscal year ending September 30, 1999 that elects to submit its unaudited financial report earlier than the due date of November 30, 1999 must submit its report as required in this section. On or after September 30, 1998, but prior to November 30, 1999 (except for a PHA with its fiscal year ending September 30, 1999), PHAs may submit their financial reports in accordance with this section.
            (2) For entities listed in paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of this section, the requirements of this section will begin with those entities with fiscal years ending December 31, 1998 and later. Entities listed in paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of this section with fiscal years ending December 31, 1998 that elect to submit their reports earlier than the due date must submit their financial reports as required in this section. On or after September 30, 1998 but prior to January 1, 1999, these entities may submit their financial reports in accordance with this section.

            (3) The requirements of this section apply to the entities listed in paragraph (a)(5) of this section with fiscal years ending on or after September 30, 2002. Audited financial statements submitted by lenders with fiscal years ending before September 30, 2002, may either be submitted in paper or electronically at the lenders' option. Audited financial statements submitted by lenders with fiscal years ending on or after September 30, 2002, must be submitted electronically.
            

            (4) Entities described in paragraph (a)(6) of this section must comply with the requirements of this section with respect to fiscal years commencing on or after the date that is 60 calendar days after the date on which HUD announces, through Federal Register notice, that it has issued guidance on the manner in which these reports will be transmitted to HUD.
            (e) Limitation on changing fiscal years. To allow for a period of consistent assessment of the financial reports submitted to HUD under this subpart part, PHAs listed in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section will not be allowed to change their fiscal years for their first three full fiscal years following October 1, 1998.
            (f) Responsibility for submission of financial report. The responsibility for submission of the financial report due to HUD under this section rests with the individuals and entities listed in paragraph (a) of this section.
            [63 FR 46591, Sept. 1, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 1505, Jan. 11, 1999; 64 FR 33755, June 24, 1999; 65 FR 16295, Mar. 27, 2000; 67 FR 53451, Aug. 15, 2002; 77 FR 55134, Sept. 7, 2012; 78 FR 57060, Sept. 17, 2013; 79 FR 55362, Sept. 16, 2014; 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
        
        
          Subpart I—Preventing Crime in Federally Assisted Housing—Denying Admission and Terminating Tenancy for Criminal Activity or Alcohol Abuse
          
            Source:
            66 FR 28792, May 24, 2001, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            General
            
              § 5.850
              Which subsidized housing is covered by this subpart?
              (a) If you are the owner of federally assisted housing, your federally assisted housing is covered, except as provided in paragraph (b) or (c) of this section.
              (b) If you are operating public housing, this subpart does not apply, but similar provisions applicable to public housing units are found in parts 960 and 966 of this title. If you administer tenant-based assistance under Section 8 or you are the owner of housing assisted with tenant-based assistance under Section 8, this subpart does not apply to you, but similar provisions that do apply are located in part 982 of this title.
              (c) If you own or administer housing assisted by the Rural Housing Administration under section 514 or section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949, this subpart does not apply to you.
            
            
              § 5.851
              What authority do I have to screen applicants and to evict tenants?
              (a) Screening applicants. You are authorized to screen applicants for the programs covered by this part. The provisions of this subpart implement statutory directives that either require or permit you to take action to deny admission to applicants under certain circumstances in accordance with established standards, as described in this subpart. The provisions of this subpart do not constrain your authority to screen out applicants who you determined are unsuitable under your standards for admission.
              (b) Terminating tenancy. You are authorized to terminate tenancy of tenants, in accordance with your leases and landlord-tenant law for the programs covered by this part. The provisions of this subpart implement statutory directives that either require or permit you to terminate tenancy under certain circumstances, as provided in 42 U.S.C. 1437f, 1437n, and 13662, in accordance with established standards, as described in this subpart. You retain authority to terminate tenancy on any basis that is otherwise authorized.
            
            
              § 5.852
              What discretion do I have in screening and eviction actions?
              (a) General. If the law and regulation permit you to take an action but do not require action to be taken, you may take or not take the action in accordance with your standards for admission and eviction. Consistent with the application of your admission and eviction standards, you may consider all of the circumstances relevant to a particular admission or eviction case, such as:
              (1) The seriousness of the offending action;

              (2) The effect on the community of denial or termination or the failure of the responsible entity to take such action;
              (3) The extent of participation by the leaseholder in the offending action;
              (4) The effect of denial of admission or termination of tenancy on household members not involved in the offending action;
              (5) The demand for assisted housing by families who will adhere to lease responsibilities;
              (6) The extent to which the leaseholder has shown personal responsibility and taken all reasonable steps to prevent or mitigate the offending action; and
              (7) The effect of the responsible entity's action on the integrity of the program.
              (b) Exclusion of culpable household member. You may require an applicant (or tenant) to exclude a household member in order to be admitted to the housing program (or continue to reside in the assisted unit), where that household member has participated in or been culpable for action or failure to act that warrants denial (or termination).
              (c) Consideration of rehabilitation. (1) In determining whether to deny admission or terminate tenancy for illegal use of drugs or alcohol abuse by a household member who is no longer engaged in such behavior, you may consider whether such household member is participating in or has successfully completed a supervised drug or alcohol rehabilitation program, or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully (42 U.S.C. 13661). For this purpose, you may require the applicant or tenant to submit evidence of the household member's current participation in, or successful completion of, a supervised drug or alcohol rehabilitation program or evidence of otherwise having been rehabilitated successfully.
              (2) If rehabilitation is not an element of the eligibility determination (see § 5.854(a)(1) for the case where it must be considered), you may choose not to consider whether the person has been rehabilitated.
              (d) Length of period of mandatory prohibition on admission. If a statute requires that you prohibit admission of persons for a prescribed period of time after some disqualifying behavior or event, you may apply that prohibition for a longer period of time.
              (e) Nondiscrimination limitation. Your admission and eviction actions must be consistent with fair housing and equal opportunity provisions of § 5.105.
            
            
              § 5.853
              Definitions.
              (a) Terms found elsewhere. The following terms are defined in subpart A of this part: 1937 Act, covered person, drug, drug-related criminal activity, federally assisted housing, guest, household, HUD, other person under the tenant's control, premises, public housing, public housing agency (PHA), Section 8, violent criminal activity.
              
              (b) Additional terms used in this part are as follows.
              
                Currently engaging in. With respect to behavior such as illegal use of a drug, other drug-related criminal activity, or other criminal activity, currently engaging in means that the individual has engaged in the behavior recently enough to justify a reasonable belief that the individual's behavior is current.
              
                Owner. The owner of federally assisted housing.
              
                Responsible entity. For the Section 8 project-based certificate or project-based voucher program (part 983 of this title) and the Section 8 moderate rehabilitation program (part 882 of this title), responsible entity means the PHA administering the program under an Annual Contributions Contract with HUD. For all other federally assisted housing, the responsible entity means the owner of the housing.
            
          
          
            Denying Admissions
            
              § 5.854
              When must I prohibit admission of individuals who have engaged in drug-related criminal activity?
              (a) You must prohibit admission to your federally assisted housing of an applicant for three years from the date of eviction if any household member has been evicted from federally assisted housing for drug-related criminal activity. However, you may admit the household if:

              (1) The evicted household member who engaged in drug-related criminal activity has successfully completed an approved supervised drug rehabilitation program; or
              (2) The circumstances leading to the eviction no longer exist (for example, the criminal household member has died or is imprisoned).
              (b) You must establish standards that prohibit admission of a household to federally assisted housing if:
              (1) You determine that any household member is currently engaging in illegal use of a drug; or
              (2) You determine that you have reasonable cause to believe that a household member's illegal use or a pattern of illegal use of a drug may interfere with the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents.
            
            
              § 5.855
              When am I specifically authorized to prohibit admission of individuals who have engaged in criminal activity?
              (a) You may prohibit admission of a household to federally assisted housing under your standards if you determine that any household member is currently engaging in, or has engaged in during a reasonable time before the admission decision:
              (1) Drug-related criminal activity;
              (2) Violent criminal activity;
              (3) Other criminal activity that would threaten the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents; or
              (4) Other criminal activity that would threaten the health or safety of the PHA or owner or any employee, contractor, subcontractor or agent of the PHA or owner who is involved in the housing operations.

              (b) You may establish a period before the admission decision during which an applicant must not have engaged in the activities specified in paragraph (a) of this section (reasonable time).
              (c) If you previously denied admission to an applicant because of a determination concerning a member of the household under paragraph (a) of this section, you may reconsider the applicant if you have sufficient evidence that the members of the household are not currently engaged in, and have not engaged in, such criminal activity during a reasonable period, determined by you, before the admission decision.
              (1) You would have sufficient evidence if the household member submitted a certification that she or he is not currently engaged in and has not engaged in such criminal activity during the specified period and provided supporting information from such sources as a probation officer, a landlord, neighbors, social service agency workers and criminal records, which you verified. (See subpart J of this part for one method of checking criminal records.)

              (2) For purposes of this section, a household member is currently engaged in the criminal activity if the person has engaged in the behavior recently enough to justify a reasonable belief that the behavior is current.
            
            
              § 5.856
              When must I prohibit admission of sex offenders?
              You must establish standards that prohibit admission to federally assisted housing if any member of the household is subject to a lifetime registration requirement under a State sex offender registration program. In the screening of applicants, you must perform necessary criminal history background checks in the State where the housing is located and in other States where the household members are known to have resided. (See § 5.905.)
            
            
              § 5.857
              When must I prohibit admission of alcohol abusers?
              You must establish standards that prohibit admission to federally assisted housing if you determine you have reasonable cause to believe that a household member's abuse or pattern of abuse of alcohol interferes with the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents.
            
          
          
            Terminating Tenancy
            
              § 5.858
              What authority do I have to evict drug criminals?

              The lease must provide that drug-related criminal activity engaged in on or near the premises by any tenant, household member, or guest, and any such activity engaged in on the premises by any other person under the tenant's control, is grounds for you to terminate tenancy. In addition, the lease must allow you to evict a family when you determine that a household member is illegally using a drug or when you determine that a pattern of illegal use of a drug interferes with the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents.
            
            
              § 5.859
              When am I specifically authorized to evict other criminals?
              (a) Threat to other residents. The lease must provide that the owner may terminate tenancy for any of the following types of criminal activity by a covered person:
              (1) Any criminal activity that threatens the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents (including property management staff residing on the premises); or
              (2) Any criminal activity that threatens the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of their residences by persons residing in the immediate vicinity of the premises.
              (b) Fugitive felon or parole violator. The lease must provide that you may terminate the tenancy during the term of the lease if a tenant is:
              (1) Fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or confinement after conviction, for a crime, or attempt to commit a crime, that is a felony under the laws of the place from which the individual flees, or that, in the case of the State of New Jersey, is a high misdemeanor; or
              (2) Violating a condition of probation or parole imposed under Federal or State law.
            
            
              § 5.860
              When am I specifically authorized to evict alcohol abusers?
              The lease must provide that you may terminate the tenancy if you determine that a household member's abuse or pattern of abuse of alcohol threatens the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents.
            
            
              § 5.861
              What evidence of criminal activity must I have to evict?
              You may terminate tenancy and evict the tenant through judicial action for criminal activity by a covered person in accordance with this subpart if you determine that the covered person has engaged in the criminal activity, regardless of whether the covered person has been arrested or convicted for such activity and without satisfying a criminal conviction standard of proof of the activity.
            
          
        
        
          Subpart J—Access to Criminal Records and Information
          
            Source:
            66 FR 28794, May 24, 2001, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5.901
            To what criminal records and searches does this subpart apply?
            (a) General criminal records searches. This subpart applies to criminal conviction background checks by PHAs that administer the Section 8 and public housing programs when they obtain criminal conviction records, under the authority of section 6(q) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437d(q)), from a law enforcement agency to prevent admission of criminals to public housing and Section 8 housing and to assist in lease enforcement and eviction.
            (b) Sex offender registration records searches. This subpart applies to PHAs that administer the Section 8 and public housing programs when they obtain sex offender registration information from State and local agencies, under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 13663, to prevent admission of dangerous sex offenders to federally assisted housing.
            (c) Excluded records searches. The provisions of this subpart do not apply to criminal conviction information or sex offender information searches by a PHA or others of information from law enforcement agencies or other sources other than as provided under this subpart.
          
          
            § 5.902
            Definitions.
            (a) Terms found elsewhere. The following terms used in this subpart are defined in subpart A of this part: 1937 Act, drug, federally assisted housing, household, HUD, public housing, public housing agency (PHA), Section 8.
            
            (b) Additional terms used in this subpart are as follows:
            
              Adult. A person who is 18 years of age or older, or who has been convicted of a crime as an adult under any Federal, State, or tribal law.
            
            
              Covered housing. Public housing, project-based assistance under section 8 (including new construction and substantial rehabilitation projects), and tenant-based assistance under section 8.
            
              Law enforcement agency. The National Crime Information Center (NCIC), police departments and other law enforcement agencies that hold criminal conviction records.
            
              Owner. The owner of federally assisted housing.
            
              Responsible entity. For the public housing program, the Section 8 tenant-based assistance program (part 982 of this title), the Section 8 project-based certificate or project-based voucher program (part 983 of this title), and the Section 8 moderate rehabilitation program (part 882 of this title), responsible entity means the PHA administering the program under an Annual Contributions Contract with HUD. For all other Section 8 programs, responsible entity means the Section 8 owner.
          
          
            § 5.903
            What special authority is there to obtain access to criminal records?
            (a) Authority. If you are a PHA that administers the Section 8 program and/or the public housing program, this section authorizes you to obtain criminal conviction records from a law enforcement agency, as defined in § 5.902. You may use the criminal conviction records that you obtain from a law enforcement agency under the authority of this section to screen applicants for admission to covered housing programs and for lease enforcement or eviction of families residing in public housing or receiving Section 8 project-based assistance.
            (b) Consent for release of criminal conviction records. (1) In order to obtain access to records under this section, as a responsible entity you must require every applicant family to submit a consent form signed by each adult household member.
            (2) By execution of the consent form, an adult household member consents that:
            (i) Any law enforcement agency may release criminal conviction records concerning the household member to a PHA in accordance with this section;
            (ii) The PHA may receive the criminal conviction records from a law enforcement agency, and may use the records in accordance with this section.
            (c) Procedure for PHA. (1) When the law enforcement agency receives your request, the law enforcement agency must promptly release to you a certified copy of any criminal conviction records concerning the household member in the possession or control of the law enforcement agency. NCIC records must be provided in accordance with NCIC procedures.
            (2) The law enforcement agency may charge you a reasonable fee for releasing criminal conviction records.
            (d) Owner access to criminal records—(1) General. (i) If an owner submits a request to the PHA for criminal records concerning an adult member of an applicant or resident household, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (d) of this section, the PHA must request the criminal conviction records from the appropriate law enforcement agency or agencies, as determined by the PHA.
            (ii) If the PHA receives criminal conviction records requested by an owner, the PHA must determine whether criminal action by a household member, as shown by such criminal conviction records, may be a basis for applicant screening, lease enforcement or eviction, as applicable in accordance with HUD regulations and the owner criteria.
            (iii) The PHA must notify the owner whether the PHA has received criminal conviction records concerning the household member, and of its determination whether such criminal conviction records may be a basis for applicant screening, lease enforcement or eviction. However, except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section, the PHA must not disclose the household member's criminal conviction record or the content of that record to the owner.
            (2) Screening. If you are an owner of covered housing, you may request that the PHA in the jurisdiction of the property obtain criminal conviction records of an adult household member from a law enforcement agency on your behalf for the purpose of screening applicants.
            
            (i) Your request must include a copy of the consent form, signed by the household member.
            (ii) Your request must include your standards for prohibiting admission of drug criminals in accordance with § 5.854, and for prohibiting admission of other criminals in accordance with § 5.855.
            (3) Eviction or lease enforcement. If you are an owner of a unit with Section 8 project-based assistance, you may request that the PHA in the location of the project obtain criminal conviction records of a household member from an appropriate law enforcement agency on your behalf in connection with lease enforcement or eviction.
            (i) Your request must include a copy of the consent form, signed by the household member.
            (ii) If you intend to use the PHA determination regarding any such criminal conviction records in connection with eviction, your request must include your standards for evicting drug criminals in accordance with § 5.857, and for evicting other criminals in accordance with § 5.858.
            (iii) If you intend to use the PHA determination regarding any such criminal conviction records for lease enforcement other than eviction, your request must include your standards for lease enforcement because of criminal activity by members of a household.
            (4) Fees. If an owner requests a PHA to obtain criminal conviction records in accordance with this section, the PHA may charge the owner reasonable fees for making the request on behalf of the owner and for taking other actions for the owner. The PHA may require the owner to reimburse costs incurred by the PHA, including reimbursement of any fees charged to the PHA by the law enforcement agency, the PHA's own related staff and administrative costs. The owner may not pass along to the applicant or tenant the costs of a criminal records check.
            (e) Permitted use and disclosure of criminal conviction records received by PHA—(1) Use of records. Criminal conviction records received by a PHA from a law enforcement agency in accordance with this section may only be used for the following purposes:
            (i) Applicant screening. (A) PHA screening of applicants for admission to public housing (part 960 of this title);
            (B) PHA screening of applicants for admission to the Housing Choice Voucher Program (section 8 tenant-based assistance) (part 982 of this title);
            (C) PHA screening of applicants for admission to the Section 8 moderate rehabilitation program (part 882 of this title); or the Section 8 project-based certificate or project-based voucher program (part 983 of this title); or
            (D) PHA screening concerning criminal conviction of applicants for admission to Section 8 project-based assistance, at the request of the owner. (For requirements governing use of criminal conviction records obtained by a PHA at the request of a Section 8 owner under this section, see paragraph (d) of this section.)
            (ii) Lease enforcement and eviction. (A) PHA enforcement of public housing leases and PHA eviction of public housing residents;
            (B) Enforcement of leases by a Section 8 project owner and eviction of residents by a Section 8 project owner. (However, criminal conviction records received by a PHA from a law enforcement agency under this section may not be used for lease enforcement or eviction of residents receiving Section 8 tenant-based assistance.)
            (2) PHA disclosure of records. (i) A PHA may disclose the criminal conviction records which the PHA receives from a law enforcement agency only as follows:
            (A) To officers or employees of the PHA, or to authorized representatives of the PHA who have a job-related need to have access to the information. For example, if the PHA is seeking to evict a public housing tenant on the basis of criminal activity as shown in criminal conviction records provided by a law enforcement agency, the records may be disclosed to PHA employees performing functions related to the eviction, or to a PHA hearing officer conducting an administrative grievance hearing concerning the proposed eviction.

            (B) To the owner for use in connection with judicial eviction proceedings by the owner to the extent necessary in connection with a judicial eviction proceeding. For example, criminal conviction records may be included in pleadings or other papers filed in an eviction action, may be disclosed to parties to the action or the court, and may be filed in court or offered as evidence.
            (ii) This disclosure may be made only if the following conditions are satisfied:
            (A) If the PHA has determined that criminal activity by the household member as shown by such records received from a law enforcement agency may be a basis for eviction from a Section 8 unit; and
            (B) If the owner certifies in writing that it will use the criminal conviction records only for the purpose and only to the extent necessary to seek eviction in a judicial proceeding of a Section 8 tenant based on the criminal activity by the household member that is described in the criminal conviction records.
            (iii) The PHA may rely on an owner's certification that the criminal record is necessary to proceed with a judicial eviction to evict the tenant based on criminal activity of the identified household member, as shown in the criminal conviction record.
            (iv) Upon disclosure as necessary in connection with judicial eviction proceedings, the PHA is not responsible for controlling access to or knowledge of such records after such disclosure.
            (f) Opportunity to dispute. If a PHA obtains criminal record information from a State or local agency under this section showing that a household member has been convicted of a crime relevant to applicant screening, lease enforcement or eviction, the PHA must notify the household of the proposed action to be based on the information and must provide the subject of the record and the applicant or tenant a copy of such information, and an opportunity to dispute the accuracy and relevance of the information. This opportunity must be provided before a denial of admission, eviction or lease enforcement action on the basis of such information.
            (g) Records management. Consistent with the limitations on disclosure of records in paragraph (e) of this section, the PHA must establish and implement a system of records management that ensures that any criminal record received by the PHA from a law enforcement agency is:
            (1) Maintained confidentially;
            (2) Not misused or improperly disseminated; and
            (3) Destroyed, once the purpose(s) for which the record was requested has been accomplished, including expiration of the period for filing a challenge to the PHA action without institution of a challenge or final disposition of any such litigation.
            (h) Penalties for improper release of information—(1) Criminal penalty. Conviction for a misdemeanor and imposition of a penalty of not more than $5,000 is the potential for:
            (i) Any person, including an officer, employee, or authorized representative of any PHA or of any project owner, who knowingly and willfully requests or obtains any information concerning an applicant for, or tenant of, covered housing assistance under the authority of this section under false pretenses; or
            (ii) Any person, including an officer, employee, or authorized representative of any PHA or a project owner, who knowingly and willfully discloses any such information in any manner to any individual not entitled under any law to receive the information.
            (2) Civil liability. (i) A PHA may be held liable to any applicant for, or tenant of, covered housing assistance affected by either of the following:
            (A) A negligent or knowing disclosure of criminal records information obtained under the authority of this section about such person by an officer, employee, or authorized representative of the PHA if the disclosure is not authorized by this section; or
            (B) Any other negligent or knowing action that is inconsistent with this section.

            (ii) An applicant for, or tenant of, covered housing assistance may seek relief against a PHA in these circumstances by bringing a civil action for damages and such other relief as may be appropriate against the PHA responsible for such unauthorized action. The United States district court in which the affected applicant or tenant resides, in which the unauthorized action occurred, or in which the officer, employee, or representative alleged to be responsible resides, has jurisdiction. Appropriate relief may include reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs.
          
          
            § 5.905
            What special authority is there to obtain access to sex offender registration information?
            (a) PHA obligation to obtain sex offender registration information. (1) A PHA that administers a Section 8 or public housing program under an Annual Contributions Contract with HUD must carry out background checks necessary to determine whether a member of a household applying for admission to any federally assisted housing program is subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement under a State sex offender registration program. This check must be carried out with respect to the State in which the housing is located and with respect to States where members of the applicant household are known to have resided.
            (2) If the PHA requests such information from any State or local agency responsible for the collection or maintenance of such information, the State or local agency must promptly provide the PHA such information in its possession or control.
            (3) The State or local agency may charge a reasonable fee for providing the information.
            (b) Owner's request for sex offender registration information—(1) General. An owner of federally assisted housing that is located in the jurisdiction of a PHA that administers a Section 8 or public housing program under an Annual Contributions Contract with HUD may request that the PHA obtain information necessary to determine whether a household member is subject to a lifetime registration requirement under a State sex offender registration requirement.
            (2) Procedure. If the request is made in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section:
            (i) The PHA must request the information from a State or local agency;
            (ii) The State or local agency must promptly provide the PHA such information in its possession or control;
            (iii) The PHA must determine whether such information may be a basis for applicant screening, lease enforcement or eviction, based on the criteria used by the owner as specified in the owner's request, and inform the owner of the determination.
            (iv) The PHA must notify the owner of its determination whether sex offender registration information received by the PHA under this section concerning a household member may be a basis for applicant screening, lease enforcement or eviction in accordance with HUD requirements and the criteria used by the owner.
            (3) Contents of request. As the owner, your request must specify whether you are asking the PHA to obtain the sex offender registration information concerning the household member for applicant screening, for lease enforcement, or for eviction and include the following information:
            (i) Addresses or other information about where members of the household are known to have lived.
            (ii) If you intend to use the PHA determination regarding any such sex offender registration information for applicant screening, your request must include your standards in accordance with § 5.855(c) for prohibiting admission of persons subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement.
            (iii) If you intend to use the PHA determination regarding any such sex offender registration information for eviction, your request must include your standards for evicting persons subject to a lifetime registration requirement in accordance with § 5.858.
            (iv) If you intend to use the PHA determination regarding any such sex offender registration information for lease enforcement other than eviction, your request must include your standards for lease enforcement because of criminal activity by members of a household.
            (4) PHA disclosure of records. The PHA must not disclose to the owner any sex offender registration information obtained by the PHA under this section.
            (5) Fees. If an owner asks a PHA to obtain sex offender registration information concerning a household member in accordance with this section, the PHA may charge the owner reasonable fees for making the request on behalf of the owner and for taking other actions for the owner. The PHA may require the owner to reimburse costs incurred by the PHA, including reimbursement of any fees charged to the PHA by a State or local agency for releasing the information, the PHA's own related staff and administrative costs. The owner may not pass along to the applicant or tenant the costs of a sex offender registration records check.
            (c) Records management. (1) The PHA must establish and implement a system of records management that ensures that any sex offender registration information record received by the PHA from a State or local agency under this section is:
            (i) Maintained confidentially;
            (ii) Not misused or improperly disseminated; and
            (iii) Destroyed, once the purpose for which the record was requested has been accomplished, including expiration of the period for filing a challenge to the PHA action without institution of a challenge or final disposition of any such litigation.
            (2) The records management requirements do not apply to information that is public information, or is obtained by a PHA other than under this section.
            (d) Opportunity to dispute. If a PHA obtains sex offender registration information from a State or local agency under paragraph (a) of this section showing that a household member is subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement, the PHA must notify the household of the proposed action to be based on the information and must provide the subject of the record, and the applicant or tenant, with a copy of such information, and an opportunity to dispute the accuracy and relevance of the information. This opportunity must be provided before a denial of admission, eviction or lease enforcement action on the basis of such information.
          
        
        
          Subpart K—Application, Registration, and Submission Requirements
          
            Source:
            69 FR 15673, Mar. 26, 2004, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5.1001
            Applicability.
            This subpart applies to all applicants for HUD grants, cooperative agreements, capital fund or operating fund subsidy, capital advance, or other assistance under HUD programs, including grant programs that are classified by OMB as including formula grant programs or activities, but excluding FHA insurance and loan guarantees that are not associated with a grant program or grant award.
          
          
            § 5.1003
            Use of a universal identifier for organizations applying for HUD grants.
            (a) Every application for a new or renewal of a grant, cooperative agreement, capital fund or operating fund subsidy, capital advance, or other assistance, including an application or plan under a grant program that is classified by OMB as including formula grant programs, must include a unique entity identifier number for the applicant.
            (b)(1) Applicants or groups of applicants under a consortium arrangement must have a unique entity identifier for the organization that is submitting the application for federal assistance as the lead applicant on behalf of the other applicants. If each organization is submitting a separate application as part of a group of applications, then each organization must include its unique entity identifier with its application submission.
            (2) If an organization is submitting an application as a sponsor or on behalf of other applicants, and the other entities will be receiving funds directly from HUD, then the applicant or sponsor must submit an application for funding that includes the unique entity identifier of each applicant that would receive funds directly from HUD.
            (3) If an organization is managing funds for a group of organizations, a unique entity identifier must be submitted for the managing organization, if it is drawing down funds directly from HUD.

            (4) If an organization is drawing down funds directly from HUD and subsequently turning the funds over to a management organization, then the management organization must obtain a unique entity identifier and submit the number to HUD.
            (c) Individuals who would personally receive a grant or other assistance from HUD, independent from any business or nonprofit organization with which they may operate or participate, are exempt from this requirement.
            (d) In cases where individuals apply for funding, but the funding will be awarded to an institution or other entity on the individual's behalf, the institution or entity must obtain a unique entity identifier and the individual must submit the institution's unique entity identifier number with the application.
            (e) Unless an exemption is granted by OMB, HUD will not consider an application as complete until a valid unique entity identifier is provided by the applicant. For classes of grants and grantees subject to this part, exceptions to this rule must be submitted to OMB for approval in accordance with procedures prescribed by the Department.
            [69 FR 15673, Mar. 26, 2004, as amended at 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 5.1004
            System of award management.
            Applicants for HUD financial assistance that are subject to this subpart are required to register with the System of Award Management (SAM) and have an active registration in SAM in accordance with 2 CFR part 25, appendix A in order for HUD to obligate funds and for an awardee to receive an award of funds from HUD.
            [75 FR 41089, July 15, 2010, as amended at 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 5.1005
            Electronic submission of applications for grants and other financial assistance.

            Applicants described under 24 CFR 5.1001 are required to submit electronic applications or plans for grants and other financial assistance in response to any application that HUD has placed on the www.grants.gov/Apply Web site or its successor. The HUD Assistant Secretary, General Deputy Assistant Secretary or, the individual authorized to perform duties and responsibilities of these positions, with authority over the specific program for which the waiver is sought, may in writing, waive the electronic submission requirement for an applicant on the basis of good cause.
            [70 FR 77294, Dec. 29, 2005]
          
        
        
          Subpart L—Protection for Victims of Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual Assault, or Stalking
          
            Source:
            81 FR 80798, Nov. 16, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 5.2001
            Applicability.

            (a) This subpart addresses the protections for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking who are applying for, or are the beneficiaries of, assistance under a HUD program covered by the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), as amended (42 U.S.C. 13925 and 42 U.S.C. 14043e et seq.) (“covered housing program,” as defined in § 5.2003). Notwithstanding the title of the statute, protections are not limited to women but cover victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking, regardless of sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation. Consistent with the nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements at 24 CFR 5.105(a), victims cannot be discriminated against on the basis of any protected characteristic, including race, color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status, disability, or age. HUD programs must also be operated consistently with HUD's Equal Access Rule at § 5.105(a)(2), which requires that HUD-assisted and HUD-insured housing are made available to all otherwise eligible individuals and families regardless of actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status.

            (b)(1) The applicable assistance provided under a covered housing program generally consists of two types of assistance (one or both may be provided): Tenant-based rental assistance, which is rental assistance that is provided to the tenant; and project-based assistance, which is assistance that attaches to the unit in which the tenant resides. For project-based assistance, the assistance may consist of such assistance as operating assistance, development assistance, and mortgage interest rate subsidy.
            (2) The regulations in this subpart are supplemented by the specific regulations for the HUD-covered housing programs listed in § 5.2003. The program-specific regulations address how certain VAWA requirements are to be implemented and whether they can be implemented (for example, reasonable time to establish eligibility for assistance as provided in § 5.2009(b)) for the applicable covered housing program, given the statutory and regulatory framework for the program. When there is conflict between the regulations of this subpart and the program-specific regulations, the program-specific regulations govern. Where assistance is provided under more than one covered housing program and there is a conflict between VAWA protections or remedies under those programs, the individual seeking the VAWA protections or remedies may choose to use the protections or remedies under any or all of those programs, as long as the protections or remedies would be feasible and permissible under each of the program statutes.
          
          
            § 5.2003
            Definitions.
            The definitions of PHA, HUD,
              household, and other person under the tenant's control are defined in subpart A of this part. As used in this subpart L:
            
              Actual and imminent threat refers to a physical danger that is real, would occur within an immediate time frame, and could result in death or serious bodily harm. In determining whether an individual would pose an actual and imminent threat, the factors to be considered include: The duration of the risk, the nature and severity of the potential harm, the likelihood that the potential harm will occur, and the length of time before the potential harm would occur.
            
              Affiliated individual, with respect to an individual, means:
            (1) A spouse, parent, brother, sister, or child of that individual, or a person to whom that individual stands in the place of a parent or guardian (for example, the affiliated individual is a person in the care, custody, or control of that individual); or
            (2) Any individual, tenant, or lawful occupant living in the household of that individual.
            
              Bifurcate means to divide a lease as a matter of law, subject to the permissibility of such process under the requirements of the applicable HUD-covered program and State or local law, such that certain tenants or lawful occupants can be evicted or removed and the remaining tenants or lawful occupants can continue to reside in the unit under the same lease requirements or as may be revised depending upon the eligibility for continued occupancy of the remaining tenants and lawful occupants.
            
              Covered housing program consists of the following HUD programs:
            (1) Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly (12 U.S.C. 1701q), with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 891.
            (2) Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities (42 U.S.C. 8013), with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 891.

            (3) Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program (42 U.S.C. 12901 et seq.), with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 574.

            (4) HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) program (42 U.S.C. 12741 et seq.), with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 92.

            (5) Homeless programs under title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11360 et seq.), including the Emergency Solutions Grants program (with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 576), the Continuum of Care program (with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 578), and the Rural Housing Stability Assistance program (with regulations forthcoming).
            (6) Multifamily rental housing under section 221(d)(3) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 17151(d)) with a below-market interest rate (BMIR) pursuant to section 221(d)(5), with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 221.
            (7) Multifamily rental housing under section 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-1), with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 236.

            (8) HUD programs assisted under the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.); specifically, public housing under section 6 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437d) (with regulations at 24 CFR Chapter IX), tenant-based and project-based rental assistance under section 8 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437f) (with regulations at 24 CFR chapters VIII and IX), and the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Single Room Occupancy (with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 882, subpart H).
            (9) The Housing Trust Fund (12 U.S.C. 4568) (with implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 93).
            
              Covered housing provider refers to the individual or entity under a covered housing program that has responsibility for the administration and/or oversight of VAWA protections and includes PHAs, sponsors, owners, mortgagors, managers, State and local governments or agencies thereof, nonprofit or for-profit organizations or entities. The program-specific regulations for the covered housing programs identify the individual or entity that carries out the duties and responsibilities of the covered housing provider as set forth in part 5, subpart L. For any of the covered housing programs, it is possible that there may be more than one covered housing provider; that is, depending upon the VAWA duty or responsibility to be performed by a covered housing provider, the covered housing provider may not always be the same individual or entity.
            
              Dating violence means violence committed by a person:
            (1) Who is or has been in a social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the victim; and
            (2) Where the existence of such a relationship shall be determined based on a consideration of the following factors:
            (i) The length of the relationship;
            (ii) The type of relationship; and
            (iii) The frequency of interaction between the persons involved in the relationship.
            
              Domestic violence includes felony or misdemeanor crimes of violence committed by a current or former spouse or intimate partner of the victim, by a person with whom the victim shares a child in common, by a person who is cohabitating with or has cohabitated with the victim as a spouse or intimate partner, by a person similarly situated to a spouse of the victim under the domestic or family violence laws of the jurisdiction receiving grant monies, or by any other person against an adult or youth victim who is protected from that person's acts under the domestic or family violence laws of the jurisdiction. The term “spouse or intimate partner of the victim” includes a person who is or has been in a social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the victim, as determined by the length of the relationship, the type of the relationship, and the frequency of interaction between the persons involved in the relationship.
            
              Sexual assault means any nonconsensual sexual act proscribed by Federal, tribal, or State law, including when the victim lacks capacity to consent.
            
              Stalking means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to:
            (1) Fear for the person's individual safety or the safety of others; or
            (2) Suffer substantial emotional distress.
            
              VAWA means the Violence Against Women Act of 1994, as amended (42 U.S.C. 13925 and 42 U.S.C. 14043e et seq.).
          
          
            § 5.2005
            VAWA protections.
            (a) Notification of occupancy rights under VAWA, and certification form. (1) A covered housing provider must provide to each of its applicants and to each of its tenants the notice of occupancy rights and the certification form as described in this section:
            (i) A “Notice of Occupancy Rights under the Violence Against Women Act,” as prescribed and in accordance with directions provided by HUD, that explains the VAWA protections under this subpart, including the right to confidentiality, and any limitations on those protections; and
            (ii) A certification form, in a form approved by HUD, to be completed by the victim to document an incident of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault or stalking, and that:

            (A) States that the applicant or tenant is a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking;
            
            (B) States that the incident of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking that is the ground for protection under this subpart meets the applicable definition for such incident under § 5.2003; and
            (C) Includes the name of the individual who committed the domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, if the name is known and safe to provide.
            (2) The notice required by paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section and certification form required by paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section must be provided to an applicant or tenant no later than at each of the following times:
            (i) At the time the applicant is denied assistance or admission under a covered housing program;
            (ii) At the time the individual is provided assistance or admission under the covered housing program;
            (iii) With any notification of eviction or notification of termination of assistance; and
            (iv) During the 12-month period following December 16, 2016, either during the annual recertification or lease renewal process, whichever is applicable, or, if there will be no recertification or lease renewal for a tenant during the first year after the rule takes effect, through other means.

            (3) The notice required by paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section and the certification form required by paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section must be made available in multiple languages, consistent with guidance issued by HUD in accordance with Executive Order 13166 (Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency, signed August 11, 2000, and published in the Federal Register on August 16, 2000 (at 65 FR 50121).
            (4) For the Housing Choice Voucher program under 24 CFR part 982, the project-based voucher program under 24 CFR part 983, the public housing admission and occupancy requirements under 24 CFR part 960, and renewed funding or leases of the Section 8 project-based program under 24 CFR parts 880, 882, 883, 884, 886, as well as project-based section 8 provided in connection with housing under part 891, the HUD-required lease, lease addendum, or tenancy addendum, as applicable, must include a description of specific protections afforded to the victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, as provided in this subpart.
            (b) Prohibited basis for denial or termination of assistance or eviction—(1) General. An applicant for assistance or tenant assisted under a covered housing program may not be denied admission to, denied assistance under, terminated from participation in, or evicted from the housing on the basis or as a direct result of the fact that the applicant or tenant is or has been a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, if the applicant or tenant otherwise qualifies for admission, assistance, participation, or occupancy.
            (2) Termination on the basis of criminal activity. A tenant in a covered housing program may not be denied tenancy or occupancy rights solely on the basis of criminal activity directly relating to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking if:
            (i) The criminal activity is engaged in by a member of the household of the tenant or any guest or other person under the control of the tenant, and
            (ii) The tenant or an affiliated individual of the tenant is the victim or threatened victim of such domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault or stalking.
            (c) Construction of lease terms and terms of assistance. An incident of actual or threatened domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking shall not be construed as:
            (1) A serious or repeated violation of a lease executed under a covered housing program by the victim or threatened victim of such incident; or
            (2) Good cause for terminating the assistance, tenancy, or occupancy rights under a covered housing program of the victim or threatened victim of such incident.
            (d) Limitations of VAWA protections. (1) Nothing in this section limits the authority of a covered housing provider, when notified of a court order, to comply with a court order with respect to:
            
            (i) The rights of access or control of property, including civil protection orders issued to protect a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking; or
            (ii) The distribution or possession of property among members of a household.
            (2) Nothing in this section limits any available authority of a covered housing provider to evict or terminate assistance to a tenant for any violation not premised on an act of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking that is in question against the tenant or an affiliated individual of the tenant. However, the covered housing provider must not subject the tenant, who is or has been a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, or is affiliated with an individual who is or has been a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault or stalking, to a more demanding standard than other tenants in determining whether to evict or terminate assistance.
            (3) Nothing in this section limits the authority of a covered housing provider to terminate assistance to or evict a tenant under a covered housing program if the covered housing provider can demonstrate an actual and imminent threat to other tenants or those employed at or providing service to property of the covered housing provider would be present if that tenant or lawful occupant is not evicted or terminated from assistance. In this context, words, gestures, actions, or other indicators will be considered an “actual and imminent threat” if they meet the standards provided in the definition of “actual and imminent threat” in § 5.2003.
            (4) Any eviction or termination of assistance, as provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this section should be utilized by a covered housing provider only when there are no other actions that could be taken to reduce or eliminate the threat, including, but not limited to, transferring the victim to a different unit, barring the perpetrator from the property, contacting law enforcement to increase police presence or develop other plans to keep the property safe, or seeking other legal remedies to prevent the perpetrator from acting on a threat. Restrictions predicated on public safety cannot be based on stereotypes, but must be tailored to particularized concerns about individual residents.
            (e) Emergency transfer plan. Each covered housing provider, as identified in the program-specific regulations for the covered housing program, shall adopt an emergency transfer plan, no later than June 14, 2017 based on HUD's model emergency transfer plan, in accordance with the following:
            (1) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
            (i) Internal emergency transfer refers to an emergency relocation of a tenant to another unit where the tenant would not be categorized as a new applicant; that is, the tenant may reside in the new unit without having to undergo an application process.
            (ii) External emergency transfer refers to an emergency relocation of a tenant to another unit where the tenant would be categorized as a new applicant; that is the tenant must undergo an application process in order to reside in the new unit.
            (iii) Safe unit refers to a unit that the victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking believes is safe.
            (2) The emergency transfer plan must provide that a tenant receiving rental assistance through, or residing in a unit subsidized under, a covered housing program who is a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking qualifies for an emergency transfer if:
            (i) The tenant expressly requests the transfer; and
            (ii)(A) The tenant reasonably believes there is a threat of imminent harm from further violence if the tenant remains within the same dwelling unit that the tenant is currently occupying; or

            (B) In the case of a tenant who is a victim of sexual assault, either the tenant reasonably believes there is a threat of imminent harm from further violence if the tenant remains within the same dwelling unit that the tenant is currently occupying, or the sexual assault occurred on the premises during the 90-calendar-day period preceding the date of the request for transfer.
            (3) The emergency transfer plan must detail the measure of any priority given to tenants who qualify for an emergency transfer under VAWA in relation to other categories of tenants seeking transfers and individuals seeking placement on waiting lists.
            (4) The emergency transfer plan must incorporate strict confidentiality measures to ensure that the covered housing provider does not disclose the location of the dwelling unit of the tenant to a person who committed or threatened to commit an act of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking against the tenant.
            (5) The emergency transfer plan must allow a tenant to make an internal emergency transfer under VAWA when a safe unit is immediately available.
            (6) The emergency transfer plan must describe policies for assisting a tenant in making an internal emergency transfer under VAWA when a safe unit is not immediately available, and these policies must ensure that requests for internal emergency transfers under VAWA receive, at a minimum, any applicable additional priority that housing providers may already provide to other types of emergency transfer requests.
            (7) The emergency transfer plan must describe reasonable efforts the covered housing provider will take to assist a tenant who wishes to make an external emergency transfer when a safe unit is not immediately available. The plan must include policies for assisting a tenant who is seeking an external emergency transfer under VAWA out of the covered housing provider's program or project, and a tenant who is seeking an external emergency transfer under VAWA into the covered housing provider's program or project. These policies may include:
            (i) Arrangements, including memoranda of understanding, with other covered housing providers to facilitate moves; and
            (ii) Outreach activities to organizations that assist or provide resources to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
            (8) Nothing may preclude a tenant from seeking an internal emergency transfer and an external emergency transfer concurrently if a safe unit is not immediately available.
            (9) Where applicable, the emergency transfer plan must describe policies for a tenant who has tenant-based rental assistance and who meets the requirements of paragraph (e)(2) of this section to move quickly with that assistance.
            (10) The emergency transfer plan may require documentation from a tenant seeking an emergency transfer, provided that:
            (i) The tenant's submission of a written request to the covered housing provider, where the tenant certifies that they meet the criteria in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section, shall be sufficient documentation of the requirements in paragraph (e)(2) of this section;
            (ii) The covered housing provider may, at its discretion, ask an individual seeking an emergency transfer to document the occurrence of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, in accordance with § 5.2007, for which the individual is seeking the emergency transfer, if the individual has not already provided documentation of that occurrence; and
            (iii) No other documentation is required to qualify the tenant for an emergency transfer.
            (11) The covered housing provider must make its emergency transfer plan available upon request and, when feasible, must make its plan publicly available.
            (12) The covered housing provider must keep a record of all emergency transfers requested under its emergency transfer plan, and the outcomes of such requests, and retain these records for a period of three years, or for a period of time as specified in program regulations. Requests and outcomes of such requests must be reported to HUD annually.
            (13) Nothing in this paragraph (e) may be construed to supersede any eligibility or other occupancy requirements that may apply under a covered housing program.
          
          
            
            § 5.2007
            Documenting the occurrence of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
            (a) Request for documentation. (1) Under a covered housing program, if an applicant or tenant represents to the covered housing provider that the individual is a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking entitled to the protections under § 5.2005, or remedies under § 5.2009, the covered housing provider may request, in writing, that the applicant or tenant submit to the covered housing provider the documentation specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
            (2)(i) If an applicant or tenant does not provide the documentation requested under paragraph (a)(1) of this section within 14 business days after the date that the tenant receives a request in writing for such documentation from the covered housing provider, nothing in § 5.2005 or § 5.2009, which addresses the protections of VAWA, may be construed to limit the authority of the covered housing provider to:
            (A) Deny admission by the applicant or tenant to the covered housing program;
            (B) Deny assistance under the covered housing program to the applicant or tenant;
            (C) Terminate the participation of the tenant in the covered housing program; or
            (D) Evict the tenant, or a lawful occupant that commits a violation of a lease.
            (ii) A covered housing provider may, at its discretion, extend the 14-business-day deadline under paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section.
            (b) Permissible documentation and submission requirements. (1) In response to a written request to the applicant or tenant from the covered housing provider, as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, the applicant or tenant may submit, as documentation of the occurrence of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, any one of the following forms of documentation, where it is at the discretion of the tenant or applicant which one of the following forms of documentation to submit:
            (i) The certification form described in § 5.2005(a)(1)(ii); or
            (ii) A document:
            (A) Signed by an employee, agent, or volunteer of a victim service provider, an attorney, or medical professional, or a mental health professional (collectively, “professional”) from whom the victim has sought assistance relating to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, or the effects of abuse;
            (B) Signed by the applicant or tenant; and
            (C) That specifies, under penalty of perjury, that the professional believes in the occurrence of the incident of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking that is the ground for protection and remedies under this subpart, and that the incident meets the applicable definition of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking under § 5.2003; or
            (iii) A record of a Federal, State, tribal, territorial or local law enforcement agency, court, or administrative agency; or
            (iv) At the discretion of a covered housing provider, a statement or other evidence provided by the applicant or tenant.
            (2) If a covered housing provider receives documentation under paragraph (b)(1) of this section that contains conflicting information (including certification forms from two or more members of a household each claiming to be a victim and naming one or more of the other petitioning household members as the perpetrator), the covered housing provider may require an applicant or tenant to submit third-party documentation, as described in paragraphs (b)(1)(ii), (b)(1)(iii), or (b)(1)(iv) of this section, within 30 calendar days of the date of the request for the third-party documentation.
            (3) Nothing in this paragraph (b) shall be construed to require a covered housing provider to request that an individual submit documentation of the status of the individual as a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
            (c) Confidentiality. Any information submitted to a covered housing provider under this section, including the fact that an individual is a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking (confidential information), shall be maintained in strict confidence by the covered housing provider.

            (1) The covered housing provider shall not allow any individual administering assistance on behalf of the covered housing provider or any persons within their employ (e.g., contractors) or in the employ of the covered housing provider to have access to confidential information unless explicitly authorized by the covered housing provider for reasons that specifically call for these individuals to have access to this information under applicable Federal, State, or local law.
            (2) The covered housing provider shall not enter confidential information described in paragraph (c) of this section into any shared database or disclose such information to any other entity or individual, except to the extent that the disclosure is:
            (i) Requested or consented to in writing by the individual in a time-limited release
            (ii) Required for use in an eviction proceeding or hearing regarding termination of assistance from the covered program; or
            (iii) Otherwise required by applicable law.
            (d) A covered housing provider's compliance with the protections of §§ 5.2005 and 5.2009, based on documentation received under this section shall not be sufficient to constitute evidence of an unreasonable act or omission by the covered housing provider. However, nothing in this paragraph (d) of this section shall be construed to limit the liability of a covered housing provider for failure to comply with §§ 5.2005 and 5.2009.
          
          
            § 5.2009
            Remedies available to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
            (a) Lease bifurcation. (1) A covered housing provider may in accordance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section, bifurcate a lease, or remove a household member from a lease in order to evict, remove, terminate occupancy rights, or terminate assistance to such member who engages in criminal activity directly relating to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking against an affiliated individual or other individual:
            (i) Without regard to whether the household member is a signatory to the lease; and
            (ii) Without evicting, removing, terminating assistance to, or otherwise penalizing a victim of such criminal activity who is also a tenant or lawful occupant.
            (2) A lease bifurcation, as provided in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, shall be carried out in accordance with any requirements or procedures as may be prescribed by Federal, State, or local law for termination of assistance or leases and in accordance with any requirements under the relevant covered housing program.
            (b) Reasonable time to establish eligibility for assistance or find alternative housing following bifurcation of a lease—(1) Applicability. The reasonable time to establish eligibility under a covered housing program or find alternative housing is specified in paragraph (b) of this section, or alternatively in the program-specific regulations governing the applicable covered housing program. Some covered housing programs may provide different time frames than are specified in this paragraph (b), and in such cases, the program-specific regulations govern.
            (2) Reasonable time to establish eligibility assistance or find alternative housing. (i) If a covered housing provider exercises the option to bifurcate a lease as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, and the individual who was evicted or for whom assistance was terminated was the eligible tenant under the covered housing program, the covered housing provider shall provide to any remaining tenant or tenants that were not already eligible a period of 90 calendar days from the date of bifurcation of the lease to:
            (A) Establish eligibility for the same covered housing program under which the evicted or terminated tenant was the recipient of assistance at the time of bifurcation of the lease; or
            (B) Establish eligibility under another covered housing program; or
            (C) Find alternative housing.
            
            (ii) The 90-calendar-day period provided by paragraph (b)(2) of this section will not be available to a remaining household member if the statutory requirements for the covered housing program prohibit it. The 90-day calendar period also will not apply beyond the expiration of a lease, unless this is permitted by program regulations. The 90-calendar-day period is the total period provided to a remaining tenant to establish eligibility under the three options provided in paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(A), (B), and (C) of this section.
            (iii) The covered housing provider may extend the 90-calendar-day period in paragraph (b)(2) of this section up to an additional 60 calendar days, unless prohibited from doing so by statutory requirements of the covered program or unless the time period would extend beyond expiration of the lease.
            (c) Efforts to promote housing stability for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. Covered housing providers are encouraged to undertake whatever actions permissible and feasible under their respective programs to assist individuals residing in their units who are victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking to remain in their units or other units under the covered housing program or other covered housing providers, and for the covered housing provider to bear the costs of any transfer, where permissible.
          
          
            § 5.2011
            Effect on other laws.
            (a) Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to supersede any provision of any Federal, State, or local law that provides greater protection than this section for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
            (b) All applicable fair housing and civil rights statutes and requirements apply in the implementation of VAWA requirements. See § 5.105(a).
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 6
        PART 6—NONDISCRIMINATION IN PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER TITLE I OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACT OF 1974
        
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            Sec.
            6.1
            Purpose.
            6.2
            Applicability.
            6.3
            Definitions.
            6.4
            Discrimination prohibited.
            6.5
            Discrimination prohibited—employment.
            6.6
            Records to be maintained.
          
          
            Subpart B—Enforcement
            6.10
            Compliance information.
            6.11
            Conduct of investigations.
            6.12
            Procedure for effecting compliance.
            6.13
            Hearings and appeals.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d) 42 U.S.C. 5309.
        
        
          Source:
          64 FR 3797, Jan. 25, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General Provisions
          
            § 6.1
            Purpose.

            The purpose of this part is to implement the provisions of section 109 of title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (Title I) (42 U.S.C. 5309). Section 109 provides that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, national origin, religion, or sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance. Section 109 does not directly prohibit discrimination on the bases of age or disability, and the regulations in this part 6 do not apply to age or disability discrimination in Title I programs. Instead, section 109 directs that the prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of age under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107) (Age Discrimination Act) and the prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of disability under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) (Section 504) apply to programs or activities funded in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance. Thus, the regulations of 24 CFR part 8, which implement Section 504 for HUD programs, and the regulations of 24 CFR part 146, which implement the Age Discrimination Act for HUD programs, apply to disability and age discrimination in Title I programs.
          
          
            § 6.2
            Applicability.
            (a) This part applies to any program or activity funded in whole or in part with funds under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, including Community Development Block Grants—Entitlement, State and HUD-Administered Small Cities, and Section 108 Loan Guarantees; Urban Development Action Grants; Economic Development Initiative Grants; and Special Purpose Grants.
            (b) The provisions of this part and sections 104(b)(2) and 109 of Title I that relate to discrimination on the basis of race shall not apply to the provision of Federal financial assistance by grantees under this title to the Hawaiian Homelands (42 U.S.C. 5309).
            (c) The provisions of this part and sections 104(b)(2) and 109 of Title I that relate to discrimination on the basis of race and national origin shall not apply to the provision of Federal financial assistance to grant recipients under the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act (25 U.S.C. 4101). See also, 24 CFR 1003.601(a).
          
          
            § 6.3
            Definitions.
            The terms Department, HUD, and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5. Other terms used in this part 6 are defined as follows:
            
              Act means the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5301-5320).
            
              Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
            
              Award Official means the HUD official who has been delegated the Secretary's authority to implement a Title I funded program and to make grants under that program.
            
              Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the complainant's name and address, identifies the Recipient against which the complaint is made, and describes the Recipient's alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform HUD of the nature and date of the alleged violation of section 109. It shall be signed by the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or her behalf. Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall describe or identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of discrimination.
            
              Federal financial assistance means: (1) Any assistance made available under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and includes income generated from such assistance, and any grant, loan, contract, or any other arrangement, in the form of:
            (i) Funds;
            (ii) Services of Federal personnel; or
            (iii) Real or personal property or any interest in or use of such property, including:
            (A) Transfers or leases of the property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
            (B) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of the property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal Government.
            (2) Any assistance in the form of proceeds from loans guaranteed under section 108 of the Act, but does not include assistance made available through direct Federal procurement contracts or any other contract of insurance or guaranty.
            
              Program or activity (funded in whole or in part) means all of the operations of—
            (1)(i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or local government; or
            (ii) The entity of a State or local government that distributes Federal financial assistance, and each department or agency (and each State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
            (2)(i) A college, university, or other post-secondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or

            (ii) A local educational agency (as defined in section 198(a)(10) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965), system of vocational education or other school system;
            (3)(i) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
            (A) If assistance is extended to the corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
            (B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
            (ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
            (4) Any other entity that is described in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of this definition, any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
            
              Recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any State or political subdivision; any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity; or any individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended, directly or through another Recipient, for any program or activity, or who otherwise participates in carrying out such program or activity, including any successor, assign, or transferee thereof. Recipient does not include any ultimate beneficiary under any program or activity.
            
              Responsible Official means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity or his or her designee.
            
              Section 109 means section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended.
            
              Title I means title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321).
          
          
            § 6.4
            Discrimination prohibited.
            (a) Section 109 requires that no person in the United States shall be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion, or sex.
            (1) A Recipient under any program or activity to which this part applies may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, take any of the following actions on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion, or sex:
            (i) Deny any individual any facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under the program or activity;
            (ii) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits that are different, or are provided in a different form, from that provided to others under the program or activity;
            (iii) Subject an individual to segregated or separate treatment in any facility, or in any matter of process related to the receipt of any service or benefit under the program or activity;
            (iv) Restrict an individual's access to, or enjoyment of, any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits under the program or activity;
            (v) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirements or conditions that the individual must meet in order to be provided any facilities, services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity;
            (vi) Deny an individual an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee;
            (vii) Aid or otherwise perpetuate discrimination against an individual by providing Federal financial assistance to an agency, organization, or person that discriminates in providing any housing, aid, benefit, or service;
            (viii) Otherwise limit an individual in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by other individuals receiving the housing, aid, benefit, or service;

            (ix) Use criteria or methods of administration that have the effect of subjecting persons to discrimination or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with respect to persons of a particular race, color, national origin, religion, or sex; or
            
            (x) Deny a person the opportunity to participate as a member of planning or advisory boards.
            (2) In determining the site or location of housing, accommodations, or facilities, a Recipient may not make selections that have the effect of excluding persons from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination on the ground of race, color, national origin, religion, or sex. The Recipient may not make selections that have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of section 109 and of this part 6.
            (3)(i) In administering a program or activity in which the Recipient has discriminated on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion or sex, the Recipient must take any necessary steps to overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
            (ii) In the absence of discrimination, a Recipient, in administering a program or activity, may take any steps necessary to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, national origin, religion, or sex.
            (iii) After a finding of noncompliance, or after a Recipient has reasonable cause to believe that discrimination has occurred, a Recipient shall not be prohibited by this section from taking any action eligible under subpart C of 24 CFR part 570 to ameliorate an imbalance in benefits, services or facilities provided to any geographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction, where the purpose of such action is to remedy discriminatory practices or usage.
            (iv)(A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this part, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any Recipient from maintaining or constructing separate living facilities or restroom facilities for the different sexes in order to protect personal privacy or modesty concerns. Furthermore, selectivity on the basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services can, in the interest of personal privacy or modesty, only be performed by a member of the same sex as those receiving the services.
            (B) Section 109 of the Act does not directly prohibit discrimination on the basis of age or disability, but directs that the prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of age under the Age Discrimination Act and the prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of disability under Section 504 apply to Title I programs and activities. Accordingly, for programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance, the regulations in this part 6 apply to discrimination on the bases of race, color, national origin, religion, or sex; the regulations at 24 CFR part 8 apply to discrimination on the basis of disability; and the regulations at 24 CFR part 146 apply to discrimination on the basis of age.
            (b) [Reserved]
          
          
            § 6.5
            Discrimination prohibited—employment.
            (a) General. A Recipient may not, under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance, directly or through contractual agents or other arrangements including contracts and consultants, subject a person to discrimination in the terms and conditions of employment. Terms and conditions of employment include advertising, interviewing, selection, promotion, demotion, transfer, recruitment and advertising, layoff or termination, pay or other compensation, including benefits, and selection for training.
            (b) Determination of compliance status. The Assistant Secretary will follow the procedures set forth in this part and 29 CFR part 1691 and look to the substantive guidelines and policy of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission when reviewing employment practices under Section 109.
          
          
            § 6.6
            Records to be maintained.
            (a) General. Recipients shall maintain records and data as required by 24 CFR 91.105, 91.115, 570.490, and 570.506.
            (b) Employment. Recipients shall maintain records and data as required by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission at 29 CFR part 1600.
            
            (c) Recipients shall make available such records and any supporting documentation upon request of the Responsible Official.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control numbers 2506-0117 and 2506-0077)
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Enforcement
          
            § 6.10
            Compliance information.
            (a) Cooperation and assistance. The Responsible Official and the Award Official will provide assistance and guidance to Recipients to help them comply voluntarily with this part.
            (b) Access to data and other sources of information. Each Recipient shall permit access by authorized representatives of HUD to its facilities, books, records, accounts, minutes and audio tapes of meetings, personnel, computer disks and tapes, and other sources of information as may be pertinent to a determination of whether the Recipient is complying with this part. Where information required of a Recipient is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, institution, or person, and that agency, institution, or person fails or refuses to furnish this information, the Recipient shall so certify in any requested report and shall set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information. Failure or refusal to furnish pertinent information (whether maintained by the Recipient or some other agency, institution, or person) without a credible reason for the failure or refusal will be considered to be noncompliance under this part.
            (c) Compliance data. Each Recipient shall keep records and submit to the Responsible Official, timely, complete, and accurate data at such times and in such form as the Responsible Official may determine to be necessary to ascertain whether the Recipient has complied or is complying with this part.
            (d) Notification to employees, beneficiaries, and participants. Each Recipient shall make available to employees, participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons information regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability to the program or activity under which the Recipient receives Federal financial assistance and make such information available to them in such manner as the Responsible Official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by Section 109 and this part.
          
          
            § 6.11
            Conduct of investigations.
            (a) Filing a complaint—(1) Who may file. Any person who believes that he or she has been subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part may file, or may have an authorized representative file on his or her behalf, a complaint with the Responsible Official. Any person who believes that any specific class of persons has been subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part and who is a member of that class or who is the authorized representative of a member of that class may file a complaint with the Responsible Official.
            (2) Confidentiality. Generally, the Responsible Official shall hold in confidence the identity of any person submitting a complaint, unless the person submits written authorization otherwise. However, an exception to maintaining confidentiality of the identity of the person may be required to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any investigation, hearing, or proceeding under this part.
            (3) When to file. Complaints shall be filed within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination, unless the Responsible Official waives this time limit for good cause. For purposes of determining when a complaint is filed under this part, a complaint mailed to the Responsible Official via the U.S. Postal Service will be deemed filed on the date it is postmarked. A complaint delivered to the Responsible Official in any other manner will be deemed filed on the date it is received by the Responsible Official.
            (4) Where to file complaints. Complaints must be in writing, signed, addressed to the Responsible Official, and filed with (mailed to or otherwise delivered to) the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity at any HUD Office.
            (5) Content of complaints. Each complaint should contain the complainant's name, address, and phone number; a description or name, if available, of the Recipient alleged to have violated this part; an address where the violation occurred; and a description of the Recipient's alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the Responsible Official of the nature and date of the alleged violation of this part.
            (6) Amendments to complaints. Amendments to complaints, such as clarification and amplification of allegations in a complaint or the addition of other Recipients, may be made by the complainant or the complainant's authorized representative at any time while the complaint is being considered, and any amendment shall be deemed to be made as of the original filing date.
            (7) Notification. To the extent practicable, the Responsible Official will notify the complainant and the Recipient of the Responsible Official's receipt of a complaint within 10 calendar days of receipt of a complete complaint. If the Responsible Official receives a complaint that is not complete, the Responsible Official will notify the complainant and specify the additional information that is needed to make the complaint complete. If the complainant fails to complete the complaint, the Responsible Official will close the complaint without prejudice and notify the complainant. When a complete complaint has been received, the Responsible Official, or his or her designee, will assess the complaint for acceptance, rejection, or referral to an appropriate Federal agency within 20 calendar days.
            (8) Resolution of complaints. After the acceptance of a complete complaint, the Responsible Official will investigate the complaint, attempt informal resolution, and, if resolution is not achieved, the Responsible Official will notify the Recipient and complainant, to the extent practicable within 180 days of the receipt of the complete complaint, of the results of the investigation in a letter of findings sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, containing the following:
            (i) Findings of fact and a finding of compliance or noncompliance;
            (ii) A description of an appropriate remedy for each violation believed to exist; and
            (iii) A notice of the right of the Recipient and the complainant to request a review of the letter of findings by the Responsible Official. A copy of the final investigative report will be made available upon request.
            (b) Compliance reviews—(1) Periodic compliance reviews. The Responsible Official may periodically review the practices of Recipients to determine whether they are complying with this part and may conduct on-site reviews. The Responsible Official will initiate an on-site review by sending to the Recipient a letter advising the Recipient of the practices to be reviewed; the programs affected by the review; and the opportunity, at any time before a final determination, to submit information that explains, validates, or otherwise addresses the practices under review. In addition, the Award Official will include, in normal program compliance reviews and monitoring procedures, appropriate actions to review and monitor compliance with general or specific program requirements designed to implement the requirements of this part.
            (2) Time period of the review. (i) For the Entitlement program, compliance reviews will cover the three years before the date of the review.

            (ii) For the Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) program, the compliance review is applicable only to UDAG loan repayments or other payments or revenues classified as program income. UDAG repayments or other payments or revenues classified as miscellaneous revenue are not subject to compliance review under this part. (See 24 CFR 570.500(a).) The compliance review will cover the time period that program income is being repaid.
            (iii) For the State and HUD-Administered Small Cities programs, the compliance review will cover the four years before the date of the review.
            (iv) For all other programs, the time period covered by the review will be four years before the date of the review.

            (v) On a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of the Responsible Official, the above time frames for review can be expanded where facts or allegations warrant further investigation.
            
            (3) Early compliance resolution. On the last day of the on-site visit, after the compliance review, the Recipient will be given an opportunity to supplement the record. Additionally, a prefinding conference may be held and a summary of the proposed findings may be presented to the Recipient. In those instances where the issue(s) cannot be resolved at a prefinding conference or with the supplemental information, a meeting will be scheduled to attempt a voluntary settlement.
            (4) Notification of findings. (i) The Assistant Secretary will notify the Recipient of Federal financial assistance of the results of the compliance review in a letter of findings sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
            (ii) Letter of findings. The letter of findings will include the findings of fact and the conclusions of law; a description of a remedy for each violation found; and a notice that a copy of HUD's final report concerning its compliance review will be made available, upon request, to the Recipient.
            (c) Right to a review of the letter of findings. (1) Within 30 days of receipt of the letter of findings, any party may request that a review be made of the letter of findings, by mailing or delivering to the Responsible Official, Room 5100, Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, HUD, Washington, DC 20410, a written statement of the reasons why the letter of findings should be modified.
            (2) The Responsible Official will send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the request for review to all parties. Parties other than the party requesting review and HUD shall have 20 days from receipt to respond to the request for review.
            (3) The Responsible Official will either sustain or modify the letter of findings or require that further investigation be conducted, within 60 days of the request for review. The Responsible Official's decision shall constitute the formal determination of compliance or noncompliance.
            (4) If no party requests that the letter of findings be reviewed, the Responsible Official, within 14 calendar days of the expiration of the time period in paragraph (a)(9)(i) of this section, will send a formal written determination of compliance or noncompliance to all parties.
            (d) Voluntary compliance time limits. The Recipient will have 10 calendar days from receipt of the letter of findings of noncompliance, or such other reasonable time as specified in the letter, within which to agree, in writing, to come into voluntary compliance or to contact the Responsible Official for settlement discussions. If the Recipient fails to meet this deadline, HUD will proceed in accordance with §§ 6.12 and 6.13.
            (e) Informal resolution/voluntary compliance—(1) General. It is the policy of HUD to encourage the informal resolution of matters. A complaint or a compliance review may be resolved by informal means at any time. If a letter of findings is issued, and the letter makes a finding of noncompliance, the Responsible Official will attempt to resolve the matter through a voluntary compliance agreement.
            (2) Objectives of informal resolution/voluntary compliance. In attempting informal resolution, the Responsible Official will attempt to achieve a just resolution of the matter and to obtain assurances, where appropriate, that the Recipient will satisfactorily remedy any violations of the rights of any complainant, and will take such action as will assure the elimination of any violation of this part or the prevention of the occurrence of such violation in the future. If a finding of noncompliance has been made, the terms of such an informal resolution shall be reduced to a written voluntary compliance agreement, signed by the Recipient and the Responsible Official, and be made part of the file. Such voluntary compliance agreements shall seek to protect the interests of the complainant (if any), other persons similarly situated, and the public.
            (3) Right to file a private civil action. At any time in the process, the complainant has the right to file a private civil action. If the complainant does so, the Responsible Official has the discretion to administratively close the investigation or continue the investigation, if he or she decides that it is in the best interests of the Department to do so. If the Responsible Official makes a finding of noncompliance and an agreement to voluntarily comply is not obtained from the Recipient, the procedures at §§ 6.12 and 6.13 for effecting compliance shall be followed.
            (f) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No Recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any person for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by this part, or because he or she has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, compliance review, proceeding, or hearing under this part.
          
          
            § 6.12
            Procedure for effecting compliance.
            (a) Whenever the Assistant Secretary determines that a Recipient of Federal financial assistance has failed to comply with Section 109(a) or this part and voluntary compliance efforts have failed, the Secretary will notify the Governor of the State or the Chief Executive Officer of the unit of general local government of the findings of noncompliance and will request that the Governor or the Chief Executive Officer secure compliance. If within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days, the Governor or the Chief Executive Officer fails or refuses to secure compliance, the Secretary will:
            (1) Refer the matter to the Attorney General with a recommendation that an appropriate civil action be instituted;
            (2) Exercise the powers and functions provided by Title VI;
            (3) Terminate or reduce payments under Title I, or limit the availability of payments under Title I to programs or activities not affected by the failure to comply; or
            (4) Take such other actions as may be provided by law, including, but not limited to, the initiation of proceedings under 2 CFR part 2424 or any applicable proceeding under State or local law.
            (b) Termination, reduction, or limitation of the availability of Title I payments. No order terminating, reducing, or limiting the availability of Title I payments under this part shall become effective until:
            (1) The Secretary has notified the Governor of the State or the Chief Executive Officer of the unit of general local government of the Recipient's failure to comply in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section and of the termination, reduction or limitation of the availability of Title I payments to be taken;
            (2) The Secretary has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means;
            (3) The Recipient has been extended an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with § 6.13(a); and
            (4) A final agency notice or decision has been rendered in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section or 24 CFR part 180.
            (c) If a Recipient does not respond to the notice of opportunity for a hearing or does not elect to proceed with a hearing within 20 days of the issuance of the Secretary's actions listed in paragraphs (b)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, then the Secretary's approval of the termination, reduction or limitation of the availability of Title I payments is considered a final agency notice and the Recipient may seek judicial review in accordance with section 111(c) of the Act.
            [64 FR 3797, Jan. 25, 1999, as amended at 72 FR 73491, Dec. 27, 2007]
          
          
            § 6.13
            Hearings and appeals.
            (a) When a Recipient requests an opportunity for a hearing, in accordance with § 6.12(b)(3), the General Counsel will follow the notification procedures set forth in 24 CFR 180.415. The hearing, and any petition for review, will be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in 24 CFR part 180.
            (b) After a hearing is held and a final agency decision is rendered under 24 CFR part 180, the Recipient may seek judicial review in accordance with section 111(c) of the Act.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 8
        PART 8—NONDISCRIMINATION BASED ON HANDICAP IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
        
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            Sec.
            8.1
            Purpose.
            
            8.2
            Applicability.
            8.3
            Definitions.
            8.4
            Discrimination prohibited.
            8.5
            [Reserved]
            8.6
            Communications.
          
          
            Subpart B—Employment
            8.10
            General prohibitions against employment discrimination.
            8.11
            Reasonable accommodation.
            8.12
            Employment criteria.
            8.13
            Preemployment inquiries.
          
          
            Subpart C—Program Accessibility
            8.20
            General requirement concerning program accessibility.
            8.21
            Non-housing facilities.
            8.22
            New construction—housing facilities.
            8.23
            Alterations of existing housing facilities.
            8.24
            Existing housing programs.
            8.25
            Public housing and multi-family Indian housing.
            8.26
            Distribution of accessible dwelling units.
            8.27
            Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.
            8.28
            Housing certificate and housing voucher programs.
            8.29
            Homeownership programs (sections 235(i) and 235(j), Turnkey III and Indian housing mutual self-help programs).
            8.30
            Rental rehabilitation program.
            8.31
            Historic properties.
            8.32
            Accessibility standards.
            8.33
            Housing adjustments.
          
          
            Subpart D—Enforcement
            8.50
            Assurances required.
            8.51
            Self-evaluation.
            8.52
            Remedial and affirmative action.
            8.53
            Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
            8.54
            Notice.
            8.55
            Compliance information.
            8.56
            Conduct of investigations.
            8.57
            Procedure for effecting compliance.
            8.58
            Hearings.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 5309.
        
        
          Source:
          53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General Provisions
          
            § 8.1
            Purpose.
            (a) The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C 794), to the end that no otherwise qualified individual with handicaps in the United States shall, solely by reason of his or her handicap, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department of Housing and Urban Development. This part also implements section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5309). This part does not effectuate section 504 as it applies to any program or activity conducted by the Department. Compliance with this part does not assure compliance with requirements for accessibility by physically-handicapped persons imposed under the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157; 24 CFR part 40).
            (b) The policies and standards for compliance established by this part are established in contemplation of, and with a view to enforcement through, the Department's administration of programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance and the administrative procedures described in subpart D (including, without limitation, judicial enforcement under § 8.57(a)).
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 83 FR 26361, June 7, 2018]
          
          
            § 8.2
            Applicability.
            This part applies to all applicants for, and recipients of, HUD assistance in the operation of programs or activities receiving such assistance. 
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 83 FR 26361, June 7, 2018]
          
          
            § 8.3
            Definitions.
            As used in this part:
            
              Accessible, when used with respect to the design, construction, or alteration of a facility or a portion of a facility other than an individual dwelling unit, means that the facility or portion of the facility when designed, constructed or altered, can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical handicaps. The phrase accessible to and usable by is synonomous with accessible.
            
              Accessible, when used with respect to the design, construction, or alteration of an individual dwelling unit, means that the unit is located on an accessible route and when designed, constructed, altered or adapted can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical handicaps. A unit that is on an accessible route and is adaptable and otherwise in compliance with the standards set forth in § 8.32 is accessible within the meaning of this paragraph. When a unit in an existing facility which is being made accessible as a result of alterations is intended for use by a specific qualified individual with handicaps (e.g., a current occupant of such unit or of another unit under the control of the same recipient, or an applicant on a waiting list), the unit will be deemed accessible if it meets the requirements of applicable standards that address the particular disability or impairment of such person.
            
              Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building or facility that complies with the space and reach requirements of applicable standards prescribed by § 8.32. An accessible route that serves only accessible units occupied by persons with hearing or vision impairments need not comply with those requirements intended to effect accessibility for persons with mobility impairments.
            
              Adaptability means the ability of certain elements of a dwelling unit, such as kitchen counters, sinks, and grab bars, to be added to, raised, lowered, or otherwise altered, to accommodate the needs of persons with or without handicaps, or to accommodate the needs of persons with different types or degrees of disability. For example, in a unit adaptable for a hearing-impaired person, the wiring for visible emergency alarms may be installed but the alarms need not be installed until such time as the unit is made ready for occupancy by a hearing-impaired person.
            
              Alteration means any change in a facility or its permanent fixtures or equipment. It includes, but is not limited to, remodeling, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, changes or rearrangements in structural parts and extraordinary repairs. It does not include normal maintenance or repairs, reroofing, interior decoration, or changes to mechanical systems.
            
              Applicant for assistance means one who submits an application, request, plan, or statement required to be approved by a Department official or by a primary recipient as a condition of eligibility for Federal financial assistance. An application means such a request, plan or statement.
            
              Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance. For example, auxiliary aids for persons with impaired vision may include readers, Brailled materials, audio recordings, and other similar services and devices. Auxiliary aids for persons with impaired hearing may include telephone handset amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing aids, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's), interpreters, notetakers, written materials, and other similar services and devices.
            
              Department or HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, rolling stock or other real or personal property or interest in the property.
            
              Federal financial assistance means any assistance provided or otherwise made available by the Department through any grant, loan, contract or any other arrangement, in the form of:
            (a) Funds;
            (b) Services of Federal personnel; or
            (c) Real or personal property or any interest in or use of such property, including:
            (1) Transfers or leases of the property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
            (2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of the property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal Government.
            
              Federal financial assistance includes community development funds in the form of proceeds from loans guaranteed under section 108 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, but does not include assistance made available through direct Federal procurement contracts or payments made under these contracts or any other contract of insurance or guaranty.
            
              Handicap means any condition or characteristic that renders a person an individual with handicaps.
            
              Historic preservation programs or activities means programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance that have preservation of historic properties as a primary purpose.
            
              Historic properties means those properties that are listed or are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or such properties designated as historic under a statute of the appropriate State or local government body.
            
              Individual with handicaps means any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; has a record of such an impairment; or is regarded as having such an impairment. For purposes of employment, this term does not include: Any individual who is an alcoholic or drug abuser whose current use of alcohol or drugs prevents the individual from performing the duties of the job in question, or whose employment, by reason of current alcohol or drug abuse, would constitute a direct threat to property or the safety of others; or any individual who has a currently contagious disease or infection and who, by reason of such disease or infection, would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or who, by reason of the currently contagious disease or infection, is unable to perform the duties of the job. For purposes of other programs and activities, the term does not include any individual who is an alcoholic or drug abuser whose current use of alcohol or drugs prevents the individual from participating in the program or activity in question, or whose participation, by reason of such current alcohol or drug abuse, would constitute a direct threat to property or the safety of others. As used in this definition, the phrase:
            (a) Physical or mental impairment includes:
            (1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or

            (2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction and alcoholism.
            (b) Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
            (c) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
            (d) Is regarded as having an impairment means:
            (1) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit one or more major life activities but that is treated by a recipient as constituting such a limitation;
            (2) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or
            (3) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (a) of this section but is treated by a recipient as having such an impairment.
            
              Multifamily housing project means a project containing five or more dwelling units.
            
              Primary recipient means a person, group, organization, State or local unit of government that is authorized or required to extend Federal financial assistance to another recipient for the purpose of carrying out a program or activity.
            
            
              Program or activity means all of the operations of:
            (a)(1) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
            (2) The entity of such State or local government that distributes such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
            (b)(1) A college, university, or other post-secondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or
            (2) A local educational agency (as defined in section 198(a)(10) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965), system of vocational education, or other school system;
            (c)(1) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—
            (i) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
            (ii) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
            (2) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
            (d) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraphs (a), (b), or (c) of this section;
            any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
            
              Project means the whole of one or more residential structures and appurtenant structures, equipment, roads, walks, and parking lots which are covered by a single contract for Federal financial assistance or application for assistance, or are treated as a whole for processing purposes, whether or not located on a common site.
            
              Qualified individual with handicaps means:
            (a) With respect to employment, an individual with handicaps who, with reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the job in question; and
            (b) With respect to any non-employment program or activity which requires a person to perform services or to achieve a level of accomplishment, an individual with handicaps who meets the essential eligibility requirements and who can achieve the purpose of the program or activity without modifications in the program or activity that the recipient can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in its nature; or

            (c) With respect to any other non-employment program or activity, an individual with handicaps who meets the essential eligibility requirements for participation in, or receipt of benefits from, that program or activity. Essential eligibility requirements include stated eligibility requirements such as income as well as other explicit or implicit requirements inherent in the nature of the program or activity, such as requirements that an occupant of multifamily housing be capable of meeting the recipient's selection criteria and be capable of complying with all obligations of occupancy with or without supportive services provided by persons other than the recipient. For example, a chronically mentally ill person whose particular condition poses a significant risk of substantial interference with the safety or enjoyment of others or with his or her own health or safety in the absence of necessary supportive services may be qualified for occupancy in a project where such supportive services are provided by the recipient as part of the assisted program. The person may not be qualified for a project lacking such services.
            
              Recipient means any State or its political subdivision, any instrumentality of a State or its political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any person to which Federal financial assistance is extended for any program or activity directly or through another recipient, including any successor, assignee, or transferee of a recipient, but excluding the ultimate beneficiary of the assistance. An entity or person receiving housing assistance payments from a recipient on behalf of eligible families under a housing assistance payments program or a voucher program is not a recipient or subrecipient merely by virtue of receipt of such payments.
            
              Replacement cost of the completed facility means the current cost of construction and equipment for a newly constructed housing facility of the size and type being altered. Construction and equipment costs do not include the cost of land, demolition, site improvements, non-dwelling facilities and administrative costs for project development activities.
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. 794, as it applies to programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance.
            
              Substantial impairment means a significant loss of the integrity of finished materials, design quality, or special character resulting from a permanent alteration.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 54 FR 8188, Feb. 27, 1989]
          
          
            § 8.4
            Discrimination prohibited.
            (a) No qualified individual with handicaps shall, solely on the basis of handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance from the Department.
            (b)(1) A recipient, in providing any housing, aid, benefit, or service in a program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance from the Department may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, solely on the basis of handicap:
            (i) Deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to participate in, or benefit from, the housing, aid, benefit, or service;
            (ii) Afford a qualified individual with handicaps an opportunity to participate in, or benefit from, the housing, aid, benefit, or service that is not equal to that afforded to others;
            (iii) Provide a qualified individual with handicaps with any housing, aid, benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording the individual an equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement as that provided to others;
            (iv) Provide different or separate housing, aid, benefits, or services to individuals with handicaps or to any class of individuals with handicaps from that provided to others unless such action is necessary to provide qualified individuals with handicaps with housing, aid, benefits, or services that are as effective as those provided to others.
            (v) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against a qualified individual with handicaps by providing significant assistance to an agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of handicap in providing any housing, aid, benefit, or service to beneficiaries in the recipient's federally assisted program or activity;
            (vi) Deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to participate as a member of planning or advisory boards;
            (vii) Deny a dwelling to an otherwise qualified buyer or renter because of a handicap of that buyer or renter or a person residing in or intending and eligible to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or
            (viii) Otherwise limit a qualified individual with handicaps in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by other qualified individuals receiving the housing, aid, benefit, or service.
            (2) For purposes of this part, housing, aids, benefits, and services, to be equally effective, are not required to produce the identical result or level of achievement for individuals with handicaps and non-handicapped persons, but must afford individuals with handicaps equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement.

            (3) A recipient may not deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to participate in any federally assisted program or activity that is not separate or different despite the existence of permissibly separate or different programs or activities.
            
            (4) In any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department, a recipient may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration the purpose or effect of which would:
            (i) Subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination solely on the basis of handicap;
            (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the objectives of the recipient's federally assisted program or activity for qualified individuals with a particular handicap involved in the program or activity, unless the recipient can demonstrate that the criteria or methods of administration are manifestly related to the accomplishment of an objective of a program or activity; or
            (iii) Perpetuate the discrimination of another recipient if both recipients are subject to common administrative control or are agencies of the same State.
            (5) In determining the site or location of a federally assisted facility, an applicant for assistance or a recipient may not make selections the purpose or effect of which would:
            (i) Exclude qualified individuals with handicaps from, deny them the benefits of, or otherwise subject them to discrimination under, any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance from the Department, or
            (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with respect to qualified individuals with handicaps.
            (6) As used in this section, the housing, aid, benefit, or service provided under a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance includes any housing, aid, benefit, or service provided in or through a facility that has been constructed, altered, leased or rented, or otherwise acquired, in whole or in part, with Federal financial assistance.
            (c)(1) Non-handicapped persons may be excluded from the benefits of a program if the program is limited by Federal statute or executive order to individuals with handicaps. A specific class of individuals with handicaps may be excluded from a program if the program is limited by Federal statute or Executive order to a different class of individuals.

            (2) Certain Department programs operate under statutory definitions of handicapped person that are more restrictive than the definition of individual with handicaps contained in § 8.3. Those definitions are not superseded or otherwise affected by this regulation.
            (d) Recipients shall administer programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals with handicaps.
            (e) The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement that, based on handicap, imposes inconsistent or contradictory prohibitions or limits upon the eligibility of qualified individuals with handicaps to receive services or to practice any occupation or profession.
            (f) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section does not limit the general prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988, as amended at 83 FR 23961, June 7, 2018]
          
          
            § 8.5
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 8.6
            Communications.
            (a) The recipient shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective communication with applicants, beneficiaries, and members of the public.
            (1) The recipient shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where necessary to afford an individual with handicaps an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
            (i) In determining what auxiliary aids are necessary, the recipient shall give primary consideration to the requests of the individual with handicaps.
            (ii) The recipient is not required to provide individually prescribed devices, readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal nature.

            (2) Where a recipient communicates with applicants and beneficiaries by telephone, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's) or equally effective communication systems shall be used.
            (b) The recipient shall adopt and implement procedures to ensure that interested persons (including persons with impaired vision or hearing) can obtain information concerning the existence and location of accessible services, activities, and facilities.
            (c) This section does not require a recipient to take any action that the recipient can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. If an action would result in such an alteration or burdens, the recipient shall take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the program or activity receiving HUD assistance.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Employment
          
            § 8.10
            General prohibitions against employment discrimination.
            (a) No qualified individual with handicaps shall, solely on the basis of handicap, be subjected to discrimination in employment under any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance from the Department.
            (b) A recipient may not limit, segregate, or classify applicants or employees in any way that adversely affects their opportunities or status because of handicap.
            (c) The prohibition against discrimination in employment applies to the following activities:
            (1) Recruitment, advertising, and the processing of applications for employment;
            (2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, award of tenure, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, right of return from layoff, injury or illness, and rehiring;
            (3) Rates of pay or any other form of compensation and changes in compensation;
            (4) Job assignments, job classifications, organizational structures, position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
            (5) Leaves of absence, sick leave, or any other leave;
            (6) Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, whether or not administered by the recipient;
            (7) Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related activities, and selection for leaves of absence for training;
            (8) Employer sponsored activities, including social or recreational programs; and
            (9) Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
            (d) A recipient may not participate in a contractual or other relationship that has the effect of subjecting qualified applicants with handicaps or employees with handicaps to discrimination prohibited by this subpart. The relationships referred to in this paragraph (d) include relationships with employment and referral agencies, labor unions, organizations providing or administering fringe benefits to employees of the recipient, and organizations providing training and apprenticeship programs.
          
          
            § 8.11
            Reasonable accommodation.
            (a) A recipient shall make reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified applicant with handicaps or employee with handicaps, unless the recipient can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its program.
            (b) Reasonable accommodation may include:
            (1) Making facilities used by employees accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps and
            (2) Job restructuring, job relocation, part-time or modified work schedules, acquisitions or modification of equipment or devices, the provision of readers or interpreters, and other similar actions.

            (c) In determining, under paragraph (a) of this section, whether an accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of a recipient's program, factors to be considered include:
            
            (1) The overall size of the recipient's program with respect to number of employees, number and type of facilities, and size of budget;
            (2) The type of the recipient's operation, including the composition and structure of the recipient's workforce; and
            (3) The nature and cost of the accommodation needed.
            (d) A recipient may not deny any employment opportunity to a qualified handicapped employee or applicant if the basis for the denial is the need to make reasonable accommodation to the physical or mental limitations of the employee or applicant.
          
          
            § 8.12
            Employment criteria.
            (a) A recipient may not use any employment test or other selection criterion that screens out or tends to screen out individuals with handicaps or any class of individuals with handicaps unless:
            (1) The recipient demonstrates that the test score or other selection criterion, as used by the recipient, is job-related for the position in question; and
            (2) The appropriate HUD official demonstrates that alternative job-related tests or criteria that tend to screen out fewer individuals with handicaps are unavailable.
            (b) A recipient shall select and administer tests concerning employment to ensure that, when administered to an applicant or employee who has a handicap that impairs sensory, manual, or speaking skills, the test results accurately reflect the applicant's or employee's job skills, aptitude, or whatever other factor the test purports to measure, rather than the applicant's or employee's impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills (except where those skills are the factors that the test purports to measure).
          
          
            § 8.13
            Preemployment inquiries.
            (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a recipient may not make a preemployment inquiry or conduct a preemployment medical examination of an applicant to determine whether the applicant is an individual with handicaps or the nature or severity of a handicap. A recipient may, however, make preemployment inquiry into an applicant's ability to perform job-related functions.
            (b) When a recipient is undertaking affirmative action efforts, voluntary or otherwise, the recipient may invite applicants for employment to indicate whether and to what extent they are handicapped, if the following conditions are met:
            (1) The recipient states clearly on any written questionnaire used for this purpose, or makes clear orally if no written questionnaire is used, that the information requested is intended for use solely in connection with its remedial action obligations, or its voluntary or affirmative action efforts; and
            (2) The recipient states clearly that the information is being requested on a voluntary basis, that it will be kept confidential (as provided in paragraph (d) of this section), that refusal to provide the information will not subject the applicant or employee to any adverse treatment, and that the information will be used only in accordance with this part.
            (c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a recipient from conditioning an offer of employment on the results of a medical examination conducted before the employee's entrance on duty if all entering employees in that category of job classification must take such an examination regardless of handicap, and the results of such examination are used only in accordance with the requirements of this part.
            (d) Information obtained under this section concerning the medical condition or history of the applicant is to be collected and maintained on separate forms that are accorded confidentiality as medical records, except that:
            (1) Supervisors and managers may be informed of restrictions on the work or duties of individuals with handicaps and informed of necessary accommodations;
            (2) First aid and safety personnel may be informed if the condition might require emergency treatment; and
            (3) Government officials investigating compliance with section 504 shall be provided relevant information upon request.
          
        
        
          
          Subpart C—Program Accessibility
          
            § 8.20
            General requirement concerning program accessibility.
            Except as otherwise provided in §§ 8.21(c)(1), 8.24(a), 8.25, and 8.31, no qualified individual with handicaps shall, because a recipient's facilities are inaccessible to or unusable by individuals with handicaps, be denied the benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance.
          
          
            § 8.21
            Non-housing facilities.
            (a) New construction. New non-housing facilities shall be designed and constructed to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps.
            (b) Alterations to facilities. Alterations to existing non-housing facilities shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. For purposes of this paragraph, the phrase to the maximum extent feasible shall not be interpreted as requiring that a recipient make a non-housing facility, or element thereof, accessible if doing so would impose undue financial and administrative burdens on the operation of the recipient's program or activity.
            (c) Existing non-housing facilities—(1) General. A recipient shall operate each non-housing program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance so that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. This paragraph does not—
            (i) Necessarily require a recipient to make each of its existing non-housing facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps;
            (ii) In the case of historic preservation programs or activities, require the recipient to take any action that would result in a substantial impairment of significant historic features of an historic property; or
            (iii) Require a recipient to take any action that it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. If an action would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the recipient shall take any action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that individuals with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
            (2) Methods—(i) General. A recipient may comply with the requirements of this section in its programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance through such means as location of programs or services to accessible facilities or accessible portions of facilities, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, the addition or redesign of equipment (e.g., appliances or furnishings) changes in management policies or procedures, acquisition or construction of additional facilities, or alterations to existing facilities on a selective basis, or any other methods that result in making its program or activity accessible to individuals with handicaps. A recipient is not required to make structural changes in existing facilities where other methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section. In choosing among available methods for meeting the requirements of this section, the recipient shall give priority to those methods that offer programs and activities to qualified individuals with handicaps in the most integrated setting appropriate.
            (ii) Historic preservation programs or activities. In meeting the requirements of § 8.21(c) in historic preservation programs or activities, a recipient shall give priority to methods that provide physical access to individuals with handicaps. In cases where a physical alteration to an historic property is not required because of § 8.21(c)(1)(ii) or (iii), alternative methods of achieving program accessibility include using audio-visual materials and devices to depict those portions of an historic property that cannot otherwise be made accessible; assigning persons to guide individuals with handicaps into or through portions of historic properties that cannot otherwise be made accessible; or adopting other innovative methods.
            (3) Time period for compliance. The recipient shall comply with the obligations established under this section within sixty days of July 11, 1988, except that where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, such changes shall be made within three years of July 11, 1988, but in any event as expeditiously as possible.
            (4) Transition plan. If structural changes to non-housing facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, a recipient shall develop, within six months of July 11, 1988, a transition plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The plan shall be developed with the assistance of interested persons, including individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps. A copy of the transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum—
            (i) Identify physical obstacles in the recipient's facilities that limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals with handicaps;
            (ii) Describe in details the methods that will be used to make the facilities accessible;
            (iii) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during each year of the transition period;
            (iv) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan; and
            (v) Identify the persons or groups with whose assistance the plan was prepared.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0034)
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]
          
          
            § 8.22
            New construction—housing facilities.
            (a) New multifamily housing projects (including public housing and Indian housing projects as required by § 8.25) shall be designed and constructed to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps.
            (b) Subject to paragraph (c) of this section, a minimum of five percent of the total dwelling units or at least one unit in a multifamily housing project, whichever is greater, shall be made accessible for persons with mobility impairments. A unit that is on an accessible route and is adaptable and otherwise in compliance with the standards set forth in § 8.32 is accessible for purposes of this section. An additional two percent of the units (but not less than one unit) in such a project shall be accessible for persons with hearing or vision impairments.
            (c) HUD may prescribe a higher percentage or number than that prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section for any area upon request therefor by any affected recipient or by any State or local government or agency thereof based upon demonstration to the reasonable satisfaction of HUD of a need for a higher percentage or number, based on census data or other available current data (including a currently effective Housing Assistance Plan or Comprehensive Homeless Assistance Plan), or in response to evidence of a need for a higher percentage or number received in any other manner. In reviewing such request or otherwise assessing the existence of such needs, HUD shall take into account the expected needs of eligible persons with and without handicaps.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 920, Jan. 9, 1991]
          
          
            § 8.23
            Alterations of existing housing facilities.
            (a) Substantial alteration. If alterations are undertaken to a project (including a public housing project as required by § 8.25(a)(2)) that has 15 or more units and the cost of the alterations is 75 percent or more of the replacement cost of the completed facility, then the provisions of § 8.22 shall apply.
            (b) Other alterations. (1) Subject to paragraph (b)(2) of this section, alterations to dwelling units in a multifamily housing project (including public housing) shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. If alterations of single elements or spaces of a dwelling unit, when considered together, amount to an alteration of a dwelling unit, the entire dwelling unit shall be made accessible. Once five percent of the dwelling units in a project are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with mobility impairments, then no additional elements of dwelling units, or entire dwelling units, are required to be accessible under this paragraph. Alterations to common areas or parts of facilities that affect accessibility of existing housing facilities shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. For purposes of this paragraph, the phrase to the maximum extent feasible shall not be interpreted as requiring that a recipient (including a PHA) make a dwelling unit, common area, facility or element thereof accessible if doing so would impose undue financial and administrative burdens on the operation of the multifamily housing project.
            (2) HUD may prescribe a higher percentage or number than that prescribed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section for any area upon request therefor by any affected recipient or by any State or local government or agency thereof based upon demonstration to the reasonable satisfaction of HUD of a need for a higher percentage or number, based on census data or other available current data (including a currently effective Housing Assistance Plan or Comprehensive Homeless Assistance Plan), or in response to evidence of a need for a higher percentage or number received in any other manner. In reviewing such request or otherwise assessing the existence of such needs, HUD shall take into account the expected needs of eligible persons with and without handicaps.
          
          
            § 8.24
            Existing housing programs.
            (a) General. A recipient shall operate each existing housing program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance so that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. This paragraph does not—
            (1) Necessarily require a recipient to make each of its existing facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps;
            (2) Require a recipient to take any action that it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. If an action would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the recipient shall take any action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that individuals with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
            (b) Methods. A recipient may comply with the requirements of this section through such means as reassignment of services to accessible buildings, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, provision of housing or related services at alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and construction of new facilities, or any other methods that result in making its programs or activities readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. A recipient is not required to make structural changes in existing housing facilities where other methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section or to provide supportive services that are not part of the program. In choosing among available methods for meeting the requirements of this section, the recipient shall give priority to those methods that offer programs and activities to qualified individuals with handicaps in the most integrated setting appropriate.
            (c) Time period for compliance. The recipient shall comply with the obligations established under this section within sixty days of July 11, 1988 except that—
            (1) In a public housing program where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, such changes shall be made within the timeframes established in § 8.25(c).
            (2) In other housing programs, where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, such changes shall be made within three years of July 11, 1988, but in any event as expeditiously as possible.
            (d) Transition plan and time period for structural changes. Except as provided in § 8.25(c), in the event that structural changes to facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, a recipient shall develop, within six months of July 11, 1988, a transition plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The plan shall be developed with the assistance of interested persons, including individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps. A copy of the transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum—
            (1) Identify physical obstacles in the recipient's facilities that limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals with handicaps;
            (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the facilities accessible;
            (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during each year of the transition period;
            (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan; and
            (5) Identify the persons or groups with whose assistance the plan was prepared.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0034)
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]
          
          
            § 8.25
            Public housing and multi-family Indian housing.
            (a) Development and alteration of public housing and multi-family Indian housing. (1) The requirements of § 8.22 shall apply to all newly constructed public housing and multi-family Indian housing.
            (2) The requirements of § 8.23 shall apply to public housing and multi-family Indian housing developed through rehabilitation and to the alteration of public housing and multi-family Indian housing.
            (3) In developing public housing and multi-family Indian housing through the purchase of existing properties PHAs and IHAs shall give priority to facilities which are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps.
            (b) Existing public housing and multi-family Indian housing—general. The requirements of § 8.24(a) shall apply to public housing and multi-family Indian housing programs.
            (c) Existing public housing and multi-family Indian housing—needs assessment and transition plan. As soon as possible, each PHA (for the purpose of this paragraph, this includes an Indian Housing Authority) shall assess, on a PHA-wide basis, the needs of current tenants and applicants on its waiting list for accessible units and the extent to which such needs have not been met or cannot reasonably be met within four years through development, alterations otherwise contemplated, or other programs administered by the PHA (e.g., Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation or Section 8 Existing Housing or Housing Vouchers). If the PHA currently has no accessible units or if the PHA or HUD determines that information regarding the availability of accessible units has not been communicated sufficiently so that, as a result, the number of eligible qualified individuals with handicaps on the waiting list is not fairly representative of the number of such persons in the area, the PHA's assessment shall include the needs of eligible qualified individuals with handicaps in the area. If the PHA determines, on the basis of such assessment, that there is no need for additional accessible dwelling units or that the need is being or will be met within four years through other means, such as new construction, Section 8 or alterations otherwise contemplated, no further action is required by the PHA under this paragraph. If the PHA determines, on the basis of its needs assessment, that alterations to make additional units accessible must be made so that the needs of eligible qualified individuals with handicaps may be accommodated proportionally to the needs of non-handicapped individuals in the same categories, then the PHA shall develop a transition plan to achieve program accessibility. The PHA shall complete the needs assessment and transition plan, if one is necessary, as expeditiously as possible, but in any event no later than two years after July 11, 1988. The PHA shall complete structural changes necessary to achieve program accessibility as soon as possible but in any event no later than four years after July 11, 1988. The Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity and the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing may extend the four year period for a period not to exceed two years, on a case-by-case determination that compliance within that period would impose undue financial and administrative burdens on the operation of the recipient's public housing and multi-family Indian housing program. The Secretary or the Undersecretary may further extend this time period in extraordinary circumstances, for a period not to exceed one year. The plan shall be developed with the assistance of interested persons including individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps. A copy of the needs assessment and transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The transition plan shall, at a minimum—
            (1) Identify physical obstacles in the PHA's facilities (e.g., dwelling units and common areas) that limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals with handicaps;
            (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the PHA's facilities accessible. A PHA may, if necessary, provide in its plan that it will seek HUD approval, under 24 CFR part 968, of a comprehensive modernization program to meet the needs of eligible individuals with handicaps;
            (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve compliance with this section and, if the time of the transition plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during each year of the transition period;
            (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan; and
            (5) Identify the persons or groups with whose assistance the plan was prepared.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0034)
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989; 56 FR 920, Jan. 9, 1991]
          
          
            § 8.26
            Distribution of accessible dwelling units.
            Accessible dwelling units required by § 8.22, 8.23, 8.24 or 8.25 shall, to the maximum extent feasible and subject to reasonable health and safety requirements, be distributed throughout projects and sites and shall be available in a sufficient range of sizes and amenities so that a qualified individual with handicaps' choice of living arrangements is, as a whole, comparable to that of other persons eligible for housing assistance under the same program. This provision shall not be construed to require provision of an elevator in any multifamily housing project solely for the purpose of permitting location of accessible units above or below the accessible grade level.
          
          
            § 8.27
            Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.
            (a) Owners and managers of multifamily housing projects having accessible units shall adopt suitable means to assure that information regarding the availability of accessible units reaches eligible individuals with handicaps, and shall take reasonable nondiscriminatory steps to maximize the utilization of such units by eligible individuals whose disability requires the accessibility features of the particular unit. To this end, when an accessible unit becomes vacant, the owner or manager before offering such units to a non-handicapped applicant shall offer such unit:
            (1) First, to a current occupant of another unit of the same project, or comparable projects under common control, having handicaps requiring the accessibility features of the vacant unit and occupying a unit not having such features, or, if no such occupant exists, then
            (2) Second, to an eligible qualified applicant on the waiting list having a handicap requiring the accessibility features of the vacant unit.
            (b) When offering an accessible unit to an applicant not having handicaps requiring the accessibility features of the unit, the owner or manager may require the applicant to agree (and may incorporate this agreement in the lease) to move to a non-accessible unit when available.
          
          
            § 8.28
            Housing certificate and housing voucher programs.

            (a) In carrying out the requirements of this subpart, a recipient administering a Section 8 Existing Housing Certificate program or a housing voucher program shall:
            
            (1) In providing notice of the availability and nature of housing assistance for low-income families under program requirements, adopt suitable means to assure that the notice reaches eligible individuals with handicaps;
            (2) In its activities to encourage participation by owners, include encouragement of participation by owners having accessible units;
            (3) When issuing a Housing Certificate or Housing Voucher to a family which includes an individual with handicaps include a current listing of available accessible units known to the PHA and, if necessary, otherwise assist the family in locating an available accessible dwelling unit;
            (4) Take into account the special problem of ability to locate an accessible unit when considering requests by eligible individuals with handicaps for extensions of Housing Certificates or Housing Vouchers; and
            (5) If necessary as a reasonable accommodation for a person with disabilities, approve a family request for an exception rent under § 982.504(b)(2) for a regular tenancy under the Section 8 certificate program so that the program is readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities.
            (b) In order to ensure that participating owners do not discriminate in the recipient's federally assisted program, a recipient shall enter into a HUD-approved contract with participating owners, which contract shall include necessary assurances of nondiscrimination.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998]
          
          
            § 8.29
            Homeownership programs (sections 235(i) and 235(j), Turnkey III and Indian housing mutual self-help programs).
            Any housing units newly constructed or rehabilitated for purchase or single family (including semi-attached and attached) units to be constructed or rehabilitated in a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance shall be made accessible upon request of the prospective buyer if the nature of the handicap of an expected occupant so requires. In such case, the buyer shall consult with the seller or builder/sponsor regarding the specific design features to be provided. If accessibility features selected at the option of the homebuyer are ones covered by the standards prescribed by § 8.32, those features shall comply with the standards prescribed in § 8.32. The buyer shall be permitted to depart from particular specifications of these standards in order to accommodate his or her specific handicap. The cost of making a facility accessible under this paragraph may be included in the mortgage amount within the allowable mortgage limits, where applicable. To the extent such costs exceed allowable mortgage limits, they may be passed on to the prospective homebuyer, subject to maximum sales price limitations (see 24 CFR 235.320.)
          
          
            § 8.30
            Rental rehabilitation program.
            Each grantee or state recipient in the rental rehabilitation program shall, subject to the priority in 24 CFR 511.10(l) and in accordance with other requirements in 24 CFR part 511, give priority to the selection of projects that will result in dwelling units being made readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988]
          
          
            § 8.31
            Historic properties.
            If historic properties become subject to alterations to which this part applies the requirements of § 4.1.7 of the standards of § 8.32 of this part shall apply, except in the case of the Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) program. In the UDAG program the requirements of 36 CFR part 801 shall apply. Accessibility to historic properties subject to alterations need not be provided if such accessibility would substantially impair the significant historic features of the property or result in undue financial and administrative burdens.
          
          
            § 8.32
            Accessibility standards.

            (a) Effective as of July 11, 1988, design, construction, or alteration of buildings in conformance with sections 3-8 of the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of §§ 8.21, 8.22, 8.23, and 8.25 with respect to those buildings. Departures from particular technical and scoping requirements of the UFAS by the use of other methods are permitted where substantially equivalent or greater access to and usability of the building is provided. The alteration of housing facilities shall also be in conformance with additional scoping requirements contained in this part. Persons interested in obtaining a copy of the UFAS are directed to § 40.7 of this title.
            (b) For purposes of this section, section 4.1.6(1)(g) of UFAS shall be interpreted to exempt from the requirements of UFAS only mechanical rooms and other spaces that, because of their intended use, will not require accessibility to the public or beneficiaries or result in the employment or residence therein of individuals with physical handicaps.
            (c) This section does not require recipients to make building alterations that have little likelihood of being accomplished without removing or altering a load-bearing structural member.
            (d) For purposes of this section, section 4.1.4(11) of UFAS may not be used to waive or lower the minimum of five percent accessible units required by § 8.22(b) or to apply the minimum only to projects of 15 or more dwelling units.
            (e) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the provisions of §§ 8.21 (a) and (b), 8.22 (a) and (b), 8.23, 8.25(a) (1) and (2), and 8.29 shall apply to facilities that are designed, constructed or altered after July 11, 1988. If the design of a facility was commenced before July 11, 1988, the provisions shall be followed to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Department. For purposes of this paragraph, the date a facility is constructed or altered shall be deemed to be the date bids for the construction or alteration of the facility are solicited. For purposes of the Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) program, the provisions shall apply to the construction or alteration of facilities that are funded under applications submitted after July 11, 1988. If the UDAG application was submitted before July 11, 1988, the provisions shall apply, to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Department.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 61 FR 5203, Feb. 9, 1996]
          
          
            § 8.33
            Housing adjustments.
            A recipient shall modify its housing policies and practices to ensure that these policies and practices do not discriminate, on the basis of handicap, against a qualified individual with handicaps. The recipient may not impose upon individuals with handicaps other policies, such as the prohibition of assistive devices, auxiliary alarms, or guides in housing facilities, that have the effect of limiting the participation of tenants with handicaps in the recipient's federally assisted housing program or activity in violation of this part. Housing policies that the recipient can demonstrate are essential to the housing program or activity will not be regarded as discriminatory within the meaning of this section if modifications to them would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the program or activity or undue financial and administrative burdens.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Enforcement
          
            § 8.50
            Assurances required.
            (a) Assurances. An applicant for Federal financial assistance for a program or activity to which this part applies shall submit an assurance to HUD, or in the case of a subrecipient to a primary recipient, on a form specified by the responsible civil rights official, that the program or activity will be operated in compliance with this part. An applicant may incorporate these assurances by reference in subsequent applications to the Department.
            (b) Duration of obligation. (1) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended in the form of real property or to provide real property or structures on the property, the assurance will obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the real property or structures are used for the purpose for which Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits.
            
            (2) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide personal property, the assurance will obligate the recipient for the period during which it retains ownership or possession of the property.
            (3) In all other cases the assurance will obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended.
            (c) Covenants. (1) Where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of real property or interest in the property from the Department, the instrument effecting or recording this transfer shall contain a covenant running with the land to assure nondiscrimination for the period during which the real property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits.
            (2) Where no transfer of property is involved but property is purchased or improved with Federal financial assistance, the recipient shall agree to include the covenant described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section in the instrument effecting or recording any subsequent transfer of the property.
            (3) Where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of real property or interest in the property from the Department, the covenant shall also include a condition coupled with a right to be reserved by the Department to revert title to the property in the event of a breach of the covenant. If a transferee of real property proposes to mortgage or otherwise encumber the real property as security for financing construction of new, or improvement of existing, facilities on the property for the purposes for which the property was transferred, the Secretary may, upon request of the transferee and if necessary to accomplish such financing and upon such conditions as he or she deems appropriate, agree to forbear the exercise of such right to revert title for so long as the lien of such mortgage or other encumbrance remains effective.
          
          
            § 8.51
            Self-evaluation.
            (a) Each recipient shall, within one year of July 11, 1988, and after consultation with interested persons, including individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps:
            (1) Evaluate its current policies and practices to determine whether, in whole or in part, they do not or may not meet the requirements of this part;
            (2) Modify any policies and practices that do not meet the requirements of this part; and
            (3) Take appropriate corrective steps to remedy the discrimination revealed by the self-evaluation.
            (b) A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall, for at least three years following completion of the evaluation required under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, maintain on file, make available for public inspection, and provide to the responsible civil rights official, upon request: (1) A list of the interested persons consulted; (2) a description of areas examined and any problems identified; and (3) a description of any modifications made and of any remedial steps taken.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0034)
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]
          
          
            § 8.52
            Remedial and affirmative action.
            (a) Remedial action. (1) If the responsible civil rights official finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of handicap in violation of section 504 or this part, the recipient shall take such remedial action as the responsible civil rights official deems necessary to overcome the effects of the discrimination.
            (2) The responsible civil rights official may, where necessary to overcome the effects of discrimination in violation of section 504 or this part, require a recipient to take remedial action—
            (i) With respect to individuals with handicaps who are no longer participants in the program but who were participants in the program when such discrimination occurred or
            (ii) With respect to individuals with handicaps who would have been participants in the program had the discrimination not occurred.
            (b) Voluntary action. A recipient may take nondiscriminatory steps, in addition to any action that is required by this part, to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in the recipient's program or activity by qualified individuals with handicaps.
          
          
            § 8.53
            Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.
            (a) Designation of responsible employee. A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall designate at least one person to coordinate its efforts to comply with this part.
            (b) Adoption of grievance procedures. A recipient that employees fifteen or more persons shall adopt grievance procedures that incorporate appropriate due process standards and that provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by this part. Such procedures need not be established with respect to complaints from applicants for employment or from applicants for admission to housing covered by this part.
          
          
            § 8.54
            Notice.
            (a) A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall take appropriate initial and continuing steps to notify participants, beneficiaries, applicants, and employees, including those with impaired vision or hearing, and unions or professional organizations holding collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient that it does not discriminate on the basis of handicap in violation of this part. The notification shall state, where appropriate, that the recipient does not discriminate in admission or access to, or treatment or employment in, its federally assisted programs and activities. The notification shall also include an identification of the responsible employee designated pursuant to § 8.53. A recipient shall make the initial notification required by this paragraph within 90 days of July 11, 1988. Methods of initial and continuing notification may include the posting of notices, publication in newspapers and magazines, placement of notices in recipients' publications, and distribution of memoranda or other written communications.
            (b) If a recipient publishes or uses recruitment materials or publications containing general information that it makes available to participants, beneficiaries, applicants, or employees, it shall include in those materials or publications a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section. A recipient may meet the requirement of this paragraph either by including appropriate inserts in existing materials and publications or by revising and reprinting the materials and publications.
            (c) The recipient shall ensure that members of the population eligible to be served or likely to be affected directly by a federally assisted program who have visual or hearing impairments are provided with the information necessary to understand and participate in the program. Methods for ensuring participation include, but are not limited to, qualified sign language and oral interpreters, readers, or the use of taped and Braille materials.
          
          
            § 8.55
            Compliance information.
            (a) Cooperation and assistance. The responsible civil rights official and the award official shall, to the fullest extent practicable, seek the cooperation of recipients in obtaining compliance with this part and shall provide assistance and guidance to recipients to help them comply voluntarily with this part.
            (b) Compliance reports. Each recipient shall keep such records and submit to the responsible civil rights official or his or her designee timely, complete, and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in such form and containing such information, as the responsible civil rights official or his or her designee may determine to be necessary to enable him or her to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is complying with this part. In general, recipients should have available for the Department data showing the extent to which individuals with handicaps are beneficiaries of federally assisted programs.
            (c) Access to sources of information. Each recipient shall permit access by the responsible civil rights official during normal business hours to such of its books, records, accounts, and other sources of information, and its facilities, as may be pertinent to ascertain compliance with this part. Where any information required of a recipient is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, institution, or person and this agency, institution, or person shall fail or refuse to furnish this information, the recipient shall so certify in its report and shall set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information.
            (d) Information to beneficiaries and participants. Each recipient shall make available to participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such information regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability to the program or activity under which the recipient receives Federal financial assistance, and make such information available to them in such manner as the responsible civil rights official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by this part.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0034)
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]
          
          
            § 8.56
            Conduct of investigations.
            (a) Periodic compliance reviews. The responsible civil rights official or designee may periodically review the practices of recipients to determine whether they are complying with this part and where he or she has a reasonable basis to do so may conduct on-site reviews. Such basis may include any evidence that a problem exists or that programmatic matters exist that justify on-site investigation in selected circumstances. The responsible civil rights official shall initiate an on-site review by sending to the recipient a letter advising the recipient of the practices to be reviewed; the programs affected by the review; and the opportunity, at any time prior to receipt of a final determination, to make a documentary or other submission that explains, validates, or otherwise addresses the practices under review. In addition, each award official shall include in normal program compliance reviews and monitoring procedures appropriate actions to review and monitor compliance with general or specific program requirements designed to effectuate the requirements of this part.
            (b) Investigations. The responsible civil rights official shall make a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, report, complaint or any other information indicates a possible failure to comply with this part.
            (c) Filing a complaint—(1) Who may file. Any person who believes that he or she has been subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part may by himself or herself or by his or her authorized representative file a complaint with the responsible civil rights official. Any person who believes that any specific class of persons has been subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part and who is a member of that class or who is the authorized representative of a member of that class may file a complaint with the responsible civil rights official.
            (2) Confidentiality. The responsible civil rights official shall hold in confidence the identity of any person submitting a complaint, unless the person submits written authorization otherwise, and except to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any investigation, hearing, or proceeding under this part.
            (3) When to file. Complaints shall be filed within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination, unless the responsible civil rights official waives this time limit for good cause shown. For purposes of determining when a complaint is filed under this paragraph, a complaint mailed to the Department shall be deemed filed on the date it is postmarked. Any other complaint shall be deemed filed on the date it is received by the Department.
            (4) Where to file complaints. Complaints may be filed by mail with the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410, or any Regional or Field Office of the Department.
            (5) Contents of complaints. Each complaint should contain the complainant's name and address, the name and address of the recipient alleged to have violated this part, and a description of the recipient's alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the Department of the nature and date of the alleged violation of this part.
            
            (6) Amendments of complaints. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. Amendments to complaints such as clarification and amplification of allegations in a complaint or the addition of other recipients may be made at any time during the pendency of the complaint and any amendment shall be deemed to be made as of the original filing date.
            (d) Notification. The responsible civil rights official will notify the complainant and the recipient of the agency's receipt of the complaint within ten (10) calendar days.
            (e) Complaint processing procedures. After acknowledging receipt of a complaint, the responsible civil rights official will immediately initiate complaint processing procedures.
            (1) Preliminary investigation.
            (i) Within twenty (20) calendar days of acknowledgement of the complaint, the responsible civil rights official will review the complaint for acceptance, rejection, or referral to the appropriate Federal agency.
            (ii) If the complaint is accepted, the responsible civil rights official will notify the complainant and the award official. The responsible civil righs official will also notify the applicant or recipient complained against of the allegations and give the applicant or recipient an opportunity to make a written submission responding to, rebutting, or denying the allegations raised in the complaint.
            (iii) The party complained against may send the responsible civil rights official a response to the notice of complaint within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving it. With leave of the responsible civil rights official, an answer may be amended at any time. The responsible civil rights official will permit answers to be amended for good cause shown.
            (2) Informal resolution. In accordance with paragraph (j) of this section, the responsible civil rights official shall attempt to resolve complaints informally whenever possible.
            (f) Dismissal of complaint. If the investigation reveals no violation of this part, the responsible civil rights official will dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and recipient.
            (g) Letter of findings. If an informal resolution of the complaint is not reached the responsible civil rights official or his or her designee shall, within 180 days of receipt of the complaint, notify the recipient and the complainant (if any) of the results of the investigation in a letter sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, containing the following:
            (1) Preliminary findings of fact and a preliminary finding of compliance or noncompliance;
            (2) A description of an appropriate remedy for each violation believed to exist;
            (3) A notice that a copy of the Final Investigative Report of the Department will be made available, upon request, to the recipient and the complainant (if any); and
            (4) A notice of the right of the recipient and the complainant (if any) to request a review of the letter of findings by the reviewing civil rights official.
            (h) Right to review of the letter of findings. (1) A complainant or recipient may request that a complete review be made of the letter of findings within 30 days of receipt, by mailing or delivering to the reviewing civil rights official, Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Washington, DC 20410, a written statement of the reasons why the letter of findings should be modified in light of supplementary information.
            (2) The reviewing civil rights official shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the request for review to the other party, if any. Such other party shall have 20 days to respond to the request for review.
            (3) The reviewing civil rights official shall either sustain or modify the letter of findings within 60 days of the request for review. The reviewing civil rights official's decision shall constitute the formal determination.

            (4) If neither party requests that the letter of findings be reviewed, the responsible civil rights official shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the expiration of the time period in paragraph (h)(1) of this section, send a formal written determination of compliance or noncompliance to the recipient and copies to the award official.
            
            (i) Voluntary compliance time limits. The recipient will have ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the formal determination of noncompliance within which to come into voluntary compliance. If the recipient fails to meet this deadline, HUD shall proceed under § 8.57.
            (j) Informal resolution/voluntary compliance—(1) General. It is the policy of the Department to encourage the informal resolution of matters. The responsible civil rights official may attempt to resolve a matter through informal means at any stage of processing. A matter may be resolved by informal means at any time. If a letter of findings making a preliminary finding of noncompliance is issued, the responsible civil rights official shall attempt to resolve the matter by informal means.
            (2) Objectives of informal resolution/voluntary compliance. In attempting informal resolution, the responsible civil rights official shall attempt to achieve a just resolution of the matter and to obtain assurances where appropriate, that the recipient will satisfactorily remedy any violations of the rights of any complainant and will take such action as will assure the elimination of any violation of this part or the prevention of the occurrence of such violation in the future. The terms of such an informal resolution shall be reduced to a written voluntary compliance agreement, signed by the recipient and the responsible civil rights official, and be made part of the file for the matter. Such voluntary compliance agreements shall seek to protect the interests of the complainant (if any), other persons similarly situated, and the public interest.
            (k) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any person for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by this part, or because he or she has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of complainants shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of investigation, hearing or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988; 53 FR 34634, Sept. 7, 1988]
          
          
            § 8.57
            Procedure for effecting compliance.
            (a) General. If there appears to be a failure or threatened failure to comply with this part and if the noncompliance or threatened noncompliance cannot be corrected by informal means, compliance with this part may be effected by the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance, or by other means authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not limited to:
            (1) A referral to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of the United States, or any assurance or other contractual undertaking;
            (2) The initiation of debarment proceedings pursuant to 2 CFR part 2424; and
            (3) Any applicable proceeding under State or local law.
            (b) Noncompliance with § 8.50. If an applicant or a recipient of assistance under a contract which is extended or amended on or after July 11, 1988, fails or refuses to furnish an assurance required under § 8.50 or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with the requirements imposed by that section, Federal financial assistance may be refused under paragraph (c) of this section. The Department is not required to provide assistance during the pendency of the administrative proceeding under such paragraph (c), except where the assistance is due and payable under a contract approved before July 11, 1988.
            (c) Termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance. No order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective until:

            (1) The responsible civil rights official has advised the applicant or recipient of its failure to comply and has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means;
            
            (2) There has been an express finding on the record, after opportunity for hearing, of a failure by the applicant or recipient to comply with a requirement imposed under this part;
            (3) The action has been approved by the Secretary; and
            (4) The expiration of 30 days after the Secretary has filed with the committees of the House and Senate having legislative jurisdiction over the program or activity involved a full written report of the circumstances and the grounds for such action. Any action to suspend or terminate, or to refuse to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance shall be limited to the particular political entity, or part thereof, or other applicant or recipient as to whom such a finding has been made and shall be limited in its effect to the particular program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found.
            (d) Notice to State or local government. Whenever the Secretary determines that a State or unit of general local government which is a recipient of Federal financial assistance under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5301-5318) has failed to comply with a requirement of this part with respect to a program or activity funded in whole or in part with such assistance, the Secretary shall notify the Governor of the State or the chief executive officer of the unit of general local government of the noncompliance and shall request the Governor or the chief executive officer to secure compliance. The notice shall be given at least sixty days before:
            (1) An order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or continue Federal financial assistance becomes effective under paragraph (c) of this section; or
            (2) Any action to effect compliance by any other means authorized by law is taken under paragraph (a) of this section.
            (e) Other means authorized by law. No action to effect compliance by any other means authorized by law shall be taken until:
            (1) The responsible civil rights official has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means;
            (2) The recipient or other person has been notified of its failure to comply and of the action to be taken to effect compliance; and
            (3) At least 10 days have elapsed since the mailing of such notice to the applicant or recipient. During this period, additional efforts shall be made to persuade the applicant or recipient to comply with this part and to take such corrective action as may be appropriate.
            However, this paragraph shall not be construed to prevent an award official from utilizing appropriate procedures and sanctions established under the program to assure or secure compliance with a specific requirement of the program designed to effectuate the objectives of this part.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988, as amended at 72 FR 73491, Dec. 27, 2007]
          
          
            § 8.58
            Hearings.
            (a) Opportunity for hearing. Whenever an opportunity for a hearing is required by § 8.57(c), reasonable notice shall be given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the affected applicant or recipient. This notice shall advise the applicant or recipient of the action proposed to be taken, the specific provision under which the proposed action against it is to be taken, and the matters of fact or law asserted as the basis for this action. The notice shall:
            (1) Fix a date not less than 20 days after the date of the notice for the applicant or recipient to request the administrative law judge to schedule a hearing, or

            (2) Advise the applicant or recipient that the matter has been scheduled for hearing at a stated time and place. The time and place so fixed shall be reasonable and shall be subject to change for cause. The complainant, if any, shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit written information and argument for the record. The failure of an applicant or recipient to request a hearing under this paragraph or to appear at a hearing for which a date has been set is a waiver of the right to a hearing under § 8.57(c) and consent to the making of a decision on the basis of available information.
            (b) Hearing procedures. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with 24 CFR part 180.
            [53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 9
        PART 9—ENFORCEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
        
          Sec.
          9.101
          Purpose.
          9.102
          Applicability.
          9.103
          Definitions.
          9.110
          Self-evaluation.
          9.111
          Notice.
          9.112-9.129
          [Reserved]
          9.130
          General prohibitions against discrimination.
          9.131
          Direct threat.
          9.132-9.139
          [Reserved]
          9.140
          Employment.
          9.141-9.148
          [Reserved]
          9.149
          Program accessibility: discrimination prohibited.
          9.150
          Program accessibility: existing facilities.
          9.151
          Program accessibility: new construction and alterations.
          9.152
          Program accessibility: alterations of Property Disposition Program multifamily housing facilities.
          9.153
          Distribution of accessible dwelling units.
          9.154
          Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.
          9.155
          Housing adjustments.
          9.160
          Communications.
          9.170
          Compliance procedures.
        
        
          Authority:
          29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          59 FR 31047, June 16, 1994, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 9.101
          Purpose.
          The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 119 of the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978, which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability in programs or activities conducted by Executive agencies or the United States Postal Service.
        
        
          § 9.102
          Applicability.
          This part applies to all programs or activities conducted by the agency, except for programs or activities conducted outside the United States that do not involve individuals with disabilities in the United States.
        
        
          § 9.103
          Definitions.
          For purposes of this part:
          
            Accessible: (1) When used with respect to the design, construction, or alteration of a facility or a portion of a facility other than an individual dwelling unit, means that the facility or portion of the facility when designed, constructed or altered, complies with applicable accessibility standards and can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical disabilities. The phrase “accessible to and usable by” is synonymous with accessible.
          (2) When used with respect to the design, construction, or alteration of an individual dwelling unit, means that the unit is located on an accessible route and, when designed, constructed, altered or adapted, complies with applicable accessibility standards, and can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical disabilities. A unit that is on an accessible route and is adaptable and otherwise in compliance with the standards set forth in § 9.151 is “accessible” within the meaning of this definition. When a unit in an existing facility which is being made accessible as a result of alterations is intended for use by a specific qualified individual with disabilities (e.g., a current occupant of such unit or of another unit under the control of the same agency, or an applicant on a waiting list), the unit will be deemed accessible if it meets the requirements of applicable standards that address the particular disability or impairment of such person.
          
            Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces of a building or facility. Interior accessible routes may include corridors, floors, ramps, elevators, lifts, and clear floor space at fixtures. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb ramps, crosswalks at vehicular ways, walks, ramps and lifts.
          
          
            ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 through 12213)
          
            ADA Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) means the Accessibility Guidelines issued under the ADA, and which are codified in the Appendix to 39 CFR part 1191.
          
            Adaptability means the ability of certain building, spaces and elements, such as kitchen counters, sinks, and grab bars, to be added or altered, to accommodate the needs of persons with or without disabilities, or to accommodate the needs of persons with different types or degrees of disability. For example, in a unit adaptable for a person with impaired hearing, the wiring for visible emergency alarms may be installed but the alarms need not be installed until such time as the unit is made ready for occupancy by a person with impaired hearing.
          
            Agency means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
          
            Alteration means a change to a building or facility or its permanent fixtures or equipment that affects or could affect the usability of the building or facility or part thereof. Alterations include, but are not limited to, remodeling, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, historic restoration, changes or rearrangements of the structural parts and changes or rearrangements in the plan configuration of walls and full-height partitions. Normal maintenance, re-roofing, painting, or wallpapering or changes to mechanical and electrical systems are not alterations unless they affect the usability of the building or facility.
          
            Assistant Attorney General means the Assistant Attorney General, Civil Rights Division, United States Department of Justice.
          
            Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
          
            Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with impaired sensory, manual, or communication skills to have an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or activities conducted by the agency. For example, auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired vision include readers, Brailled materials, audio recordings, and other similar services and devices. Auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired hearing include telephone handset amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing aids, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's), interpreters, note takers, written materials, and other similar services and devices.
          
            Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the complainant's name and address and describes the agency's alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the agency of the nature and date of the alleged violation of section 504. It shall be signed by the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or her behalf. Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall describe or identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of discrimination.
          
            Current illegal use of drugs means illegal use of drugs that occurred recently enough to justify a reasonable belief that a person's drug use is current or that continuing use is a real and ongoing problem.
          
            Drug means a controlled substance, as defined in schedules I through V of section 202 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812).
          
            Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, site improvements, complexes, equipment, roads, walks, passageways, parking lots, rolling stock or other conveyances, or other real or personal property located on a site.
          
            Historic properties means those properties that are listed or are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or such properties designated as historic under a statute of the appropriate State or local government body.
          
            Illegal use of drugs means the use of one or more drugs, the possession or distribution of which is unlawful under the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812). The term “illegal use of drugs” does not include the use of a drug taken under supervision by a licensed health care professional, or other uses authorized by the Controlled Substances Act or other provisions of Federal law.
          
          
            Individual with disabilities means any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment. As used in this definition, the phrase:
          (1) “Physical or mental impairment” includes:
          (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
          (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. The term “physical or mental impairment” includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, Human Immunodeficiency Virus disease (symptomatic or asymptomatic), mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction and alcoholism.
          (2) The term “individual with disabilities” does not include:
          (i) An individual who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, when the agency acts on the basis of such use. This exclusion, however, does not exclude an individual with disabilities who—
          (A) Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program, and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs, or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully, and is no longer engaging in such use;
          (B) Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program, and is no longer engaging in such use; or
          (C) Is erroneously regarded as engaging in such use, but is not engaging in such use.
          (ii) Except that it shall not violate this part for the agency to adopt or administer reasonable policies and procedures, including but not limited to drug testing, designed to ensure than an individual described in paragraphs (2)(i) (A) and (B) of this definition is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs.
          (iii) Nothing in paragraph (2) of this definition shall be construed to encourage, prohibit, restrict or authorize the conduct of testing for illegal use of drugs.
          (iv) The agency shall not deny health services provided under titles I, II and III of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 701 through 777f) to an individual with disabilities on the basis of that individual's current illegal use of drugs, if the individual is otherwise entitled to such services.
          (3) For purposes of employment, the term “individual with disabilities” does not include:
          (i) An individual who has a currently contagious disease or infection and who, by reason of such disease or infection—
          (A) Has been determined, in accordance with the provisions of § 9.131, to pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, which threat cannot be eliminated or reduced by reasonable accommodation, or
          (B) Is unable to perform the essential duties of the job, with or without reasonable accommodation; or
          (ii) An individual who is an alcoholic and whose current use of alcohol prevents him or her from performing the duties of the job in question or whose employment would constitute a direct threat to the property or the safety of others by reason of his or her current alcohol abuse.
          (4) “Major life activities” means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working.
          (5) “Has a record of such an impairment” means has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
          (6) “Is regarded as having an impairment” means—

          (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities but is treated by the agency as constituting such a limitation;
          
          (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or
          (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (1) of this definition but is treated by the agency as having such an impairment.
          
            Multifamily housing project means a project containing five or more dwelling units.
          
            Official or Responsible Official means the Assistant Secretary of HUD for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
          
            PDP housing facility means a housing facility administered under HUD's Property Disposition Program.
          
            Project means the whole of one or more residential structures and appurtenant structures, equipment, roads, walks, and parking lots which are covered by a single mortgage or contract or otherwise treated as a whole by the agency for processing purposes, whether or not located on a common site.
          
            Property Disposition Program (PDP) means the HUD program which administers the housing facilities that are either owned by the Secretary or where, even though the Secretary has not obtained title, the Secretary is mortgagee-in-possession. Such properties are deemed to be in the possession or control of the agency.
          
            Qualified individual with disabilities means:
          (1) With respect to any agency non-employment program or activity under which a person is required to perform services or to achieve a level of accomplishment, an individual with disabilities who meets the essential eligibility requirements and who can achieve the purpose of the program or activity without modifications in the program or activity that the agency can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in its nature; or
          (2) With respect to any other agency non-employment program or activity, an individual with disabilities who meets the essential eligibility requirements for participation in, or receipt of benefits from, that program or activity.
          (3) “Essential eligibility requirements” include stated eligibility requirements such as income, as well as other explicit or implicit requirements inherent in the nature of the program or activity, such as requirements that an occupant of a PDP multifamily housing facility be capable of meeting selection criteria and be capable of complying with all obligations of occupancy with or without supportive services provided by persons other than the agency.
          (4) “Qualified person with disabilities” as that term is defined for purposes of employment in 29 CFR 1613.702(f), which is made applicable to this part by § 9.140.
          
            Replacement cost of the completed facility means the current cost of construction and equipment for a newly constructed housing facility of the size and type being altered. Construction and equipment costs do not include the cost of land, demolition, site improvements, non-dwelling facilities and administrative costs for project development activities.
          
            Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
          
            Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 794). As used in this part, section 504 applies only to programs or activities conducted by the agency and not to federally assisted programs.
          
            Substantial impairment means a significant loss of the integrity of finished materials, design quality, or special character resulting from a permanent alteration.
          
            UFAS means the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards, which implement the accessibility standards required by the Architectural Barriers Act (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), and which are established at 24 CFR part 40, appendix A for residential structures, and 41 CFR 101-19.600 through 101-19.607, and appendix A to these sections, for non-residential structures.
        
        
          § 9.110
          Self-evaluation.

          (a) The agency shall, within one year of the effective date of this part, evaluate its current policies and practices, and the effects of those policies and practices, including regulations, handbooks, notices and other written guidance, that do not or may not meet the requirements of this part. To the extent modification of any such policies is required, the agency shall take the necessary corrective actions.
          (b) The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, including individuals with disabilities or organizations representing individuals with disabilities, to participate in the self-evaluation process by submitting comments (both oral and written).
          (c) The agency shall, for at least three years following the completion of the self-evaluation, maintain on file and make available for public inspection:
          (1) A list of interested persons;
          (2) A description of the areas examined and any problems identified; and
          (3) A description of any modifications made or to be made.
        
        
          § 9.111
          Notice.
          The agency shall make available to employees, applicants, participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons information regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability to the programs or activities conducted by the agency. The agency shall make such information available to such persons in such manner as the Secretary finds necessary to apprise them of the protections against discrimination assured them by section 504 and this part. All publications and recruitment materials distributed to participants, beneficiaries, applicants or employees shall include a statement that the agency does not discriminate on the basis of disability. The notice shall include the name of the person or office responsible for the implementation of section 504.
        
        
          §§ 9.112-9.129
          [Reserved]
        
        
          § 9.130
          General prohibitions against discrimination.
          (a) No qualified individual with disabilities shall, on the basis of disability, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the agency.
          (b)(1) The agency, in providing any housing, aid, benefit, or service, may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, on the basis of disability—
          (i) Deny a qualified individual with disabilities the opportunity to participate in or benefit from the housing, aid, benefit, or service;
          (ii) Afford a qualified individual with disabilities an opportunity to participate in or benefit from the housing, aid, benefit, or service that is not equal to that afforded others;
          (iii) Provide a qualified individual with disabilities with any housing, aid, benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement as that provided to others;
          (iv) Provide different or separate housing, aid, benefits, or services to individuals with disabilities or to any class of individuals with disabilities than is provided to others unless such action is necessary to provide qualified individuals with disabilities with housing, aid, benefits, or services that are as effective as those provided to others;
          (v) Deny a qualified individual with disabilities the opportunity to participate as a member of planning or advisory boards;
          (vi) Deny a dwelling to an otherwise qualified buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or renter or a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or
          (vii) Otherwise limit a qualified individual with disabilities in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by others receiving the housing, aid, benefit, or service.
          (2) For purposes of this part, housing, aids, benefits, and services, to be equally effective, are not required to produce the identical result or level of achievement for individuals with disabilities and for persons without disabilities, but must afford individuals with disabilities equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement.

          (3) The agency may not deny a qualified individual with disabilities the opportunity to participate in programs or activities that are not separate or different, despite the existence of programs or activities that are permissibly separate or different for persons with disabilities.
          (4) The agency may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration the purpose or effect of which would:
          (i) Subject qualified individuals with disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability; or
          (ii) Defeat or substantially impair accomplishment of the objectives of a program or activity with respect to individuals with disabilities.
          (5) The agency may not, in determining the site or location of a facility, make selections the purpose or effect of which would:
          (i) Exclude individuals with disabilities from, deny them the benefits of, or otherwise subject them to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the agency; or
          (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the objectives of a program or activity with respect to individuals with disabilities.
          (6) The agency, in the selection of procurement contractors, may not use criteria that subject qualified individuals with disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability.
          (7) The agency may not administer a licensing or certification program in a manner that subjects qualified individuals with disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability, nor may the agency establish requirements for the programs or activities of licensees or certified entities that subject qualified individuals with disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability. However, the programs or activities of entities that are licensed or certified by the agency are not, themselves, covered by this part.
          (c)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, persons without disabilities may be excluded from the benefits of a program if the program is limited by Federal statute or Executive order to individuals with disabilities. A specific class of individuals with disabilities may be excluded from a program if the program is limited by Federal statute or Executive order to a different class of individuals.
          (2) Certain agency programs operate under statutory definitions of “persons with disabilities” that are more restrictive than the definition of “individual with disabilities” contained in § 9.103. Those definitions are not superseded or otherwise affected by this regulation.
          (d) The agency shall administer programs and activities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals with disabilities.
          (e) The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement that, based on disability, imposes inconsistent or contradictory prohibitions or limits upon the eligibility of qualified individuals with disabilities to receive services or to practice any occupation or profession.
          (f) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section does not limit the general prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
        
        
          § 9.131
          Direct threat.
          (a) This part does not require the agency to permit an individual to participate in, or benefit from the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and accommodations of that agency when that individual poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others.
          (b) “Direct threat” means a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies, practices, or procedures, or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services.
          (c) In determining whether an individual poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others, the agency must make an individualized assessment, based on reasonable judgment that relies on current medical knowledge or on the best available objective evidence to ascertain: the nature, duration, and severity of the risk; the probability that the potential injury will actually occur; and whether reasonable modifications of policies, practices, or procedures will mitigate the risk.
        
        
          
          §§ 9.132-9.139
          [Reserved]
        
        
          § 9.140
          Employment.
          No qualified individual with disabilities shall, on the basis of disability, be subjected to discrimination in employment under any program or activity conducted by the agency. The definitions, requirements, and procedures of section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791), as established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR part 1613 (subpart G), shall apply to employment in federally conducted programs or activities.
        
        
          §§ 9.141-9.148
          [Reserved]
        
        
          § 9.149
          Program accessibility: discrimination prohibited.
          Except as otherwise provided in § 9.150, no qualified individual with disabilities shall, because the agency's facilities are inaccessible to or unusable by individuals with disabilities, be denied the benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the agency.
        
        
          § 9.150
          Program accessibility: existing facilities.
          (a) General. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (e) of this section, the agency shall operate each program or activity so that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. This section does not—
          (1) Necessarily require the agency to make each of its existing facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities;
          (2) In the case of historic properties, require the agency to take any action that would result in a substantial impairment of significant historic features of an historic property; or
          (3) Require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency has the burden of proving that compliance with § 9.150(a) would result in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the Secretary or his or her designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity, and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that individuals with disabilities receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
          (b) Methods. The agency may comply with the requirements of this section through such means as redesign of equipment, reassignment of services to accessible buildings, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, delivery of services at alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and construction of new facilities, use of accessible rolling stock, or any other methods that result in making its programs or activities readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The agency is not required to make structural changes in existing facilities where other methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section. The agency, in making alterations to existing buildings, also shall meet accessibility requirements to the extent compelled by the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), and any regulations implementing it. In choosing among available methods for meeting the requirements of this section, the agency shall give priority to those methods that offer programs and activities to qualified individuals with disabilities in the most integrated setting appropriate.
          (c) Time period for compliance. The agency shall comply with the obligations established under this section within sixty days of July 18, 1994 except that where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, such changes shall be made within three years of July 18, 1994, but in any event as expeditiously as possible.
          (d) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, the agency shall develop, within six months of July 18, 1994, a transition plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, including individuals with disabilities or organizations representing individuals with disabilities, to participate in the development of the transition plan by submitting comments (both oral and written). A copy of the transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum—
          (1) Identify physical obstacles in the agency's facilities that limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals with disabilities;
          (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the facilities accessible;
          (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during each year of the transition period; and
          (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan.
          (e) The requirements of paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall apply to the Property Disposition Programs. However, this section does not require HUD to make alterations to existing facilities that are part of the Property Disposition Programs unless such alterations are necessary to meet the needs of a current or prospective tenant during the time when HUD expects to retain legal possession of the facilities, and there is no alternative method to meet the needs of that current or prospective tenant. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require alterations to make facilities accessible to persons with disabilities who are expected to occupy the facilities only after HUD relinquishes legal possession.
        
        
          § 9.151
          Program accessibility: new construction and alterations.
          Each building or part of a building that is constructed or altered by, on behalf of, or for the use of the agency shall be designed, constructed, or altered and provide emergency egress so as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The definitions, requirements, and accessibility standards that apply to buildings covered by this section are those contained in the UFAS, except where the ADAAG provides for greater accessibility for the type of construction or alteration being undertaken, and in this case, the definitions, requirements and standards of the ADAAG shall apply.
        
        
          § 9.152
          Program accessibility: alterations of Property Disposition Program multifamily housing facilities.
          (a) Substantial alteration. If the agency undertakes alterations to a PDP multifamily housing project that has 15 or more units and the cost of the alterations is 75 percent or more of the replacement cost of the completed facility, then the project shall be designed and altered to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. Subject to paragraph (c) of this section, a minimum of five percent of the total dwelling units, or at least one unit, whichever is greater, shall be made accessible for persons with mobility impairments. A unit that is on an accessible route and is adaptable and otherwise in compliance with the standards set forth in paragraph (d) of this section is accessible for purposes of this section. An additional two percent of the units (but not less that one unit) in such a project shall be accessible for persons with hearing or vision impairments. If state or local requirements for alterations require greater action than this paragraph, those requirements shall prevail.
          (b) Other alteration. (1) Subject to paragraph (c) of this section, alterations to dwelling units in a PDP multifamily housing project shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. If alterations of single elements or spaces of a dwelling unit, when considered together, amount to an alteration of a dwelling unit, the entire dwelling unit shall be made accessible. Once five percent of the dwelling units in a project are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with mobility impairments, then no additional elements of dwelling units, or entire dwelling units, are required to be accessible under this paragraph. Once two percent of the dwelling units in a project are readily accessible to or usable by individuals with hearing or vision impairments, then no additional elements of dwelling units, or entire dwelling units, are required to be accessible under this paragraph.
          (2) Alterations to common areas or parts of facilities that affect accessibility of existing housing facilities, shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.
          (c) The agency may establish a higher percentage or number of accessible units than that prescribed in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section if the agency determines that there is a need for a higher percentage or number, based on census data or other available current data. In making such a determination, HUD shall take into account the expected needs of eligible persons with and without disabilities.
          (d) The definitions, requirements, and accessibility standards that apply to PDP multifamily housing projects covered by this section are those contained in the UFAS, except where the ADAAG provides for greater accessibility for the type of alteration being undertaken, and, in this case, the definitions, requirements and standards of the ADAAG shall apply.
          (e) With respect to multifamily housing projects operated by HUD, but in which HUD does not have an ownership interest, alterations under this section need not be made if doing so would impose undue financial and administrative burdens on the operation of the multifamily housing project.
        
        
          § 9.153
          Distribution of accessible dwelling units.
          Accessible dwelling units required by § 9.152 shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be distributed throughout projects and sites and shall be available in a sufficient range of sizes and amenities so that a qualified individual with disabilities' choice of living arrangements is, as a whole, comparable to that of other persons eligible for housing assistance under the same agency conducted program. This provision shall not be construed to require (but does allow) the provision of an elevator in any multifamily housing project solely for the purpose of permitting location of accessible units above or below the accessible grade level.
        
        
          § 9.154
          Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.
          (a) The agency shall adopt suitable means to assure that information regarding the availability of accessible units in PDP housing facilities reaches eligible individuals with disabilities, and shall take reasonable nondiscriminatory steps to maximize the utilization of such units by eligible individuals whose disability requires the accessibility features of the particular unit. To this end, when an accessible unit becomes vacant, the agency (or its management agent) before offering such units to an applicant without disabilities shall offer such unit:
          (1) First, to a current occupant of another unit of the same project, or comparable projects under common control, having disabilities requiring the accessibility features of the vacant unit and occupying a unit not having such features, or, if no such occupant exists, then
          (2) Second, to an eligible qualified applicant on the waiting list having a disability requiring the accessibility features of the vacant unit.
          (b) When offering an accessible unit to an applicant not having disabilities requiring the accessibility features of the unit, the agency may require the applicant to agree (and may incorporate this agreement in the lease) to move to a non-accessible unit when available.
        
        
          § 9.155
          Housing adjustments.

          (a) The agency shall modify its housing policies and practices as they relate to PDP housing facilities to ensure that these policies and practices do not discriminate, on the basis of disability, against a qualified individual with disabilities. The agency may not impose upon individuals with disabilities other policies, such as the prohibition of assistive devices, auxiliary aids, alarms, or guides in housing facilities, that have the effect of limiting the participation of tenants with disabilities in any agency conducted housing program or activity in violation of this part. Housing policies that the agency can demonstrate are essential to the housing program or activity will not be regarded as discriminatory within the meaning of this section if modifications would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the program or activity or undue financial and administrative burdens.
          (b) The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the Secretary or his or her designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity, and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action required to comply with this section would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals with disabilities receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
        
        
          § 9.160
          Communications.
          (a) The agency shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective communication with applicants, participants, personnel of other Federal entities, and members of the public.
          (1) The agency shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where necessary to afford an individual with disabilities an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a program or activity conducted by the agency.
          (i) In determining what type of auxiliary aid is necessary, the agency shall give primary consideration to the requests of the individual with disabilities.
          (ii) The agency need not provide individually prescribed devices, readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal nature.
          (2) Where the agency communicates with applicants and beneficiaries or members of the public by telephone, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's) or equally effective telecommunication systems shall be used to communicate with persons with impaired hearing.
          (b) The agency shall ensure that interested persons, including persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain information as to the existence and location of accessible services, activities, and facilities.
          (c) The agency shall provide signage at a primary entrance to each of its inaccessible facilities, directing users to a location at which they can obtain information about accessible facilities. The international symbol for accessibility shall be used at each primary entrance of an accessible facility.
          (d) This section does not require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency has the burden of proving that compliance with this section would result in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the Secretary or his or her designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action required to comply with § 9.160 would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals with disabilities receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
        
        
          
          § 9.170
          Compliance procedures.
          (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this section applies to all allegations of discrimination on the basis of disability in programs or activities conducted by the agency.
          (b) The agency shall process complaints alleging violations of section 504 with respect to employment according to the procedures established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR part 1613 under section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791).
          (c) The Responsible Official shall coordinate implementation of this section.
          (d) Persons may submit complete complaints to the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, 451 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 20410, or to any HUD Area Office. The agency shall accept and investigate all complete complaints for which the agency has jurisdiction. All complete complaints shall be filed within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination. The agency may extend this time period for good cause. For purposes of determining when a complaint is filed, a complaint mailed to the agency shall be deemed filed on the date it is postmarked. Any other complaint shall be deemed filed on the date it is received by the agency. The agency shall acknowledge all complaints, in writing, within ten (10) working days of receipt of the complaint.
          (e) If the agency receives a complaint over which it does not have jurisdiction, it shall promptly notify the complainant and shall make reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate Government entity.
          (f) The agency shall notify the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board upon receipt of any complaint alleging that a building or facility that is subject to the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), is not readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The agency shall delete the identity of the complainant from the copy of the complaint.
          (g)(1) Within 180 days of the receipt of a complete complaint for which it has jurisdiction, the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity shall complete the investigation of the complaint, attempt informal resolution, and if no informal resolution is achieved, issue a letter of findings. If a complaint is filed against the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, the Secretary or a designee of the Secretary shall investigate and resolve the complaint through informal agreement or letter of findings.
          (2) If a complaint is resolved informally, the terms of the agreement shall be reduced to writing and made part of the complaint file, with a copy of the agreement provided to the complainant and the agency. The written agreement may include a finding on the issue of discrimination and shall describe any corrective action to which the complainant and the respondent have agreed.
          (3) If a complaint is not resolved informally, the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity or a person designated under this paragraph shall notify the complainant of the results of the investigation in a letter containing—
          (i) Findings of fact and conclusions of law;
          (ii) A description of a remedy for each violation found;
          (iii) A notice of the right to appeal to the Secretary;
          (h)(1) Appeals of the findings of fact and conclusions of law or remedies must be filed by the complainant within 90 days of receipt from the agency of the letter required by § 9.170(g). The Assistant Secretary or the person designated by the Secretary to decide an appeal of a complaint filed against the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity may extend this time for good cause.
          (2) Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed by the Assistant Secretary. Decisions on an appeal shall not be issued by the person who made the initial determination.

          (i) The Assistant Secretary or the person designated by the Secretary to decide an appeal of a complaint filed against the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity shall notify the complainant of the results of the appeal within 60 days of the receipt of the request. If the agency determines that it needs additional information from the complainant, it shall have 60 days from the date it receives the additional information to make its determination on the appeal.
          (j) The time limits cited in paragraphs (g) and (i) of this section may be extended with the permission of the Assistant Attorney General.
          (k) The agency may delegate its authority for conducting complaint investigations to other Federal agencies, except that the authority for making the final determination may not be delegated to another agency.
        
      
      
        Pt. 10
        PART 10—RULEMAKING: POLICY AND PROCEDURES
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            10.1
            Policy.
            10.2
            Definitions.
            10.3
            Applicability.
            10.4
            Rules docket.
          
          
            Subpart B—Procedures
            10.6
            Initiation of rulemaking.
            10.7
            Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.
            10.8
            Notice of proposed rulemaking.
            10.10
            Participation by interested persons.
            10.12
            Additional rulemaking proceedings.
            10.14
            Hearings.
            10.16
            Adoption of a final rule.
            10.18
            Petitions for reconsideration.
            10.20
            Petition for rulemaking.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          44 FR 1606, Jan. 5, 1979, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 10.1
            Policy.

            It is the policy of the Department of Housing and Urban Development to provide for public participation in rulemaking with respect to all HUD programs and functions, including matters that relate to public property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts even though such matters would not otherwise be subject to rulemaking by law or Executive policy. The Department therefore publishes notices of proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register and gives interested persons an opportunity to participate in the rulemaking through submission of written data, views, and arguments with or without opportunity for oral presentation. It is the policy of the Department that its notices of proposed rulemaking are to afford the public not less than sixty days for submission of comments. For some rules the Secretary will employ additional methods of inviting public participation. These methods include, but are not limited to, publishing Advance Notices of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR), conducting public surveys, and convening public forums or panels. An ANPR will be used to solicit public comment early in the rulemaking process for significant rules unless the Secretary grants an exception based upon legitimate and pressing time constraints. Unless required by statute, notice and public procedure will be omitted if the Department determines in a particular case or class of cases that notice and public procedure are impracticable, unnecessary or contrary to the public interest. In a particular case, the reasons for the determination shall be stated in the rulemaking document. Notice and public procedure may also be omitted with respect to statements of policy, interpretative rules, rules governing the Department's organization or its own internal practices or procedures, or if a statute expressly so authorizes. A final substantive rule will be published not less than 30 days before its effective date, unless it grants or recognizes an exemption or relieves a restriction or unless the rule itself states good cause for taking effect upon publication or less than 30 days thereafter. Statements of policy and interpretative rules will usually be made effective on the date of publication.
            [44 FR 1606, Jan. 5, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 56625, Dec. 20, 1982]
          
          
            § 10.2
            Definitions.
            (a) Rule or Regulation means all or part of any Departmental statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to: (1) Implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy, or (2) describe the Department's organization, or its procedure or practice requirements. The term regulation is sometimes applied to a rule which has been published in the Code of Federal Regulations.
            
            (b) Rulemaking means the Departmental process for considering and formulating the issuance, modification, or repeal of a rule.
            (c) Secretary means the Secretary or the Under Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, or an official to whom the Secretary has expressly delegated authority to issue rules.
          
          
            § 10.3
            Applicability.
            (a) This part prescribes general rulemaking procedures for the issuance, amendment, or repeal of rules in which participation by interested persons is required by 5 U.S.C. or by Department policy.
            (b) The authority to issue rules, delegated by the Secretary, may not be redelegated unless expressly permitted.
            (c) This part is not applicable to a determination by HUD under 24 CFR part 966 (public housing) or 24 CFR part 950 (Indian housing) that the law of a jurisdiction requires that, prior to eviction, a tenant be given a hearing in court which provides the basic elements of due process (“due process determination”).
            [44 FR 1606, Jan. 5, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13273, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 10.4
            Rules docket.
            (a) All documents relating to rulemaking procedures including but not limited to advance notices of proposed rulemaking, notices of proposed rulemaking, written comments received in response to notices, withdrawals or terminations of proposed rulemaking, petitions for rulemaking, requests for oral argument in public participation cases, requests for extension of time, grants or denials of petitions or requests, transcripts or minutes of informal hearings, final rules and general notices are maintained in the Rules Docket Room (Room 5218), Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410. All public rulemaking comments should refer to the docket number which appears in the heading of the rule and should be addressed to the Rules Docket Clerk, Room 5218, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410.
            (b) Documents relating to rulemaking proceedings are public records. After a docket is established, any person may examine docketed material at any time during regular business hours, and may obtain a copy of any docketed material upon payment of the prescribed fee. (See part 15 of this title).
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Procedures
          
            § 10.6
            Initiation of rulemaking.
            Rulemaking proceedings may be initiated on the Secretary's motion, or on the recommendation of a Federal, State, or local government or government agency, or on the petition of any interested person.
          
          
            § 10.7
            Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.

            An Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking issued in accordance with § 10.1 of this part is published in the Federal Register and briefly outlines:
            (a) The proposed new program or program changes, and why they are needed;
            (b) The major policy issues involved;
            (c) A request for comments, both specific and general, as to the need for the proposed rule and the provisions that the rule might include;
            (d) If appropriate, a list of questions about the proposal that will elicit detailed comments;
            (e) If known, an estimate of the reporting or recordkeeping requirements, if any, that the rule would impose; and
            (f) Where comments should be addressed and the time within which they must be submitted.
          
          
            § 10.8
            Notice of proposed rulemaking.

            Each notice of proposed rulemaking required by statute or by § 10.1 is published in the Federal Register and includes:
            (a) The substance or terms of the proposed rule or a description of the subject matter and issues involved;
            (b) A statement of how and to what extent interested persons may participate in the proceeding;

            (c) Where participation is limited to written comments, a statement of the time within which such comments must be submitted;
            
            (d) A reference to the legal authority under which the proposal is issued; and
            (e) In a proceeding which has provided Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, an analysis of the principal issues and recommendations raised by the comments, and the manner in which they have been addressed in the proposed rulemaking.
          
          
            § 10.10
            Participation by interested persons.
            (a) Unless the notice otherwise provides, any interested person may participate in rulemaking proceedings by submitting written data, views or arguments within the comment time stated in the notice. In addition, the Secretary may permit the filing of comments in response to original comments.
            (b) In appropriate cases, the Secretary may provide for oral presentation of views in additional proceedings described in § 10.12.
          
          
            § 10.12
            Additional rulemaking proceedings.
            The Secretary may invite interested persons to present oral arguments, appear at informal hearings, or participate in any other procedure affording opportunity for oral presentation of views. The transcript or minutes of such meetings, as appropriate, will be kept and filed in the Rules Docket.
          
          
            § 10.14
            Hearings.

            (a) The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 556 and 557, which govern formal hearings in adjudicatory proceedings, do not apply to informal rule making proceedings described in this part. When opportunity is afforded for oral presentation, such informal hearing is a nonadversary, fact-finding proceeding. Any rule issued in a proceeding under this part in which a hearing is held is not based exclusively on the record of such hearing.
            (b) When a hearing is provided, the Secretary will designate a representative to conduct the hearing, and if the presence of a legal officer is desirable, the General Counsel will designate a staff attorney to serve as the officer.
          
          
            § 10.16
            Adoption of a final rule.
            All timely comments are considered in taking final action on a proposed rule. Each preamble to a final rule will contain a short analysis and evaluation of the relevant significant issues set forth in the comments submitted, and a clear concise statement of the basis and purpose of the rule.
          
          
            § 10.18
            Petitions for reconsideration.
            Petitions for reconsideration of a final rule will not be considered. Such petitions, if filed, will be treated as petitions for rulemaking in accordance with § 10.20.
          
          
            § 10.20
            Petition for rulemaking.
            (a) Any interested person may petition the Secretary for the issuance, amendment, or repeal of a rule. Each petition shall:
            (1) Be submitted to the Rules Docket Clerk, Room 5218, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410;
            (2) Set forth the text of substance of the rule or amendment proposed or specify the rule sought to be repealed;
            (3) Explain the interest of the petitioner in the action sought; and
            (4) Set forth all data and arguments available to the petitioner in support of the action sought.
            (b) No public procedures will be held directly on the petition before its disposition. If the Secretary finds that the petition contains adequate justification, a rulemaking proceeding will be initiated or a final rule will be issued as appropriate. If the Secretary finds that the petition does not contain adequate justification, the petition will be denied by letter or other notice, with a brief statement of the ground for denial. The Secretary may consider new evidence at any time; however, repetitious petitions for rulemaking will not be considered.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 13
        PART 13—USE OF PENALTY MAIL IN THE LOCATION AND RECOVERY OF MISSING CHILDREN
        
          Sec.
          13.1
          Purpose.
          13.2
          Procedures for obtaining and disseminating data.
          13.3
          Withdrawal of data.
          
          13.4
          Reports.
        
        
          Authority:
          39 U.S.C. 3220(a)(2); 5 U.S.C. 301.
        
        
          Source:
          51 FR 19830, June 3, 1986, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 13.1
          Purpose.
          To support the national effort to locate and recover missing children, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) joins other executive departments and independent establishments of the Government of the United States in using penalty mail to disseminate photographs and biographical information on hundreds of missing children.
          [51 FR 19830, June 3, 1986; 51 FR 43608, Dec. 3, 1986]
        
        
          § 13.2
          Procedures for obtaining and disseminating data.
          (a) HUD shall insert, manually and via automated inserts, pictures and biographical data related to missing children in domestic penalty mail directed to members of the public in the United States, its territories and possessions. These include:
          (1) Standard letter-size envelopes (41/2″ × 91/2″);
          (2) Document-size envelopes (91/2″ × 12″, 91/2″ × 111/2″, 10″ × 13″); and
          (3) Other envelopes (miscellaneous size).

          (b) Missing children information shall not be placed on the Penalty Indicia, OCR Read Area, Bar Code Read Area, and Return Address areas of letter-size envelopes.
          (c) Posters containing pictures and biographical data shall be placed on bulletin boards in Headquarters and Field offices.
          (d) HUD shall accept camera-ready and other photographic and biographical materials solely from the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (National Center). Photographs that were reasonably current as of the time of the child's disappearance shall be the only acceptable form of visual media or pictorial likeness used in penalty mail or posters.
        
        
          § 13.3
          Withdrawal of data.
          HUD shall remove all printed penalty mail envelopes and other materials from circulation or other use within a three month period from the date the National Center receives information or notice that a child, whose picture and biographical information have been made available to HUD, has been recovered or that the parent or guardian's permission to use the child's photograph and biographical information has been withdrawn. The HUD contact person shall be notified immediately and in writing by the National Center of the need to withdraw from circulation penalty mail envelopes and other materials related to a particular child.
        
        
          § 13.4
          Reports.

          HUD shall compile and submit to Office of Juvenile Justice and Deliquency Prevention (OJJDP), by June 30, 1987, a consolidated report on its experience in implementing S. 1195 Official Mail Use in the Location and Recovery of Missing Children along with recommendations for future Departmental action.
        
      
      
        Pt. 14
        PART 14—IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EQUAL ACCESS TO JUSTICE ACT IN ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS
        
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            Sec.
            14.50
            Definitions.
            14.100
            Time computation.
            14.105
            Purpose of these rules.
            14.110
            When the Act applies.
            14.115
            Proceedings covered.
            14.120
            Eligibility of applicants.
            14.125
            Standards for awards.
            14.130
            Allowable fees and expenses.
            14.135
            Rulemaking on maximum rates for attorney fees.
            14.140
            Awards against other agencies.
          
          
            Subpart B—Information Required From Applicants
            14.200
            Contents of application.
            14.205
            Net worth exhibit.
            14.210
            Documentation of fees and expenses.
            14.215
            When an application may be filed.
          
          
            Subpart C—Procedures for Considering Applications
            14.300
            Jurisdiction of adjudicative officer.
            14.305
            Filing and service of documents.
            14.310
            Answer to application.
            14.315
            Comments by other parties.
            14.320
            Settlement.
            14.325
            Extensions of time and further proceedings.
            
            14.330
            Decision.
            14.335
            Departmental review.
            14.340
            Judicial review.
            14.345
            Payment of award.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          5 U.S.C. 504(c)(1); 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          52 FR 27126, July 17, 1987, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General Provisions
          
            § 14.50
            Definitions.
            
              Act. The Equal Access to Justice Act, 5 U.S.C. 504, title II of Pub. L. 96-481, as amended by Pub. L. 99-80.
            
              Adjudicative officer. The hearing examiner, administrative law judge, administrative judge of the HUD Office of Appeals, or other officer designated by the Secretary or other responsible Department official, who presided at the adversary adjudication.
            
              Adversary adjudication. (a) An adjudication under 5 U.S.C. 554 in which the position of the United States is represented by counsel or otherwise, but not including an adjudication for the purpose of establishing or fixing a rate or for the purpose of granting or renewing a license; and
            (b) Appeals of decisions of contracting officers made pursuant to section 6 of the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 605) before agency boards of contract appeals as provided in section 8 of that Act (41 U.S.C. 607).
            
              Agency counsel (a) When the position of the Department is being represented, the attorney or attorneys designated by the Department's General Counsel to represent the Department in a proceeding covered by this part, and
            (b) When the position of another agency of the United States is being represented, the representative as designated by that agency.
            
              Department. The Department of Housing and Urban Development, or the organizational unit within the Department responsible for conducting an adversary adjudication subject to this part.
            
              Proceeding. An adversary adjudication as defined above.
            
              Secretary. The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
            [52 FR 27126, July 17, 1987, as amended at 72 FR 53877, Sept. 20, 2007]
          
          
            § 14.100
            Time computation.
            Time periods stated in this part shall be computed in accordance with the Department's rules with respect to computation of time which apply to the underlying proceeding.
          
          
            § 14.105
            Purpose of these rules.

            The Act provides for the award of attorney fees and other expenses to eligible individuals and entities who are parties to certain administrative proceedings (adversary adjudications) before the Department. An eligible party may receive an award when it prevails over an agency, unless the agency's position was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust. The rules in this part described the parties eligible for awards and the proceedings that are covered. They also explain how to apply for awards and the procedures and standards that the Department will use to make them.
          
          
            § 14.110
            When the Act applies.
            The Act applies to any adversary adjudication pending or commenced before this Department on or after August 5, 1985. It also applies to any adversary adjudication commenced on or after October 1, 1984, and finally disposed of before August 5, 1985, provided that an application for fees and expenses, as described in subpart B of these rules, has been filed with the Department no later than 30 days after August 5, 1985, and to any adversary adjudication pending on or commenced on or after October 1, 1981, in which an application for fees and other expenses was timely filed and was dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.
          
          
            § 14.115
            Proceedings covered.
            (a) The proceedings to which this part applies are adversary adjudications conducted by the Department under:

            (1) The Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 1701 et seq., pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 1715 and 24 CFR part 1720;
            (2) Section 602 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, and 24 CFR parts 1 and 2;

            (3) Section 505(a) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. 794a, 28 CFR part 41, and any applicable HUD regulations;
            (4) Section 305(a) of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6104(a), 45 CFR part 90 and any applicable HUD regulations;
            (5) Section 3 of the HUD Act of 1968, 12 U.S.C. 170lu (Employment Opportunities for Business and Lower Income Persons in Connection with Assisted Projected), and 24 CFR part 135;
            (6) Debt Collection Act of 1982 (Salary Offset), 5 U.S.C. 5514, and 24 CFR 17.125-.140;

            (7) Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq., and 24 CFR part 3280;
            (8) Section 111 of title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5311, and 24 CFR 570.913;
            (9) Appeals of decisions of contracting officers made pursuant to section 6 of the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 605) before the HUD Board of Contract Appeals as provided in section 8 of that Act (41 U.S.C. 607); or
            (10) Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3600-3620) and 24 CFR part 104.
            (b) The Department's failure to identify a type of proceeding as an adversary adjudication shall not preclude the filing of an application by a party who believes the proceeding is covered by the Act; whether the proceeding is covered will then be an issue for resolution in proceedings on the application.
            (c) If a proceeding includes both matters covered by the Act and matters specifically excluded from coverage, any award made will include only fees and expenses related to covered issues.
            [52 FR 27126, July 17, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989]
          
          
            § 14.120
            Eligibility of applicants.

            (a) To be eligible for an award of attorney fees and other expenses under the Act, the applicant must be a party to the adversary adjudication for which it seeks an award. The term party is defined in 5 U.S.C. 551(3). The applicant must show that it meets all conditions of eligibility set out in this subpart and in subpart B.
            (b) The types of eligible applicants are as follows:
            (1) An individual with a net worth of not more than $2 million;
            (2) The sole owner of an unincorporated business who has a net worth of not more than $7 million, including both personal and business interests, and not more than 500 employees;
            (3) A charitable or other tax-exempt organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3), with not more than 500 employees;
            (4) A cooperative association as defined in section 15(a) of the Agricultural Marketing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1141j(a), with not more than 500 employees; or
            (5) Any other partnership, corporation, association, unit of local government, or organization with a net worth of not more than $7 million and not more than 500 employees.
            (c) For the purpose of eligibility, the net worth and number of employees of an applicant shall be determined as of the date the proceeding was initiated. For the purpose of eligibility of applicants before the HUD Board of Contract Appeals, the net worth and number of employees of an applicant shall be determined as of the date the applicant filed its appeal under 41 U.S.C. 606.

            (d) An applicant who owns an unincorporated business will be considered as an individual rather than a sole owner of an unincorporated business if the issues on which the application prevails are related primarily to personal interests rather than to business interests.
            (e) The employees of an applicant include all persons who regularly perform services for remuneration for the applicant, under the applicant's direction and control. Part-time employees shall be included on a proportional basis.

            (f) The net worth and number of employees of the applicant and all of its affiliates shall be aggregated to determine eligibility. Any individual, corporation or other entity that directly or indirectly controls or owns a majority of the voting shares or other interests of the applicant, or any corporation or other entity of which the applicant directly or indirectly owns or controls a majority of the voting shares or other interest, will be considered an affiliate for purposes of this part, unless the adjudicative officer determines that such treatment would be unjust and contrary to the purposes of the Act in light of the actual relationship between the affiliated entities. In addition, the adjudicative officer may determine that financial relationships of the applicant other than those described in this paragraph constitute special circumstances that would make an award unjust.
            (g) An applicant that participates in a proceeding primarily on behalf of one or more other persons or entities that would be ineligible is not itself eligible for an award.
          
          
            § 14.125
            Standards for awards.
            (a) A prevailing applicant may receive an award for fees and expenses incurred in connection with a proceeding, or in a significant and discrete substantive portion of the proceeding, unless the position of the agency over which the applicant has prevailed was substantially justified. The position of the agency includes, in addition to the position taken by the agency in the adversary adjudication, the action or failure to act by the agency upon which the adversary adjudication is based. The burden of proof that an award should not be made to an ineligible prevailing applicant because the agency's position was substantially justified is on the agency counsel, who may avoid an award by showing that its position was reasonable in law and fact.
            (b) An award will be reduced or denied if the applicant has unduly or unreasonably protracted the proceeding, if the applicant has falsified the application (including documentation) or net worth exhibit or if special circumstances make the award sought unjust.
          
          
            § 14.130
            Allowable fees and expenses.
            (a) No award for the fee of an attorney or agent under these rules may exceed $75.00 per hour. However, an award may also include the reasonable expenses of the attorney, agent or witness as a separate item, if the attorney, agent or witness ordinarily charges clients separately for such expenses.
            (b) In determining the reasonableness of the fee sought for an attorney, agent or expert witness, the adjudicative officer shall consider the following:
            (1) If the attorney, agent or witness is in private practice, his or her customary fee for similar services, or, if an employee of the applicant, the fully allocated cost of the services;
            (2) The prevailing rate for the kind and quality of services furnished in the community in which the attorney, agent or witness ordinarily performs services;
            (3) The time actually spent in the representation of the applicant;
            (4) The time reasonably spent in the light of the difficulty or complexity of the issues in the proceeding; and
            (5) Such other factors as may bear on the value of the services provided.
            (c) The reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, test, project, or similar matter prepared on behalf of a party may be awarded, to the extent that the charge for the services does not exceed the prevailing rate for similar services, and the study or other matter was necessary for preparation of the applicant's case.
          
          
            § 14.135
            Rulemaking on maximum rates for attorney fees.
            Any person may file with the Department a petition for rulemaking to increase the maximum rate for attorney fees as provided in 5 U.S.C. 504(b)(1)(A)(ii), in accordance with 24 CFR part 10. The petition should identify the rate the petitioner believes the Department should establish and the types of proceedings in which the rate should be used. It should also explain fully the reasons why the higher rate is warranted. The Department will respond to the petition in accordance with 24 CFR 10.20(b).
          
          
            § 14.140
            Awards against other agencies.
            If an applicant is entitled to an award because it prevails over another agency of the United States that participates in a proceeding before the Department and takes a position that is not substantially justified, the award or an appropriate portion of the award shall be made against that agency.
          
        
        
          
          Subpart B—Information Required From Applicants
          
            § 14.200
            Contents of application.
            (a) An application for an award of fees and expenses under the Act shall identify the applicant and the proceeding for which an award is sought. The application shall show that the applicant has prevailed and identify the position of the Department or other agencies that the applicant alleges was not substantially justified. Unless the applicant is an individual, the application shall also state the number of employees of the applicant and describe briefly the type and purpose of its organization or business.
            (b) The application shall also include a statement that the applicant's net worth does not exceed $2 million (if an individual) or $7 million (for all other applicants, including their affiliates). However, an applicant may omit this statement if:
            (1) It attaches a copy of a ruling by the Internal Revenue Service that it qualifies as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3), or, in the case of a tax-exempt organization not required to obtain a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service on its exempt status, a statement that describes the basis for the applicant's belief that it qualifies under such section; or
            (2) It states that it is a cooperative association as defined in section 15(a) of the Agricultural Marketing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1141j(a).
            (c) If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, association, or organization, or a sole owner of an unincorporated business, the applicant shall state that it did not have more than 500 employees at the time the proceeding was initiated, giving the number of its employees and describing briefly the type and purpose of its organization or business.
            (d) The application shall also itemize the amount of fees and expenses for which an award is sought.
            (e) The application also may include any other matters that the applicant wishes the Department to consider in determining whether and in what amount an award should be made.
            (f) The application shall be signed by the applicant or an authorized officer with respect to the eligibility of the applicant and by the attorney of the applicant with respect to fees and expenses sought. The application shall contain or be accompanied by a written verification under oath or affirmation under penalty of perjury that the information provided in the application and all accompanying material is true and complete to the best of the applicant's or authorized officer's information and belief.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2510-0001)
          
          
            § 14.205
            Net worth exhibit.
            (a) Each applicant except a qualified tax-exempt organization or a qualified cooperative association must submit with its application a detailed exhibit showing the net worth of the applicant and any affiliates (as defined in § 14.120(f) of this part) when the proceeding was initiated. The exhibit may be in any form convenient to the applicant that provides full disclosure of the applicant's and its affiliates' assets and liabilities, and is sufficient to determine whether the applicant qualifies under the standards of the Act and this part. The adjudicative officer may require an applicant to file additional information to determine its eligibility for an award.
            (b) The net worth exhibit shall describe any transfers of assets from, or obligations incurred by, the applicant or any affiliate, occurring in the one-year period before the date on which the proceeding was initiated, that reduced the net worth of the applicant and its affiliates below the applicable net worth ceiling. If there were no such transactions, the applicant shall so state.

            (c) Ordinarily, the net worth exhibit will be included in the public record of the proceeding. However, an applicant that objects to public disclosure of information in any portion of the exhibit and believes there are legal grounds for withholding it from disclosure may submit that portion of the exhibit directly to the adjudicative officer in a sealed envelope labeled “Confidential Financial Information,” accompanied by a motion to withhold the information from public disclosure. The motion shall describe the information sought to be withheld and explain, in detail, why it falls within one or more of the specific exemptions from mandatory disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552(b) (1)-(9)), why public disclosure of the information would adversely affect the applicant, and why disclosure is not required in the public interest. The material in question shall be served on counsel representing the agency against which the applicant seeks an award, but need not be served on any other party to the proceeding. If the adjudicative officer finds that the information should not be withheld from disclosure, it shall be placed in the public record of the proceeding. Otherwise, any request to inspect or copy the exhibit shall be disposed of in accordance with the Department's established procedures under the Freedom of Information Act, 24 CFR part 15. In either case, disclosure shall be subject to the provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, and the Department's procedures implementing the Privacy Act of 1974 at 24 CFR part 16.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2510-0001)
          
          
            § 14.210
            Documentation of fees and expenses.
            (a) The application shall be accompanied by full and itemized documentation of the fees and expenses, including the cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, test, project or similar matter, for which an award is sought.
            (b) The documentation shall include an affidavit from any attorney, agent or expert witness representing or appearing in behalf of the party, stating the actual time expended and the rate at which fees and other expenses were computed and describing the specific services performed.
            (c) The documentation shall also include a description of any expenses for which reimbursement is sought and a statement of the amounts paid and payable by the applicant or by any other person or entity for the services provided. Vouchers, receipts, logs, or other substantiation for any expenses paid or payable shall be provided.
            (d) The adjudicative officer may require the applicant to provide additional substantiation for any expenses claimed.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2510-0001)
          
          
            § 14.215
            When an application may be filed.
            (a) An application may be filed whenever the applicant has prevailed in the proceeding or in a significant and discrete substantive portion of the proceeding, but in no case later than 30 days after the Department's final disposition of the proceeding.
            (b) For purposes of this rule, final disposition means the date on which a decision or order disposing of the merits of the proceeding or any other complete resolution of the proceeding, such as a settlement of voluntary dismissal, become final and unappealable, both within the Department and to the courts.
            (c) If review or reconsideration (under HUD Board of Contract Appeals Rule 29, 24 CFR 20.10) is sought or taken of a decision as to which an applicant believes it has prevailed, proceedings for the award of fees shall be stayed pending final disposition of the underlying controversy. When the United States appeals the underlying merits of an adversary adjudication to a court, no decision on an application for fees and other expenses in connection with that adversary adjudication shall be made until a final and unreviewable decision is rendered by the court on the appeal or until the underlying merits of the case have been finally determined pursuant to the appeal.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Procedures for Considering Applications
          
            § 14.300
            Jurisdiction of adjudicative officer.
            Any provision in the Department's rules and regulations other than this part which limits or terminates the jurisdiction of an adjudicative officer upon the effective date of his or her decision in the underlying proceeding shall not in any way affect his or her jurisdiction to render a decision under this part.
          
          
            
            § 14.305
            Filing and service of documents.
            Any application for an award or other pleading or document related to an application shall be filed and served on all parties to the proceeding in the same manner as other pleadings in the proceeding, except as provided in § 14.205(c) for confidential financial information.
          
          
            § 14.310
            Answer to application.
            (a) Within 30 days after service of an application, agency counsel may file an answer to the application. Agency counsel may request an extension of time for filing. If agency counsel fails to answer or otherwise fails to contest or settle the application, the adjudicative officer, upon a satisfactory showing of entitlement by the applicant, may make an award for the applicant's fees and other expenses under the Act.
            (b) If agency counsel and the applicant believe that the issues in the fee application can be settled, they may jointly file a statement of their intent to negotiate a settlement. The filing of this statement shall extend the time for filing an answer for an additional 30 days, and further extensions may be granted by the adjudicative officer upon request by agency counsel and the applicant.
            (c) The answer shall explain in detail any objections to the award requested and identify the facts relied on in support of agency counsel's position. If the answer is based on any alleged facts not already in the record of the proceeding, agency counsel shall include with the answer either supporting affidavits or a request for further proceedings under § 14.325.
          
          
            § 14.315
            Comments by other parties.
            Any party to a proceeding other than the applicant and agency counsel may file comments on an application within 30 days after it is served, or on an answer within 15 days after it is served. A commenting party may not participate further in proceedings on the application unless the adjudicative officer determines that the public interest requires such participation in order to permit full exploration of matters raised in the comments.
          
          
            § 14.320
            Settlement.
            The applicant and agency counsel may agree on a proposed settlement of the award before final action on the application, either in connection with a settlement of the underlying proceeding, or after the underlying proceeding has been concluded, in accordance with the settlement procedure applicable to the underlying proceeding. If a prevailing party and agency counsel agree on a proposed settlement of an award before an application has been filed, the application shall be filed with the proposed settlement.
          
          
            § 14.325
            Extensions of time and further proceedings.
            (a) The adjudicative officer on motion and for good cause shown may grant extensions of time other than for filing an application for fees and expenses after final disposition in the adversary adjudication.
            (b) Ordinarily, the determination of an award will be made on the basis of the written record. However, on request of either the applicant or agency counsel, or on his or her own initiative, the adjudicative officer may order further proceedings, such as an informal conference, oral argument, additional written submissions, or as to issues other than substantial justification (such as the applicant's eligibility or substantiation of fees and expenses), pertinent discovery or an evidentiary hearing. Such further proceedings shall be held only when necessary for full and fair resolution of the issues arising from the application, and shall be conducted as promptly as possible. Whether or not the position of the agency was substantially justified shall be determined on the basis of the administrative record, as a whole, which is made in the adversary adjudication for which fees and other expenses are sought.
            (c) A request that the adjudicative officer order further proceedings under this section shall specifically identify the information sought or the disputed issues and shall explain why the additional proceedings are necessary to resolve the issues.
          
          
            
            § 14.330
            Decision.
            The adjudicative officer shall issue an initial decision on the application within 30 days after completion of proceedings on the application. The decision shall include written findings and conclusions on such of the following as are relevant to the decision:
            (a) The applicant's status as a prevailing party;
            (b) The applicant's qualification as a party under 5 U.S.C. 504(b)(1)(B);
            (c) Whether the agency's position was substantially justified;
            (d) Whether special circumstances make an award unjust;
            (e) Whether the applicant during the course of the proceedings engaged in conduct that unduly and unreasonably protracted the final resolution of the matter in controversy; and
            (f) The amounts, if any, awarded for fees and other expenses, with reasons for any difference between the amount requested and the amount awarded.
            If the applicant has sought an award against more than one agency, the decision shall allocate responsibility for payment of any award made among the agencies, and shall explain the reasons for the allocation made.
          
          
            § 14.335
            Departmental review.
            (a) Either the applicant or agency counsel may seek review of the initial decision on the fee application, or the Secretary (or his or her delegate, if any) may decide to review the decision on his or her own initiative, in accordance with the Department's review or appeals procedures applicable to the underlying proceeding. If neither the applicant nor agency counsel seeks review and the Secretary (or his or her delegate, if any) does not take review on his or her own initiative, the initial decision on the application shall become a final decision of the Department in the same manner as a decision in the underlying proceeding becomes final. Whether to review a decision is a matter within the discretion of the Secretary (or his or her delegate, if any). If review is taken, the Department will issue a final decision on the application or remand the application to the adjudicative officer for further proceedings.
            (b) Either party may seek reconsideration of the decision on the fee application in accordance with Rule 29, 24 CFR 20.10.
          
          
            § 14.340
            Judicial review.
            Judicial review of final departmental decisions on awards may be sought as provided in 5 U.S.C. 504(c)(2).
          
          
            § 14.345
            Payment of award.
            An applicant seeking payment of an award shall submit a copy of the final decision granting the award to: Director, Office of Finance and Accounting, Room 2202, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410, with a copy to: Associate General Counsel for Equal Opportunity and Administrative Law, Room 10244, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410. A statement that review of the underlying decision is not being sought in the United States courts, or that the process for seeking review of the award, if initiated, has been completed, must also be included. The agency will pay the amount awarded to the applicant within 60 days, unless judicial review of the award or of the underlying decision of the adversary adjudication has been sought by the applicant or any other party to the proceeding.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 15
        PART 15—PUBLIC ACCESS TO HUD RECORDS UNDER THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT AND TESTIMONY AND PRODUCTION OF INFORMATION BY HUD EMPLOYEES
        
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            Sec.
            15.1
            General provisions.
            15.2
            Definitions.
          
          
            Subpart B—Procedures for Disclosure of Records Under the FOIA
            15.101
            Proactive disclosures of department records.
            15.102
            Requirements for making requests for records.
            15.103
            Timing of responses to requests.
            15.104
            Procedures for processing FOIA requests.
            15.105
            Responses to requests.
            15.106
            Fees.
            
            15.107
            Documents generally protected from disclosure.
            15.108
            Business information.
            15.109
            Appeals.
            15.110
            HUD response to appeals.
          
          
            Subpart C—Production of Material or Provision of Testimony in Response to Demands in Legal Proceedings Among Private Litigants
            15.201
            Purpose and scope.
            15.202
            Production of material or provision of testimony prohibited unless approved.
            15.203
            Making a demand for production of material or provision of testimony.
            15.204
            Consideration of demands for production of material or provision of testimony.
            15.205
            Method of production of material or provision of testimony.
            15.206
            Procedure in the event of an adverse ruling regarding production of material or provision of testimony.
          
          
            Subpart D—Production of Material or Provision of Testimony in Response to Demands in Legal Proceedings in Which the United States Is a Party
            15.301
            Purpose and scope.
            15.302
            Production of material or provision of testimony prohibited unless approved.
            15.303
            Procedure for review of demands for production of material or provision of testimony in any legal proceeding in which the United States is a party.
            15.304
            Consideration of demands for production of material or provision of testimony.
            15.305
            Method of production of material or provision of testimony.
            Appendix A to Part 15—Location Information for HUD FOIA Reading Rooms and Contact Information for Regional Counsel
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 5 U.S.C. 552.
        
        
          Subpart A—General Provisions
          
            Source:
            80 FR 49144, Aug. 17, 2015, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 15.1
            General provisions.
            (a) Scope. Requests for material from HUD will be processed as set forth in this part. The Federal Housing Administration and the Government National Mortgage Association are components of HUD and are also covered by this part.
            (b) Subpart B. Subpart B of this part contains the rules that HUD follows in processing requests for records under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (5 U.S.C. 552). These rules should be read together with the FOIA, which provides additional information about access to records maintained by HUD. Information routinely provided to the public as part of a regular Department activity may be provided to the public without following this subpart.
            (c) Subpart C. Subpart C of this part describes the procedures to be followed and standards to be applied in processing demands for the production of material or provision of testimony in legal proceedings among private litigants.
            (d) Subpart D. Subpart D of this part describes the procedures to be followed and standards to be applied in processing demands for the production of material or provision of testimony in legal proceedings in which the United States is a party.
            (e) Inspector General. Subparts B and C of this part do not apply to the Office of Inspector General. The procedures that apply to the Office of Inspector General are described in parts 2002 and 2004 of this title.
          
          
            § 15.2
            Definitions.
            (a) The following definitions apply to this part.
            
              Agency record means any documentary material that is either created or obtained by an agency in the transaction of agency business and is under agency control. “Agency record” does not include records that are not already in existence and which would have to be created specifically to meet a request.
            
              Business information means commercial or financial information provided to HUD by a submitter that arguably is protected from disclosure under Exemption 4 (42 U.S.C. 552(b)(4)) of the FOIA.
            
              FOIA means the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).
            
              HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Review means the examination of a record located in response to a request in order to determine whether any portion of it is exempt from disclosure. Review time includes processing any record for disclosure (for example, doing all that is necessary to redact it and prepare it for disclosure). Review costs are recoverable even if a record ultimately is not disclosed. Review time includes time spent considering any formal objection to disclosure, made by a business submitter under § 15.108, but does not include time spent resolving general legal or policy issues regarding the application of exemptions.
            
              Search means the process of looking for and retrieving records or information responsive to a request. It includes page-by-page or line-by-line identification of information within records and also includes reasonable efforts to locate and retrieve information from records maintained in electronic form or format.
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Submitter means any person or entity that provides business information, directly or indirectly, to HUD. The term includes, but is not limited to, corporations, State governments, and foreign governments.
            (b) The following definitions apply to subparts C and D of this part.
            
              Appropriate Associate General Counsel means the Associate General Counsel for Litigation or the Associate General Counsel for HUD Headquarters employees in those programs for which the Associate General Counsel provides legal advice.
            
              Appropriate Regional Counsel means the Regional Counsel for the regional office having delegated authority over the project or activity with respect to which the information is sought. For assistance in identifying the Appropriate Regional Counsel, see appendix A to this part.
            
              Authorized Approving Official means the Secretary, General Counsel, Appropriate Associate General Counsel, or Appropriate Regional Counsel.
            
              Demand means a subpoena, order, or other demand of a court or other authority that is issued in a legal proceeding and any accompanying submissions.
            
              Employee of the Department means a current or former officer or employee of the United States appointed by or subject to the supervision of the Secretary, but does not include an officer or employee covered by part 2004 of this title.
            
              Good cause means necessary to prevent a miscarriage of justice or to promote a significant interest of the Department.
            
              Legal proceeding includes any proceeding before a court of law or other authority; e.g., an administrative board or commission, a hearing officer, an arbitrator, or other body conducting a quasi-judicial or legislative proceeding.
            
              Legal proceeding among private litigants means any legal proceeding in which the United States is not a party.
            
              Legal proceeding in which the United States is a party means any legal proceeding including as a named party the United States, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, any other Federal executive or administrative agency or department, or any official thereof in his official capacity.
            
              Material means either documents or information contained in, or relating to contents of, the files of the Department, or documents or information acquired by any person, while such person was an employee of the Department, as a part of the performance of his or her official duties or because of his or her official status.
            
              Production means to produce material by any means other than through the provision of oral testimony.
            
              Testimony means any oral or written statements made in litigation under oath or penalty of perjury.
            
              United States means the Federal Government of the United States (including the Department), the Secretary, and any employees of the Department in their official capacities.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Procedures for Disclosure of Records Under the FOIA
          
            Source:
            80 FR 49145, Aug. 17, 2015, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 15.101
            Proactive disclosures of department records.
            (a) In General. Records that are required to be made available for public inspection in an electronic format are accessible on the Department's Web site at http://www.hud.gov/FOIA. Published agency records, whether or not they are available for purchase, are made available for examination. Each HUD office (headquarters and field) has a FOIA Public Liaison that can assist individuals in locating records. A list of the Department's FOIA Public Liaisons is available at http://www.hud.gov/FOIA.
            
            (b) Electronic FOIA reading room. As required by 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(2), HUD makes records created on or after November 1, 1996, available through its electronic FOIA Reading Room, located on HUD's FOIA Web site at http://www.hud.gov/FOIA. These records include:
            (1) Final opinions and orders.

            (2) Public access to high-value, machine readable datasets via http://www.data.gov.
            
            (3) Statements of policy and interpretation, including:
            (i) HUD's Client and Information Policy Systems (HUDCLIPS);
            (ii) Housing policy;
            (iii) Public and Indian Housing policy and regulations;
            (iv) Public and Indian Housing policy and guidance (PHA Plans); and
            (v) Community Planning and Development policy and guidance.
            (4) Administrative staff manuals.
            (5) HUD's online library.
            (6) Fair housing information.
            (7) Copies of all records, regardless of form or format that have been released to any person under § 15.105; and
            (i) Because of the nature of their subject matter, the agency determines that the records have become or are likely to become the subject of subsequent requests for substantially the same records; or
            (ii) Have been requested three or more times.
            (8) Report for the preceding fiscal year submitted to the U.S. Attorney General and the Director of the Office of Government Information Services (OGIS) as required by 5 U.S.C. 552(e) and the raw statistical data used in each report. This report will be made available:
            (i) Without charge, license, or registration requirement;
            (ii) In an aggregated, searchable format; and
            (iii) In a format that may be downloaded in bulk.
            (c) Frequently requested materials. HUD also makes frequently requested materials available on its FOIA Web site at http://www.hud.gov/FOIA. These frequently requested materials include information related to:
            (1) Highest-scoring funding grant applications.
            (2) Purchase charge cardholders.
            (3) FHA refunds.
            (4) FHA-approved lenders.
            (5) Homes for sale.
            (6) How to buy a HUD home.
            (7) How to apply for public housing and Section 8 housing.
            (8) Housing for the elderly.
            (9) Housing for individuals with disabilities.
            (10) HUD contracting home page.
            (11) FHA mortgage insurance programs.
            (12) HUD handbooks.
            (13) HUD programs.
            (14) HUD telephone directory.
            (15) HUD homes listing.
            (16) HUD's organization.
            (17) Multifamily housing data.
            (18) Public housing authority contact information.
            (19) Weekly listing of multifamily properties for sale.
            (20) Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) materials.
            (21) Grants.
            (22) FOIA request logs.
            [80 FR 49145, Aug. 17, 2015, as amended at 82 FR 3622, Jan. 12, 2017; 82 FR 21694, May 10, 2017]
          
          
            § 15.102
            Requirements for making requests for records.
            (a) In general. Any request for HUD records must be made in writing and submitted to the FOIA Public Liaison in the HUD field office where the records are located or to the Office of the Executive Secretariat in HUD Headquarters if the request is for records located in HUD Headquarters.
            (b) HUD field office records. Requests for records located in a HUD field office may be submitted by mail (including courier or delivery service), email, or facsimile to the FOIA Public Liaison at the field office.
            (c) HUD headquarters records. Requests for records located in HUD Headquarters may be submitted via an electronic request form on HUD's FOIA Web site at http://www.hud.gov/FOIA. Requests can also be submitted in person or by mail (including courier or delivery service), email, or facsimile to the Office of the Executive Secretariat in HUD Headquarters.
            (d) Form of requests. FOIA requests should:
            (1) Be in writing and clearly identifiable as a FOIA request. To facilitate identification, the requester should place the phrase “FOIA Request” on the front of the envelope or on the cover sheet or other transmittal document used when submitting the request in person or by mail, email, facsimile, or electronic request form;
            (2) Include, whenever possible, detailed and specific information about each record sought, such as the date, title or name, author, recipient, and subject matter of the record. The more specific the FOIA request for records, the more likely HUD officials will be able to locate the records requested. Requests for categories of information should be for specific and well-defined categories. Insufficient descriptions may lead HUD officials to contact the requester to seek additional information for their record search;
            (3) Indicate the form or format in which the requester would like the record made available, if the requester has a preference;
            (4) Specify the fee amount the requester is willing to pay. In general, HUD provides records at no cost up to $25. Requesters are required to agree to pay for any costs that exceed $25. Requesters may also request a dollar amount above which HUD should consult with them before they agree to pay the fee. If a requester seeks a fee waiver or reduction, the requester should include this request with the FOIA disclosure request and should describe, consistent with § 15.106(k), how the disclosure of the requested information is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester;
            (5) Indicate the fee category that the requester believes applies to each of his or her requests (fee categories are defined in § 15.106(b));
            (6) Include verification information of the requester's identity, if the requester requests agency records pertaining to the requester, a minor, or an individual who is legally incompetent. Information about what constitutes acceptable verification information can be found in HUD's Privacy Act regulations in 24 CFR part 16;
            (7) Contain signed authorization from the other person, if the requester makes a request on another person's behalf for information about that person. If necessary, HUD will inform the requester of the authorization needed from the other person and give the requester an opportunity to provide such authorization. Requests for information about another person should be accompanied by either written, notarized authorization or proof that the individual is deceased (for example, a copy of a death certificate or an obituary), or the request will be deemed insufficient; and
            (8) Contain a detailed explanation of the basis for the request, if the requester makes a request for expedited processing as provided by § 15.104(c). The requester should also include a statement certifying the truth of the circumstances alleged or other evidence, acceptable to HUD, of the requester's compelling need.
          
          
            § 15.103
            Timing of responses to requests.
            (a) In general. HUD will generally make a determination whether to comply with a FOIA request within 20 working days, depending on the size of the request. The 20-day period will begin on the day the request is received by the appropriate component of HUD, but in any event not later than 10 working days after the request is received by any component of HUD designated to receive FOIA requests.
            (b) Tolling the 20-day time period. Under the OPEN Government Act of 2007, HUD may toll the 20-day period:
            (1) One time to make a reasonable request for additional information from the requester; or

            (2) As many times as necessary to clarify issues regarding fee assessment with the requester. The agency's receipt of the requester's response to the agency's request for information or resolution of all fee assessment issues ends the tolling period.
            (c) Extension of time periods for processing a request. In unusual circumstances, as defined in this paragraph, HUD may extend the time period for processing a FOIA request. In such circumstances, HUD will provide the requester with written notice setting forth the unusual circumstances for the extension and the date on which a determination is expected to be dispatched. If processing a request would require more than 10 working days beyond the general time limit established in paragraph (a) of this section, HUD will offer the requester an opportunity to limit the scope of the request so that HUD may process it within the extra 10-day working period or arrange an alternative time period within which the FOIA request will be processed. To aid the requester, HUD shall make available its FOIA Public Liaison, who shall assist in the resolution of any disputes between the requester and HUD, and notify the requester of the right of the requester to seek dispute resolution services from the Office of Government Information Services. For purposes of this section, unusual circumstances include:
            (1) The need to search for and collect records not located in the office processing the request;
            (2) The need to search for, collect, and appropriately examine a voluminous amount of separate and distinct records; or
            (3) The need to consult with another agency or two or more HUD components having a substantial interest in the determination of the FOIA request.
            (d) Aggregating multiple requests. (1) HUD may aggregate multiple requests in cases where unusual circumstances exist and HUD determines that:
            (i) Certain requests from the same requester or from a group of requesters acting in concert actually constitute a single request; and
            (ii) The requests involve clearly related matters.
            (2) Aggregation of requests for this purpose will be conducted independent of aggregation of requests for fee purposes under § 15.106(h).
            [80 FR 49145, Aug. 17, 2015, as amended at 82 FR 3622, Jan. 12, 2017]
          
          
            § 15.104
            Procedures for processing FOIA requests.
            (a) In general. HUD will ordinarily respond to FOIA requests according to their order of receipt.
            (b) Tracking number. FOIA requests will be logged in the order that they are received and be assigned a tracking number. A requester should use the tracking number to identify his or her request when contacting the FOIA office for any reason.
            (c) Expedited processing. (1) Requests and appeals will be taken out of order and given expedited treatment whenever it is determined that they involve:
            (i) Circumstances in which the lack of expedited treatment could reasonably be expected to pose an imminent threat to the life or physical safety of an individual;
            (ii) An urgency to inform the public about an actual or alleged Federal Government activity, if made by a person primarily engaged in disseminating information; or
            (iii) The loss of substantial due process rights.
            (2) A request for expedited processing may be made at the time of the initial request for records or at any later time. For a prompt determination, a request for expedited processing should be received by the proper office designated to receive FOIA requests as provided in § 15.102.

            (3) A requester who seeks expedited processing should submit a statement, certified to be true and correct to the best of that person's knowledge and belief, explaining in detail the basis for requesting expedited processing. For example, a requester who makes a request under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section, if not a full-time member of the news media, should establish that he or she is a person primarily engaged in disseminating information, though it need not be his or her sole occupation. A requester making a request under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section also should establish a particular urgency to inform the public about the government activity involved in the request, beyond the public's right to know about government activity generally. The formality of certification may be waived as a matter of administrative discretion.
            
            (4) HUD will make a determination within 10 calendar days of receipt by the appropriate component of HUD, as provided in § 15.103, whether to grant or deny a request for expedited processing and notify the requester of HUD's determination. FOIA requests accepted for expedited processing will be processed as soon as practicable and on a priority basis.
            (d) Multitrack processing. (1) For requests that do not qualify for expedited processing, HUD may use two or more processing tracks by distinguishing between simple and complex FOIA requests based on the following: The time and work necessary to process the FOIA request and the volume of agency records responsive to the FOIA request.
            (2) When HUD uses multitrack processing, it may provide requesters in its slower track an opportunity to limit the scope of their requests in order to qualify for faster processing within the specified limits of HUD's faster track. When HUD chooses to provide this option, HUD will contact the requester by telephone, letter, or email, whichever is more efficient in each case.
            [80 FR 49145, Aug. 17, 2015, as amended at 82 FR 3622, Jan. 12, 2017]
          
          
            § 15.105
            Responses to requests.
            (a) Acknowledgements of requests. The FOIA office in the Office of the Executive Secretariat in HUD Headquarters and FOIA Public Liaison in each HUD field office will ordinarily send an acknowledgement letter to the requester that will confirm receipt of the request by the appropriate HUD office and provide an assigned tracking number, as provided by § 15.104(b), for further reference.
            (b) Consultations, coordination, and referrals. When HUD receives a request for a record in its possession, it shall determine whether another agency of the Federal Government is better able to determine whether the record is exempt from disclosure under the FOIA or whether it should be disclosed as a matter of administrative discretion. If HUD determines that it is best able to determine whether the record is exempt from disclosure, then it shall do so. If HUD determines that it is not best able to make that determination, then it shall either:
            (1) Respond to the request regarding that record, after consulting with the agency best able to determine whether to disclose it and with any other agency that has a substantial interest in it; or
            (2) Refer the responsibility for responding to the request regarding that record to the agency that originated the record, but only if that agency is subject to the FOIA. Ordinarily, the agency with which the record originated will be presumed to be best able to determine whether to disclose it.
            (c) Fee estimates. HUD will notify the requester if HUD's estimate of the fee is more than the requester has agreed to pay. Consistent with § 15.106(e), the requester shall have 15 working days to agree to pay the higher fee.
            (d) Forms of response. Once HUD makes a determination regarding whether to comply with a request pursuant to time limits established in § 15.103(a), HUD shall immediately notify the requester of such determination and the reasons therefor, and the requester's right to seek assistance from the FOIA Public Liaison.
            (1) Granting requests in whole or in part. If HUD makes a determination to grant a request in whole or in part, it will notify the requester in writing. HUD will make a record available in the form or format requested, if the record is readily reproducible in that format. HUD will inform the requester in the notice of any fee charged under § 15.106 and disclose records to the requester promptly upon payment of any applicable fee. Records disclosed in part will be marked or annotated to show the amount of information deleted and the exemption(s) under which each deletion is made, unless doing so would harm an interest protected by an applicable FOIA exemption. The location of the information deleted and the exemption(s) under which the deletion is made will be indicated directly on the record itself, if technically feasible.
            (2) Adverse determination of requests. If a determination is made to deny a request in any respect, HUD shall notify the requester of that determination in writing. Adverse determinations, or denials of requests, include: A determination to withhold any requested record, in whole or in part; a determination that a requested record does not exist, cannot be located, or has not been retained; a determination that a record is not readily reproducible in the form or format sought by the requester; a determination that what has been requested is not a record subject to the FOIA; a determination on any disputed fee matter, including a denial of a request for a fee waiver or reduction; and a denial of a request for expedited treatment. The denial letter shall be signed by the Director of the Office of the Executive Secretariat, or a designee of the Director, in HUD Headquarters or the FOIA Public Liaison for the HUD field office where the adverse determination was made, and shall include:
            (i) The name and title or position of the person responsible for the denial;
            (ii) A brief statement of the reason(s) for the denial, including any FOIA exemption applied by HUD in denying the request;
            (iii) An estimate of the volume of records or information withheld, when appropriate, in number of pages or in some other reasonable form of estimation. This estimate does not need to be provided if the volume is otherwise indicated through deletions on records disclosed in part, or if providing an estimate would harm an interest protected by an applicable exemption; and
            (iv) Notice of the right of the requester to appeal to the head of the agency, within a period determined by the head of the agency that is not less than 90 days after the date of such adverse determination;
            (v) Notice of the right of the requester to seek dispute resolution services from the FOIA Public Liaison of the agency or the Office of Government Information Services;
            (vi) A statement that the denial may be appealed as provided by § 15.109 and a description of the requirements for appeal.
            [80 FR 49145, Aug. 17, 2015, as amended at 82 FR 3622, Jan. 12, 2017; 82 FR 21694, May 10, 2017]
          
          
            § 15.106
            Fees.
            (a) In general. HUD will charge for processing requests under the FOIA in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, except where fees are limited under paragraph (d) of this section or where a waiver or reduction of fees is granted under paragraph (k) of this section. HUD shall collect all applicable fees before sending copies of requested records to a requester. In order to resolve any fee issues that arise under this section, HUD may contact a requester for additional information. Requesters shall pay fees by check or money order made payable to the United States Treasury.
            (b) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
            
              Commercial use means a request from or on behalf of a person who seeks information for a use or purpose that furthers his or her commercial, trade, or profit interests, which can include furthering those interests through litigation. HUD shall determine, whenever reasonably possible, the use to which a requester will put the requested records. When it appears that the requester will put the records to a commercial use, either because of the nature of the request itself or because HUD has reasonable cause to doubt a requester's stated use, HUD shall provide the requester a reasonable opportunity to submit further clarification.
            
              Direct costs means those expenses that HUD actually incurs in searching for and duplicating and, in the case of commercial use requests, reviewing records to respond to a FOIA request. Direct costs include, for example, the salary of the employee performing the work and the cost of operating computers and other electronic equipment, such as for mainframe computer run time. Not included in direct costs are overhead expenses such as the costs of space and heating or lighting a facility.
            
              Duplication means the process of making a copy of a document necessary to respond to a FOIA request. Such copies can take the form of paper copy, audiovisual materials, or machine readable documentation (e.g., diskette), among others. HUD shall honor a requester's specified preference of form or format of disclosure if the record is readily reproducible with reasonable efforts in the requested form or format by the office responding to the request.
            
              Educational institution means:
            (i)(A) A preschool;
            
            (B) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
            (C) An institution of graduate higher education;
            (D) An institution of undergraduate higher education;
            (E) An institution of professional education; or
            (F) An institution of vocational education, that primarily (or solely) operates a program or programs of scholarly research.
            (ii) To be in this category, a requester should show that the request is authorized by, and is made under the auspices of, a qualifying institution and that the records are not sought for a commercial use but are sought to further scholarly research. Records requested for the intention of fulfilling credit requirements are not considered to be sought for a scholarly purpose.
            
              Other requester means any requester that does not fall within the categories of requesters described in this section.
            
              Noncommercial scientific institution means an institution that is not operated on a “commercial” basis, as defined in this section, and that is operated solely for the purpose of conducting scientific research the results of which are not intended to promote any particular product or industry. To be in this category, a requester should show that the request is authorized by, and is made under the auspices of, a qualifying institution and that the records are not sought for a commercial use but are sought to further scientific research.
            
              Representative of the news media, or news media requester, means any person actively gathering news for an entity that is organized and operated to publish or broadcast news to the public, uses its editorial skills to turn the raw materials into a distinct work, and distributes that work to an audience. The term news means information that is about current events or that would be of current interest to the public. Examples of news media entities include television or radio stations broadcasting to the public at large and publishers of periodicals that disseminate news and make their products available to the general public through a variety of means. For freelance journalists to be regarded as working for a news media entity, they should demonstrate a solid basis for expecting publication through a news media entity. A publication contract would be the clearest proof, but HUD will also look to the past publication record of a requester in making this determination. To be in this category a requester should not be seeking the requested records for a commercial use. However, a request for records supporting the news dissemination function of the requester shall not be considered to be for a commercial use.
            (c) Fees—(1) Schedule. In responding to FOIA requests, HUD will use the fee schedule set out in the following table, unless a waiver or reduction of fees has been granted under paragraph (k) of this section.
            
              FOIA Fee Schedule
              
                Activity
                Rate
                Commercial use requester
                News media, educational institution, ornoncommercial scientific
                  institution requester
                
                Other requester
              
              
                (i) Professional search
                $13 per quarter hour
                Applies
                Does not apply
                Applies. No charge for first 2 hours of cumulative search time.
              
              
                (ii) Professional review
                $13 per quarter hour
                Applies
                Does not apply
                Does not apply.
              
              
                (iii) Clerical search
                $6 per quarter hour
                Applies
                Does not apply
                Applies. No charge for first 2 hours of cumulative search time.
              
              
                (iv) Clerical review
                $6 per quarter hour
                Applies
                Does not apply
                Does not apply.
              
              
                (v) Programming services required
                Direct costs associated with search
                Applies
                Does not apply
                Applies.
              
              
                (vi) Duplication costs
                $0.10 per page
                Applies
                Applies. No charge for first 100 pages
                Applies. No charge for first 100 pages.
              
              
                (vii) Duplication costs—tape, CD ROM or diskette
                Actual cost
                Applies
                Applies
                Applies.
              
            
            
            (2) Search. (i) Search fees will be charged for all requests other than requests made by educational institutions, noncommercial scientific institutions, or representatives of the news media, subject to the limitations of paragraph (d) of this section. HUD may charge for time spent searching even if HUD does not locate any responsive record or if HUD withholds the record(s) located as entirely exempt from disclosure.
            (ii) For each hour spent by personnel searching for requested records, including electronic searches that do not require new programming, the fees will be $13 per quarter hour for professional personnel and $6 per quarter hour for clerical personnel.
            (iii) Requesters will be charged the direct costs associated with conducting any search that requires the creation of a new program to locate the requested records.
            (iv) For requests requiring the retrieval of records from any Federal records center, certain additional costs may be incurred in accordance with the Transactional Billing Rate Schedule established by the National Archives and Records Administration.
            (3) Duplication. Duplication fees will be charged to all requesters, subject to the limitations of paragraph (d) of this section. For a paper photocopy of a record (no more than one copy of which need be supplied), the fee will be $0.10 per page. For copies in digital format, HUD will charge the direct costs, including operator time, of producing the copy. Where paper documents must be scanned in order to comply with a requester's preference to receive the records in an electronic format, the requester shall pay the direct costs associated with scanning those materials. For other forms of duplication, HUD will charge the direct costs.
            (4) Review. Review fees will be charged to requesters who make a commercial use request. Review fees will be charged only for the initial record review (the review done where HUD determines whether an exemption applies to a particular record or record portion, at the initial request level). No charge will be made for review at the administrative appeal level for an exemption already applied. However, records or portions of records withheld under an exemption that is subsequently determined not to apply may be reviewed again to determine whether any other exemption not previously considered applies. The cost of that review is chargeable where it is made necessary by such a change of circumstances. Fees for the review time will be $13 per quarter hour for professional personnel and $6 per quarter hour for clerical personnel.
            (d) Restrictions on charging fees. (1) No search fee will be charged for requests by educational institutions, noncommercial scientific institutions, or representatives of the news media. In addition, except as provided in paragraphs (d)(5), (d)(6), and (d)(7) of this section, HUD shall not assess any search fees (or, for requesters that are educational institutions, noncommercial scientific institutions or representatives of the news media requesting records not sought for commercial use, duplication fees) if HUD has failed to comply with any time limit described in § 15.103.
            (2) Search and review fees will be charged in quarter-hour increments. HUD will round up a quarter hour when professional and clerical search and review time exceeds a quarter-hour increment.
            (3) Except for requesters seeking records for a commercial use, HUD will provide without charge:
            (i) The first 100 pages of duplication (or the cost equivalent); and
            (ii) The first 2 hours of search (or the cost equivalent).
            (4) No fee will be charged whenever a total fee calculated under paragraph (c) of this section is less than HUD's cost to process the payment. Currently, whenever a total fee calculated is $25 or less, no fee will be charged.

            (5) If HUD determines that unusual circumstances apply and HUD provides timely written notice to the requester pursuant to requirements provided in § 15.103(c), a failure to comply with any time limit as described in § 15.103 is excused for an additional 10 days. If HUD fails to comply with the extended time limit, HUD may not assess any search fees (or for requesters that are educational or noncommercial scientific institutions or representatives of the news media requesting records not sought for commercial use, duplication fees).
            (6) If unusual circumstances apply and more than 5000 pages are necessary to respond to the request, HUD may charge search fees or, for requesters that are educational or noncommercial scientific institutions or representatives of the news media requesting records not sought for commercial use, duplication fees, if timely written notice has been made to the requester pursuant to requirements provided in § 15.103(c) and HUD has discussed with the requester through written mail, electronic mail, or telephone (or made not less than 3 good-faith attempts to do so) how the requester could effectively limit the scope of the request as stipulated in § 15.103(c).
            (7)(i) If a court has determined that exceptional circumstances exist, a failure to comply with any time limit as described in § 15.103 shall be excused for the length of time provided by the court order.
            (ii) For purposes of this section, the term “exceptional circumstances” does not include a delay that results from a predictable workload of requests, unless HUD demonstrates reasonable progress in reducing its backlog of pending requests. However, refusal by the requester to reasonably modify the scope of a request or arrange an alternative time frame for processing a request (or a modified request) after HUD gives them an opportunity to do so shall be considered a factor in determining whether exceptional circumstances exist.
            (e) Notice of anticipated fees in excess of $25. When HUD determines or estimates that the fees to be charged under this section will amount to more than $25, HUD will notify the requester of the actual or estimated amount of the fees, unless the requester has indicated a willingness to pay fees as high as the amount anticipated. If only a portion of the fee can be readily estimated, HUD shall advise the requester that the estimated fee may be only a portion of the total fee. In cases in which a requester has been notified that actual or estimated fees amount to more than $25, the request will be held in abeyance for 15 working days. Further work will not be done on that request until the requester has either made a firm commitment to pay the anticipated total fee, or has made payment in advance if the total fee exceeds $250. Any such agreement should be memorialized by the requester in writing, should indicate a given dollar amount, and should be received by HUD within the time period specified by HUD in its notice to the requester. If the requester does not provide a firm commitment to pay the anticipated fee within the time period specified by HUD, the request will be closed. A notice under this paragraph will offer the requester an opportunity to discuss the matter of fees with HUD personnel in order to reformulate the request to meet the requester's needs at a lower cost. HUD is not required to accept payments in installments.
            (f) Charges for other services. Although not required to provide special services, if HUD chooses to do so as a matter of administrative discretion, HUD will charge the direct costs of providing these services. Examples of such services include certifying that records are true copies, providing multiple copies of the same document, or sending documents by means other than ordinary mail.
            (g) Charging interest. HUD may charge interest on any unpaid bill starting on the 31st day following the date of billing the requester. Interest charges will be assessed at the rate provided in 31 U.S.C. 3717 and will accrue from the date of the billing until payment is received by HUD. HUD will follow the provisions of the Debt Collection Act of 1982 (Pub. L. 97-365, 96 Stat. 1749), as amended, and its administrative procedures, including the use of consumer reporting agencies, collection agencies, and offset.
            (h) Aggregating requests. If HUD reasonably believes that a requester or a group of requesters acting together is attempting to divide a request into a series of requests for the purpose of avoiding fees, HUD may aggregate those requests and charge accordingly. HUD may presume that multiple requests of this type made within a 30-day period have been made in order to avoid fees. Where requests are separated by a longer period, HUD will aggregate them only where there is a reasonable basis for determining that aggregation is warranted under all the circumstances involved. Multiple requests involving unrelated matters will not be aggregated. Aggregation of requests for fee purposes under this paragraph will be conducted independent of aggregation of requests under § 15.103(d).
            (i) Advance payments. (1) For requests other than those described in paragraphs (i)(2) and (3) of this section, HUD will not require the requester to make an advance payment before work is begun or continued on a request. Payment owed for work already completed, such as prepayment before copies are sent to a requester, is not an advance payment.
            (2) If HUD determines or estimates that a total fee to be charged under this section will be more than $250, it may require the requester to make an advance payment of an amount up to the amount of the entire anticipated fee before beginning to process the request, except where it receives a satisfactory assurance of full payment from a requester who has a history of prompt payment.
            (3) If a requester has previously failed to pay a properly charged FOIA fee to HUD within 30 days of the date of billing, before HUD begins to process a new request or continues to process a pending request from that requester, HUD will require the requester to pay the full amount due, plus any applicable interest, and to make an advance payment of the full amount of any anticipated fee. If HUD has a reasonable basis to believe that a requester has misrepresented his or her identity in order to avoid paying outstanding fees, HUD may require that the requester provide proof of identity.
            (4) When HUD requires advance payment, the request will be held in abeyance for 15 working days to allow the requester an opportunity to make payment in advance and/or modify the scope of the request. If the requester does not pay the advance payment or modify the scope of the request within the allotted time frame, the request will be closed.
            (j) Other statutes specifically providing for fees. The fee schedule in this section does not apply to fees charged under any statute that specifically requires an agency to set and collect fees for particular types of records. Where records responsive to requests are maintained for distribution by agencies operating such statutorily based fee schedule programs, HUD will inform requesters of the contact information for that source.
            (k) Requirements for waiver or reduction of fees. (1) Records responsive to a request will be furnished without charge or at a charge reduced below that established under paragraph (c) of this section if HUD determines, based on all available information, that the requester has demonstrated the following:
            (i) Disclosure of the requested information is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government; and
            (ii) Disclosure of the information is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.
            (2) To determine whether the first fee waiver requirement is met, HUD will consider the following factors:
            (i) The subject of the requested records should concern identifiable operations or activities of the Federal Government, with a connection that is direct and clear, not remote or attenuated.
            (ii) The disclosable portions of the requested records should be meaningfully informative about government operations or activities and “likely to contribute” to an increased public understanding of those operations or activities. The disclosure of information that already is in the public domain, in either a duplicative or a substantially identical form, would not be as likely to contribute to such increased understanding, where nothing new would be added to the public's understanding.

            (iii) The disclosure should contribute to the understanding of a reasonably broad audience of persons interested in the subject, as opposed to the individual understanding of the requester. A requester's expertise in the subject area and ability and intention to effectively convey information to the public will be considered. It will be presumed that a representative of the news media will satisfy this consideration.
            (iv) The public's understanding of the subject in question, as compared to the level of public understanding existing prior to the disclosure, should be enhanced by the disclosure to a significant extent. However, HUD will not make value judgments about whether information at issue is “important” enough to be made public.
            (3) To determine whether the second fee waiver requirement is met, HUD will consider the following factors:
            (i) HUD will identify any commercial interest of the requester as defined in paragraph (b) of this section, or of any person on whose behalf the requester may be acting, that would be furthered by the requested disclosure. Requesters shall be given an opportunity in the administrative process to provide explanatory information regarding this consideration.
            (ii) A fee waiver or reduction is justified where the public interest standard is satisfied and that public interest is greater than that of any identified commercial interest in disclosure. HUD ordinarily will presume that where a news media requester has satisfied the public interest standard, the public interest will be the interest primarily served by disclosure to that requester. Disclosure to data brokers or others who merely compile and market government information for direct economic return will not be presumed to primarily serve the public interest.
            (4) Where only some of the records to be released satisfy the requirements for a waiver of fees, a waiver will be granted for those records.
            (5) Requests for the waiver or reduction of fees should address the factors listed in paragraphs (k)(2) and (3) of this section, insofar as they apply to each request. In deciding to grant waivers or reductions of fees, HUD will exercise its discretion to consider the cost effectiveness of its investment of administrative resources.
            [80 FR 49145, Aug. 17, 2015, as amended at 82 FR 3622, Jan. 12, 2017]
          
          
            § 15.107
            Documents generally protected from disclosure.
            (a) HUD shall withhold information only if HUD reasonably foresees that disclosure would harm an interest protected by an exemption as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, or disclosure is prohibited by law. HUD will consider whether partial disclosure of information is possible whenever HUD determines that a full disclosure of a requested record is not possible, and will take reasonable steps necessary to segregate and release nonexempt information. Nothing in this section requires disclosure of information that is otherwise prohibited from disclosure by law, or otherwise exempted from disclosure as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
            (b) The FOIA contains nine exemptions (5 U.S.C. 552(b)) that authorize agencies to withhold various records from disclosure. With regard to certain types of records, HUD generally applies the exemptions as follows:
            (1) Classified documents. Exemption 1 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(1)) protects classified national defense and foreign relations information. HUD seldom relies on this exception to withhold documents. However, where applicable, HUD will refer a request for records classified under Executive Order 13526 and the pertinent records to the originating agency for processing. HUD may refuse to confirm or deny the existence of the requested information if the originating agency determines that the fact of the existence of the information itself is classified.
            (2) Internal agency rules and practices. Exemption 2 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(2)) protects records relating to internal personnel rules and practices.
            (3) Information prohibited from disclosure by another statute. Exemption 3 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(3)) protects information that is prohibited from disclosure by another Federal law. HUD generally will not disclose competitive proposals prior to contract award, competitive proposals that are not set forth or incorporated by reference into the awarded contract (see 41 U.S.C. 4702), or, during the selection process, any covered selection information regarding such selection, either directly or indirectly (see 42 U.S.C. 3537a).
            
            (4) Commercial or financial information. Exemption 4 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4)) protects trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a person and privileged or confidential. HUD will handle this type of information as provided by § 15.108.
            (5) Certain interagency or intra-agency communications. Exemption 5 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(5)) protects interagency or intra-agency communications that are protected by legal privileges, such as the attorney-client privilege, attorney work-product privilege, or communications reflecting the agency's deliberative process. The deliberative process privilege shall not apply to records created 25 years or more before the date on which the records were requested.
            (6) Personal privacy. Exemption 6 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(6)) protects information involving matters of personal privacy. This information may include personnel, medical, and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. Names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of persons residing in public or assisted housing or of borrowers in FHA-insured single family mortgage transactions generally will not be disclosed.
            (7) Law enforcement records. Exemption 7 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(7)) protects certain records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes. This exemption protects records where the production could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement proceedings; for example, the names of individuals who have filed fair housing complaints. The protection of this exemption also encompasses, but is not limited to, information in law enforcement files that could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy; the names of confidential informants, and techniques and procedures for law enforcement investigations, or guidelines for law enforcement investigations if such disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law.
            (8) Supervision of financial institutions. Exemption 8 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(8)) protects information relating to the supervision of financial institutions. For purposes of Exemption 8, HUD is an “agency responsible for the regulation and supervision of financial institutions” for purposes of monitoring fair housing compliance.
            (9) Wells. Exemption 9 (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(9)) protects geological information on wells.
            [82 FR 21694, May 10, 2017]
          
          
            § 15.108
            Business information.
            (a) In general. Business information obtained by HUD from a submitter will be disclosed under the FOIA only under this section. In making final confidentiality determinations under this section, HUD relies to a large extent upon the information furnished by the affected business to substantiate its claim of confidentiality. HUD may be unable to verify the accuracy of much of the information submitted by the affected business. HUD will comply with Executive Order 12600 and follow the procedure in this section by giving notice to the affected business and an opportunity for the business to present evidence of its confidentiality claim. If HUD is sued by a requester under the FOIA for nondisclosure of confidential business information, HUD expects the affected business to cooperate to the fullest extent possible in defending such a decision.
            (b) Designation of business information. A submitter of business information will use good faith efforts to designate, by appropriate markings, either at the time of submission or at a reasonable time thereafter, any portions of its submission that it considers to be protected from disclosure under Exemption 4. These designations will expire 10 years after the date of the submission unless the submitter requests, and provides justification for, a longer designation period.
            (c) Notice to submitters. HUD will provide a submitter with prompt written notice of a FOIA request or administrative appeal that seeks business information, wherever required under paragraph (d) of this section, in order to give the submitter an opportunity to object to disclosure of any specified portion of that information under paragraph (e) of this section. The notice will either describe the business information requested or include copies of the requested records or portions of records containing the information. When notification of a voluminous number of submitters is required, notification may be made by posting or publishing the notice in a place reasonably likely to accomplish notification.
            (d) Where notice is required. Notice will be given to a submitter wherever:
            (1) The information has been designated in good faith by the submitter as information considered protected from disclosure under Exemption 4; or
            (2) HUD has reason to believe that the information may be protected from disclosure under Exemption 4.
            (e) Opportunity to object to disclosure. HUD will allow a submitter a reasonable time to respond to the notice described in paragraph (c) of this section and will specify that time period within the notice. If a submitter has any objection to disclosure, the submitter should submit a detailed written statement specifying the grounds for withholding any portion of the information under any exemption of the FOIA and, in the case of Exemption 4, the submitter should show why the information is a trade secret or commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential. HUD generally will not consider conclusory statements that particular information would be useful to competitors or would impair sales, or other similar statements, sufficient to justify confidential treatment. In the event that a submitter fails to respond to the notice within the time specified, the submitter will be considered to have no objection to the disclosure of the information. Information provided by the submitter that is not received until after the disclosure decision has been made will not be considered by HUD. Information provided by a submitter under this paragraph may itself be subject to disclosure under the FOIA.
            (f) Notice of intent to disclose. HUD will consider a submitter's objections and specific grounds for nondisclosure in deciding whether to disclose business information. Whenever HUD decides to disclose business information over the objection of a submitter, HUD will give the submitter written notice, which will include:
            (1) A statement of the reason(s) why each of the submitter's disclosure objections was not sustained;
            (2) A description of the business information to be disclosed; and
            (3) A specified disclosure date, which shall be a reasonable time subsequent to the notice.
            (g) Exceptions to notice requirements. The notice requirements of paragraphs (c) and (f) of this section will not apply if:
            (1) HUD determines that the information should not be disclosed;
            (2) The information lawfully has been published or has been officially made available to the public; or
            (3) Disclosure of the information is required by statute (other than the FOIA) or by a regulation issued in accordance with the requirements of Executive Order 12600.
            (h) Notice of a FOIA lawsuit. Whenever a requester files a lawsuit seeking to compel the disclosure of business information, HUD will promptly notify the submitter.
            (i) Corresponding notice to requesters. Whenever HUD provides a submitter with notice and an opportunity to object to disclosure under paragraph (f) of this section, HUD will also notify the requester(s). Whenever a submitter files a lawsuit seeking to prevent the disclosure of business information, HUD will notify the requester(s).
          
          
            § 15.109
            Appeals.
            (a) In general. A requester may appeal an adverse determination denying a request, in any respect, in writing. The letter of appeal should clearly identify the determination that is being appealed and the assigned tracking number. The appeal letter and envelope should be marked “Freedom of Information Act Appeal” for the quickest possible handling. If mailed, the requester's letter of appeal must be postmarked within 90 calendar days of the date of HUD's letter of determination. If the letter of appeal is transmitted electronically or by a means other than the United States Postal Service, it must be received in the appropriate office by the close of business on the 30th calendar day after the date of HUD's letter of determination.
            
            (b) Time frames—(1) Expedited processing. HUD will decide an appeal of a denial of a request to expedite processing of a FOIA request within 10 working days of receipt of the appeal.
            (2) All other appeals. HUD will make a determination on appeals within 20 working days of receipt, unless unusual circumstances require HUD to extend the time for an additional 10 working days.
            (3) Exceptions. An appeal ordinarily will not be acted upon if the subject of the appeal is simultaneously being litigated in an applicable Federal court.
            (c) Content of appeals. An appeal letter should include the following:
            (1) A copy of the original request;
            (2) A copy of the adverse determination;
            (3) A statement of facts and legal arguments supporting the appeal; and
            (4) Any additional information the appellant wishes to include.
            (d) When appeal is required. Before seeking a court review of HUD's adverse determination, a requester generally must have exhausted their administrative remedies.
            [80 FR 49145, Aug. 17, 2015 as amended at 82 FR 21695, May 10, 2017]
          
          
            § 15.110
            HUD response to appeals.
            (a) In general. (1) The appellate official will conduct a de novo review of the entire record and applicable law when making a decision.
            (2) The decision on the appeal will be made in writing and will be considered the final action of HUD.
            (i) A decision affirming an adverse determination, in whole or in part, will contain a statement of the reason(s) for the affirmation, including any FOIA exemption(s) applied, and will inform the appellant of the FOIA provisions for potential court review of the decision.
            (ii) If the adverse determination is modified on appeal, in whole or in part, a written decision will be sent to the appellant and the FOIA request will be reprocessed in accordance with the appeal decision.
            (iii) Adverse decisions will include the name and contact information of dispute resolution services that offer mediation services to resolve disputes between FOIA requesters and Federal agencies as a nonexclusive alternative to litigation.
            (b) Appeal of a denial of record request. Upon appeal of a denial of a record request, the appellate official will issue a decision that either:
            (1) Overturns the adverse determination, in whole or in part, and remands the request to the appropriate office. The requester will be notified of the rationale for the determination in writing. The original office will then reprocess the request in accordance with the appeal determination and respond directly to the requester; or
            (2) Affirms the adverse determination and declines to provide the requested records to the appellant.
            (c) Appeal of a fee determination. Upon appeal of a fee determination, the appellate official will issue a decision that either:
            (1) Waives the fee or charges the fee that the appellant requested;
            (2) Modifies the original fee charged and explains why the modified fee is appropriate; or
            (3) Advises the appellant that the original fee charged was appropriate and gives the reason behind this determination.
            (d) Appeal of a denial of expedited processing. Upon appeal of a denial of an expedited processing request, the appellate official will issue a decision that either:
            (1) Overturns the adverse determination and grants the expedited processing request; or
            (2) Affirms the decision to deny expedited processing.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Production of Material or Provision of Testimony in Response to Demands in Legal Proceedings Among Private Litigants
          
            Source:
            72 FR 8582, Feb. 26, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 15.201
            Purpose and scope.

            (a) This subpart contains the regulations of the Department concerning the procedures to be followed and standards to be applied when demand is issued in a legal proceeding among private litigants for the production or disclosure of any material, whether provided through production of material or provision of testimony.
            (b) This subpart does not apply to demands, which are covered by part 2004 of this title, for production of material in the files of the Office of Inspector General or provision of testimony by employees within the Office of Inspector General.
            (c) This subpart also provides guidance to persons engaged in private litigation, to which the United States is not a party, on the procedures to be followed when making a demand for documents or testimony on the Department of Housing and Urban Development. This subpart does not, and may not be relied upon to, create any affirmative right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable against HUD.
            [72 FR 8582, Feb. 26, 2007, as amended at 73 FR 72205, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.202
            Production of material or provision of testimony prohibited unless approved.
            Neither the Department nor any employee of the Department shall comply with any demand for production of material or provision of testimony in a legal proceeding among private litigants, unless the prior approval of the Authorized Approving Official has been obtained in accordance with this subpart. This rule does not apply to any legal proceeding in which an employee may be called to participate, either through the production of documents or the provision of testimony, not on official time, as to facts or opinions that are in no way related to material described in § 15.201.
            [73 FR 72205, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.203
            Making a demand for production of material or provision of testimony.
            (a) Any demand made to the Department or an employee of the Department to produce any material or provide any testimony in a legal proceeding among private litigants must:
            (1) Be submitted in writing to the Department or employee of the Department, with a copy to the Appropriate Associate General Counsel or Appropriate Regional Counsel, no later than 30 days before the date the material or testimony is required;
            (2) State, with particularity, the material or testimony sought;
            (3) If testimony is requested, state:
            (i) The intended use of the testimony, and
            (ii) Whether expert or opinion testimony will be sought from the employee;
            (4) State whether the production of such material or provision of such testimony could reveal classified, confidential, or privileged material;
            (5) Summarize the need for and relevance of the material or testimony sought in the legal proceeding and include a copy of the complaint, if available;
            (6) State whether the material or testimony is available from any other source and, if so, state all such other sources;
            (7) State why no document[s], or declaration[s] or affidavit[s], could be used in lieu of oral testimony that is being sought;
            (8) Estimate the amount of time the employee will need in order to prepare for, travel to, and attend the legal proceeding, as appropriate;
            (9) State why the production of the material or provision of the testimony is appropriate under the rules of procedure governing the legal proceeding for which it is sought (e.g., not be unduly burdensome or otherwise inappropriate under the relevant rules governing discovery); and
            (10) Describe how producing such material or providing such testimony would affect the interests of the United States.
            (b) If the Department determines that the requestor has failed to provide the information required by paragraph (a) of this section, or that the information provided is insufficient to consider the demand in accordance with § 15.204, the Department may require that additional information be provided by the requestor before the demand is considered.

            (c) Whenever a demand is made upon the Department or an employee of the Department for the production of material or provision of testimony, the employee shall immediately notify the Appropriate Associate General Counsel or Appropriate Regional Counsel.
            [73 FR 72205, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.204
            Consideration of demands for production of material or provision of testimony.
            (a) The Authorized Approving Official shall determine what material is to be produced or what testimony is to be provided, based upon the following standards:
            (1) Expert or opinion material or testimony. In any legal proceeding among private litigants, no employee of the Department may produce material or provide testimony as described in § 15.201(a) that is of an expert or opinion nature, unless specifically authorized by the Authorized Approving Official for good cause shown.
            (2) Factual material or testimony. In any legal proceeding among private litigants, no employee of the Department may produce material or provide testimony as described in § 15.201(a) that is of a factual nature, unless specifically authorized by the Authorized Approving Official. The Authorized Approving Official shall determine whether any of the following factors are applicable. Such a demand may either be denied, or conditionally granted in accordance with § 15.204(c), if any such factors are applicable:
            (i) Producing such material or providing such testimony would violate a statute or regulation;
            (ii) Producing such material or providing such testimony would reveal classified, confidential, or privileged material;
            (iii) Such material or testimony would be irrelevant to the legal proceeding;
            (iv) Such material or testimony could be obtained from any other source;
            (v) One or more documents, or a declaration or affidavit, could reasonably be provided in lieu of oral testimony;
            (vi) The amount of employees' time necessary to comply with the demand would be unreasonable;
            (vii) Production of the material or provision of the testimony would not be required under the rules of procedure governing the legal proceeding for which it is sought (e.g., unduly burdensome or otherwise inappropriate under the relevant rules governing discovery);
            (viii) Producing such material or providing such testimony would impede a significant interest of the United States; or
            (ix) The Department has any other legally cognizable objection to the release of such information or testimony in response to a demand.
            (b) Once a determination has been made, the requester will be notified of the determination. If the demand is denied, the requestor shall be notified of the reasons for the denial. If the demand is conditionally approved, the requestor shall be notified of the conditions that have been imposed upon the production of the material or provision of the testimony demanded, and the reasons for the conditional approval of the demand.
            (c) The Authorized Approving Official may impose conditions or restrictions on the production of any material or provision of any testimony. Such conditions or restrictions may include the following:
            (1) A requirement that the parties to the legal proceeding obtain a protective order or execute a confidentiality agreement to limit access to, and limit any further disclosure of, material or testimony;
            (2) A requirement that the requester accept examination of documentary material on HUD premises in lieu of production of copies;
            (3) A limitation on the subject areas of testimony permitted;
            (4) A requirement that testimony of a HUD employee be provided by deposition at a location prescribed by HUD or by written declaration;
            (5) A requirement that the parties to the legal proceeding agree that a transcript of the permitted testimony be kept under seal or will only be used or only made available in the particular legal proceeding for which testimony was demanded;

            (6) A requirement that the requester purchase an extra copy of the transcript of the employee's testimony from the court reporter and provide the Department with a copy at the requester's expense; or
            
            (7) Any other condition or restriction deemed to be in the best interests of the United States, including reimbursement of costs to the Department.
            (d) The determination made with respect to the production of material or provision of testimony pursuant to this subpart is within the sole discretion of the Authorized Approving Official and shall constitute final agency action from which no administrative appeal is available.
            [73 FR 72205, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.205
            Method of production of material or provision of testimony.
            (a) Where the Authorized Approving Official has authorized the production of material or provision of testimony, the Department shall produce such material or provide such testimony in accordance with this section and any conditions imposed upon production of material or provision of testimony pursuant to § 15.204(c).
            (b) In any legal proceeding where the Authorized Approving Official has authorized the production of documents, the Department shall respond by producing authenticated copies of the documents, to which the seal of the Department has been affixed, in accordance with its authentication procedures. The authentication shall be evidence that the documents are true copies of documents in the Department's files and shall be sufficient for the purposes of Rules 803(8) and 902 of the Federal Rules of Evidence and Rule 44(a)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
            (c) If response to a demand is required before the determination from the Authorized Approving Official is received, the U.S. Attorney, Department of Justice Attorney, or such other attorney as may be designated for the purpose will appear or make such filings as are necessary to furnish the court or other authority with a copy of the regulations contained in this subpart and will inform the court or other authority that the demand has been, or is being, as the case may be, referred for prompt consideration. The court or other authority shall be requested respectfully to stay the demand pending receipt of the requested determination from the Authorized Approving Official.
            [73 FR 72206, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.206
            Procedure in the event of an adverse ruling regarding production of material or provision of testimony.

            If the court or other authority declines to stay the demand made in accordance with § 15.205(c) pending receipt of the determination from the Authorized Approving Official, or if the court or other authority rules that the demand must be complied with irrespective of the determination by the Authorized Approving Official not to produce the material or provide the testimony demanded or to produce subject to conditions or restrictions, the employee upon whom the demand has been made shall, if so directed by an attorney representing the Department, respectfully decline to comply with the demand. (United States ex rel. Touhy v. Ragen, 340 U.S. 462 (1951)).
            [73 FR 72206, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Production of Material or Provision of Testimony in Response to Demands in Legal Proceedings in Which the United States Is a Party
          
            Source:
            72 FR 8583, Feb. 26, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 15.301
            Purpose and scope.
            (a) This subpart contains the regulations of the Department concerning the procedures to be followed and standards to be applied when demand is issued in a legal proceeding in which the United States is a party for the production or disclosure of any material, whether provided through production of material or provision of testimony.
            (b) This subpart does not apply to demands, which are covered by part 2004 of this title, for production of material in the files of the Office of Inspector General or provision of testimony by employees within the Office of Inspector General.
          
          
            
            § 15.302
            Production of material or provision of testimony prohibited unless approved.
            Neither the Department nor any employee of the Department shall comply with any demand for production of material or provision of testimony in a legal proceeding in which the United States is a party, unless the prior approval of the attorney representing the United States has been obtained in accordance with this subpart. This rule does not apply to any legal proceeding in which an employee may be called to participate, either through the production of documents or the provision of testimony, not on official time, as to facts or opinions that are in no way related to material described in § 15.301.
            [73 FR 72206, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.303
            Procedure for review of demands for production of material or provision of testimony in any legal proceeding in which the United States is a party.
            Whenever a demand is made upon the Department or an employee of the Department for the production of material or provision of testimony, the employee shall immediately notify the Appropriate Associate General Counsel or Appropriate Regional Counsel.
            [73 FR 72207, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.304
            Consideration of demands for production of material or provision of testimony.
            Consideration of demands shall be within the province of the attorney representing the United States, who may raise any valid objection to the production of material or provision of testimony in response to the demand.
            [73 FR 72207, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            § 15.305
            Method of production of material or provision of testimony.
            If the production of material or provision of testimony has been authorized, the Department may respond by producing authenticated copies of the documents, to which the seal of the Department has been affixed in accordance with its authentication procedures. The authentication shall be evidence that the documents are true copies of documents in the Department's files and shall be sufficient for the purposes of Rules 803(8) and 902 of the Federal Rules of Evidence and Rule 44(a)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
            [73 FR 72207, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
          
            Pt. 15, App. A 
            Appendix A to Part 15—Location Information for HUD FOIA Reading Rooms and Contact Information for Regional Counsel

            The Department maintains a reading room in Headquarters and in each of the Secretary's Representative's Offices. In addition, each of the Secretary's Representative's Offices has a Regional Counsel. The location and contact information for HUD's FOIA Reading Rooms and for the Regional Counsel can be found in HUD's Local Office Directory, on HUD's Internet site at http://www.hud.gov.
            
            [73 FR 72207, Nov. 26, 2008]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 16
        PART 16—IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PRIVACY ACT OF 1974
        
          Sec.
          16.1
          Purpose and statement of policy.
          16.2
          Definitions.
          16.3
          Procedures for inquiries.
          16.4
          Requests for access; requirements.
          16.5
          Disclosure of requested information to individuals.
          16.6
          Initial denial of access.
          16.7
          Administrative review of initial denial of access.
          16.8
          Request for correction or amendment to record.
          16.9
          Agency procedures upon request for correction or amendment of record.
          16.10
          Appeal of initial adverse agency determination on correction or amendment.
          16.11
          Disclosure of record to person other than the individual to whom it pertains.
          16.12
          Fees.
          16.13
          Penalties.
          16.14
          General exemptions.
          16.15
          Specific exemptions.
        
        
          Authority:
          5 U.S.C. 552(a); 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 16.1
          Purpose and statement of policy.

          (a) The purpose of this part is to establish policies and procedures for implementing the Privacy Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-579), 5 U.S.C. 552(a). The main objectives are to facilitate full exercise of rights conferred on individuals under the Act and to insure the protection of privacy as to individuals about whom the Department maintains records in systems of records under the Act. The Department accepts the responsibility to act promptly and in accordance with the Act upon receipt of any inquiry, request or appeal from a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence into the United States, regardless of the age of the individual.
          (b) Further, the Department accepts the obligations to maintain only such information on individuals as is relevant and necessary to the performance of its lawful functions, to maintain that information with such accuracy, relevancy, timeliness and completeness as is reasonably necessary to assure fairness in determinations made by the Department about the individual, to obtain information from the individual to the extent practicable, and to take every reasonable step to protect that information from unwarranted disclosure. The Department will maintain no record describing how an individual exercises rights guaranteed by the First Amendment unless expressly authorized by statute or by the individual about whom the record is maintained or unless pertinent to and within the scope of an authorized law enforcement activity.
          (c) This part applies to all organizational components in the Department in order to assure the maximum amount of uniformity and consistency within the Department in its implementation of the Act.
          (d) The Assistant Secretary for Administration shall be responsible for carrying out the requirements of this part, for issuing such orders and directives internal to the Department as are necessary for full compliance with the Act, and for effecting publication of all required notices concerning systems of records.

          (e) Requests involving information pertaining to an individual which is in a record or file but not within the scope of a System of Records Notice published in the Federal Register are outside the scope of this part. Requests for departmental records will be considered to determine whether processing under this part, part 15, or both is most appropriate, notwithstanding the requester's characterization of the request, as follows:
          (1) A Privacy Act request from an individual for records about that individual and not contained in a Privacy Act Records System shall be considered a Freedom of Information Act request and processed under HUD Freedom of Information Act regulations (24 CFR part 15) to the extent that the requester has provided the Department a reasonable description of the documents requested. When a request for records is so considered as a Freedom of Information Act request, the Privacy Act Officer shall promptly refer it to the head of the appropriate organizational unit in accordance with HUD FOIA Regulations and shall advise the requester that time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is received by the appropriate official.
          (2) A Freedom of Information Act request from an individual for records about that individual contained in a Privacy Act Records System shall be processed as follows:
          (i) If the request in whole or in part contains a reasonable description of any HUD document, processing shall be carried out pursuant to HUD FOIA Regulations.

          (ii) If the request in whole or in part does not contain a reasonable description of any HUD document, but does provide sufficient information under HUD Privacy Act Regulations to undertake a Privacy Act Records System search, the Department will provide full access under HUD Privacy Act Regulations. In this situation, the Department will comply with the deadlines for response set forth in the Privacy Act and HUD implementing regulations. In that event, an explanation will be provided to the requester advising that the request did not contain a reasonable description of a particular document as required under the FOIA and offering to process the request under FOIA procedures upon receipt of additional information sufficient to constitute a reasonable description.
          
          (3) A Freedom of Information Act request from an individual for records about another individual contained in a Privacy Act Records System shall be processed as follows: When an exemption under subsection (b) of FOIA is available, the Privacy Act governs the public interest determination under HUD FOIA Regulations (24 CFR 15.21) and compels the withholding of such documents unless: (i) The subject of those records consents to their release or (ii) disclosure comes within one of the subsections of 5 U.S.C. § 552a(b).
          (4) A Privacy Act request from an individual for records about another individual shall be processed as follows: Except as expressly permitted in this part, requests by persons who are not the subject of a record contained in a Privacy Act Records System shall be outside the scope of this part. If the request satisfies the Freedom of Information Act requirement that requested records be reasonably described, the Privacy Act Officer shall consider the requests as a Freedom of Information Act request and shall proceed as in § 16.1(e)(1) of this section.
          [40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 13917, Apr. 1, 1976]
        
        
          § 16.2
          Definitions.
          (a) The definitions of 5 U.S.C. 552a apply in this part.
          (b) As used in this part:
          (1) Act means the Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. 93-579.
          (2) Privacy Act Officer means those officials, or their designees, who are authorized to receive and act upon inquiries, requests for access, and requests for correction or amendment.
          (3) Privacy Appeals Officer means the General Counsel.
          (4) Inquiry means a request by an individual that the Department determine whether it has any record in a system of records which pertains to that individual.
          (5) Request for access means a request by an individual or guardian to inspect and/or copy and/or obtain a copy of a record which is in a particular system of records and which pertains to that individual.
          (6) Request for correction or amendment means the request by an individual or guardian that the Department change (either by correction, addition or deletion) a particular record in a system of records which pertains to that individual.
          (7) Appeal means the request by an individual that an initial denial of a request for access or correction or amendment by that individual be reviewed and reversed.
          [40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 13917, Apr. 1, 1976; 61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996; 83 FR 26361, June 7, 2018]
        
        
          § 16.3
          Procedures for inquiries.
          (a) Any individual, regardless of age, may submit an inquiry to the Department. The inquiry should be made either in person at the office of, or by mail addressed to, the appropriate Privacy Act Officer. Although oral requests may be honored, a requester may be asked to submit his request in writing. The envelope containing the request and the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is a “PRIVACY ACT INQUIRY”. If an individual believes the Department maintains a record pertaining to that individual but does not know which system of records might contain such a record and/or which organizational component of the Department maintains the system of records, assistance in person or by mail will be provided at the following address: Privacy Act Officer, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th St. SW, Room 10139, Washington, DC 20410.
          (b)(1) An inquiry should contain the following information:
          (i) Name, address and telephone number of the individual making the request;
          (ii) Name, address and telephone number of the individual to whom the record pertains, if the requesting individual is either the parent of a minor or the legal guardian of the individual to whom the record pertains;
          (iii) A certified or authenticated copy of documents establishing parentage or guardianship;
          (iv) Whether the individual to whom the record pertains is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in to the United States;
          (v) Name of the system of records, as published in the Federal Register;

          (vi) Location of the system of records, as published in the Federal Register;
          
          (vii) Such additional information as the individual knows will or believes might assist the Department in responding to the inquiry (for example, the individual's past or present relationship with the Department, e.g. mortgagor, contractor, employee, including relevant dates) and in verifying the individual's identity (for example, date of birth, place of birth, names of parents, place of work, dates of employment, position title, etc.);
          (viii) Date of inquiry; and,
          (ix) Individual's signature.
          The Department reserves the right to require compliance with the identification procedures appearing at § 16.4(d) where circumstances warrant.
          (2) In compliance with 5 U.S.C. 552a (e)(3) each individual supplying the information in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section hereby is informed that:
          (i) The authority authorizing solicitation of the information is 5 U.S.C. 552a, disclosure is voluntary, and no penalty is attached for failure to respond;
          (ii) The principal purpose for which the information is intended to be used is processing the inquiry under the Act;

          (iii) The routine uses which may be made of the information are the routine uses appearing as a prefatory statement to the Department's notice of systems of records published in the Federal Register; and,
          (iv) The effects of not providing all or any part of the information may delay, or in some cases make impossible, the Department's processing of the action on the request under the Act.
          (3) If, having been made aware of the contents of paragraph (b)(2) of this section, an individual submits the information listed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, he or she will be deemed to have made the submission on a purely voluntary and consensual basis.
          (c) When an inquiry is misdirected by the requester, or not addressed as specified in paragraph (a) of this section, the Department official receiving same shall make reasonable effort to identify, and promptly refer it to, the appropriate Privacy Act Officer and the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is received by the Privacy Act Officer.
          (d) When an inquiry fails to provide necessary information as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, the requester shall be advised that the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when the additional necessary information is received by the Privacy Act Officer.
          (e) Each inquiry received shall be acted upon promptly by the responsible Privacy Act Officer. Every effort will be made to respond within ten days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the date of receipt. If a response cannot be made within ten days, the Privacy Act Officer shall send an acknowledgement during that period providing information on the status of the inquiry. The Privacy Act Officer may indicate that additional information would facilitate processing or that further information is necessary to process the inquiry.
          [40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 83 FR 26361, June 7, 2018]
        
        
          § 16.4
          Requests for access; requirements.
          (a) Any individual, regardless of age, may submit to the Department a request for access to records of the Department. The request should be made either in person at the Office of, or by mail addressed to, the responsible Privacy Act Officer. Although oral requests may be honored, a requester may be asked to submit his request in writing. The envelope containing the request and the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is a PRIVACY ACT REQUEST FOR ACCESS TO RECORDS.
          (b) When a request for access to records is misdirected by the requester, or not addressed as specified in paragraph (a) of this section, the Department official receiving same shall promptly refer it to the appropriate Privacy Act Officer and the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is received by that official.

          (c) When a request for access to records fails to provide necessary information as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section the requester shall be advised that the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when the additional necessary information is received by the appropriate official.
          (d) The requirements for identification of individuals seeking access to records are as follows:
          (1) In person. Each individual making a request in person shall be required to present satisfactory proof of identity. The means of proof, in the order of preference and priority, are:
          (i) A document bearing the individual's photograph (for example, passport or military or civilian identification card);
          (ii) A document bearing the individual's signature (for example, driver's license, social security card, unemployment insurance book, employer's identification card, national credit card and professional, craft or union membership card); and
          (iii) A document bearing neither the photograph nor the signature of the individual (for example, a Medicaid card). In the event the individual can provide no suitable documentation of identity, the Department will require a signed statement asserting the individual's identity and stipulating that the individual understands the penalty provision of 5 U.S.C. 552a(i)(3). That penalty provision also appears at § 16.13(a). In order to avoid any unwarranted disclosure of an individual's records, the Department reserves the right to determine to its satisfaction whether proof of identity offered by any individual is adequate.
          (2) Not in person. If the individual making a request does not appear in person before a Privacy Act Officer, the information set forth in § 16.3(b)(1) and a certificate of a notary public or equivalent officer empowered to administer oaths must accompany the request. The certificate within or attached to the letter must be substantially in accord with the following text:
          
          
            City of __________
            County of __________:
            

            ss __________ (name of individual), who affixed (his) (her) signature below in my presence, came before me, a ________ (title), in and for the aforesaid County and State, this ______ day of ______, 19—, and established (his) (her) identity to my satisfaction.
            
            My commission expires __________.
            
            __________________
                  (signature)
          
          
          If the request follows inquiry under § 16.3, this should be indicated in the request for access in order to facilitate processing.
          (3) Parents of minors and legal guardians. An individual acting as the parent of a minor or the legal guardian of the individual to whom a record pertains shall establish his or her personal identity in the same manner prescribed in either paragraph (d) (1) or (2) of this section. In addition, such other individual shall establish his or her representative capacity of parent or legal guardian. In the case of the parent of a minor, the proof of identity shall be a certified or authenticated copy of the minor's birth certificate. In the case of a legal guardian of an individual who has been declared incompetent due to physical or mental incapacity or age by a court of competent jurisdiction, the proof of identity shall be a certified or authenticated copy of the court's order. A parent or legal guardian may act only for a living individual, not for a decedent. A parent or legal guardian may be accompanied during personal access to a record by another individual, provided the provisions of § 16.5(e) are satisfied.
          (e) When the provisions of this part are alleged to have the effect of impeding an individual in exercising his or her right to access, the Department will consider alternative suggestions from an individual making a request, regarding proof of identity and access to records.
          (f) An individual shall not be required to state a reason or otherwise justify his or her request for access to a record.
          [40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 83 FR 26361, June 7, 2018]
        
        
          § 16.5
          Disclosure of requested information to individuals.

          (a) Each request received shall be acted upon promptly by the responsible Privacy Act Officer. Every effort will be made to respond within ten days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the date of receipt. If a response cannot be made within ten days due to unusual circumstances, the Privacy Act Officer shall send an acknowledgement during that period providing information on the status of the request and asking for such further information as may be necessary to process the request. Unusual circumstances shall include circumstances where a search for and collection of requested records from inactive storage, field facilities or other establishments are required, cases where a voluminous amount of data is involved, instances where information on other individuals must be separated or expunged from the particular record, and cases where consultations with other agencies having a substantial interest in the determination of the request are necessary.
          (b) Grant of access—(1) Notification. An individual shall be granted access to a record pertaining to him or her, except where the provisions of § 16.6 apply. The Privacy Act Officer shall notify the individual of such determination and provide the following information:
          (i) The methods of access, as set forth in paragraph (b)(2) of this section;
          (ii) The place at which the record may be inspected;
          (iii) The earliest date on which the record may be inspected and the period of time that the records will remain available for inspection and/or the estimated date by which a copy of the record could be mailed and the estimate of fees pursuant to § 16.12;
          (iv) The fact that the individual, if he or she wishes, may be accompanied by another individual during personal access, subject to procedures set forth in paragraph (e) of this section; and
          (v) Any additional requirements needed to grant access to a specific record.
          (2) Methods of access. The following methods of access to records by an individual may be available depending on the circumstances of a given situation:
          (i) Inspection in person may be had in the office specified by the Privacy Act Officer granting access during hours indicated by the Privacy Act Officer;
          (ii) Transfer of records to a Federal facility more convenient to the individual may be arranged, but only if the Privacy Act Officer determines that a suitable facility is available, that the individual's access can be properly supervised at the facility, and that transmittal of the records to that facility will not unduly interfere with operations of the Department or involve unreasonable costs, in terms of both money and manpower; and
          (iii) Copies may be mailed at the request of the individual, subject to payment of the fees prescribed in § 16.12. The Department, at its own initiative, may elect to provide a copy by mail, in which case no fee will be charged the individual.
          (c) The Department shall supply such other information and assistance at the time of access as to make the record intelligible to the individual.
          (d) The Department reserves the right to limit access to copies and abstracts of original records, rather than the original records. This election would be appropriate, for example, when the record is in an automated data media such as tape or disc, when the record contains information on other individuals, and when deletion of information is permissible under exemptions (for example, 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2)). In no event shall original records of the Department be made available to the individual except under the immediate supervision of the Privacy Act Officer or his designee. It is a crime to conceal, mutilate, obliterate, or destroy any record filed in a public office, or to attempt to do any of the foregoing, Title 18, United States Code, 2701(a).

          (e) Any individual who requests access to a record pertaining to that individual may be accompanied by another individual of his or her choice. Accompanied includes discussion of the record in the presence of the other individual. The individual to whom the record pertains shall authorize the presence of the other individual by a signed and dated document which includes the name of the other individual and specifically describes the record to which access is sought. The other individual shall sign the authorization in the presence of the Privacy Act Officer. An individual shall not be required to state a reason or otherwise justify his or her decision to be accompanied by another individual during personal access to a record.
        
        
          § 16.6
          Initial denial of access.
          (a) Grounds. Access by an individual to a record which pertains to that individual will be denied only upon a determination by the Privacy Act Officer that:
          (1) The record is subject to an exemption under § 16.14, § 16.15 or to an exemption determined by another agency noticing the system of records;
          (2) The record is information compiled in reasonable anticipation of a civil action or proceeding; or
          (3) The individual unreasonably has failed to comply with the procedural requirements of this part.
          (b) Notification. The Privacy Act Officer shall give notice of denial of access to records to the individual in writing and shall include the following information:
          (1) The Privacy Act Officer's name and title or position;
          (2) The date of the denial;
          (3) The reasons for the denial, including citation to the appropriate section of the Act and/or this part;
          (4) The individual's opportunities, if any, for further administrative consideration, including the identity and address of the appropriate Privacy Appeals Officer. If no further administrative consideration within the Department is available, the notice shall state that the denial is administratively final; and,
          (5) If stated to be administratively final; and, within the Department, the individual's right to judicial review under 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1), as amended by 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(5).
          [40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 20297, Apr. 19, 1977]
        
        
          § 16.7
          Administrative review of initial denial of access.
          (a) Review shall be available only from a written denial of a request for access issued under § 16.6(a) (2) or (3) and only if a written request for review is filed within thirty calendar days after the issuance of the written denial.
          (b) A request for review shall be addressed to the Privacy Appeals Officer identified in the initial denial, which official is authorized to make final determinations. The envelope containing the request for review and the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is a PRIVACY ACT REQUEST FOR REVIEW.
          (c) When a request for review is misdirected by the requester, or not addressed as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the Department official receiving same shall promptly refer it to the Privacy Appeals Officer and the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is received by the appropriate official.
          (d) When a request for review fails to provide necessary information as set forth in paragraph (e) of this section, the requester shall be given reasonable opportunity to amend the request and shall be advised that the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when the additional necessary information is received by the appropriate official.
          (e) The filing of a request for review may be accomplished by mailing to the Privacy Appeals Officer a copy of the request for access, if in writing; a copy of the written denial issued under § 16.6; and a statement of the reasons why the initial denial is believed to be in error. The appeal shall be signed by the individual.
          (f) No hearing will be allowed in connection with administrative review of an initial denial of access.
          (g) The Privacy Appeals Officer shall act upon the appeal and issue a final determination in writing not later than thirty days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) from the date on which the appeal is received; provided, that the Privacy Appeals officer may extend the thirty days upon deciding that a fair and equitable review cannot be made within that period, but only if the individual is advised in writing of the reason for the extension and the estimated date by which a final determination will issue, which estimated date should not be later than the sixtieth day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) after receipt of the appeal unless there exist unusual circumstances, as described in § 16.5(a).

          (h) The decision after review will be in writing, will constitute final action of the Department on a request for access, and, if the denial of the request is in whole or part upheld, the Department shall notify the person making the request of his right to judicial review under 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1), as amended by 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(5).
        
        
          § 16.8
          Request for correction or amendment to record.
          (a) Any individual, regardless of age, may submit to the Department a request for correction or amendment of a record pertaining to that individual. The request should be made either in person at the office of, or by mail addressed to, the Privacy Act Officer who processed the individual's request for access to the record. Although an oral request may be honored, a requester may be asked to submit his or her request in writing. The envelope containing the request and the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is a PRIVACY ACT REQUEST FOR CORRECTION OR AMENDMENT.
          (b) When a request for correction or amendment is misdirected by the requester, or not addressed as specified in paragraph (a) of this section, the Department official receiving same shall make reasonable effort to identify, and promptly refer it to, the appropriate Privacy Act Officer and the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is received by the appropriate official.
          (c) When a request for correction or amendment fails to provide necessary information as set forth in paragraph (e) of this section, the requester shall be given reasonable opportunity to answer the request and shall be advised that the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when the additional necessary information is received by the appropriate official.
          (d) Since the request, in all cases, will follow a request for access under § 16.4, the individual's identity will be established by his or her signature on the request.
          (e) A request for correction or amendment should include the following:
          (1) A specific identification of the record sought to be corrected or amended (for example, description, title, date, paragraph, sentence, line and words);
          (2) The specific wording to be deleted, if any;
          (3) The specific wording to be inserted or added, if any, and the exact place at which it is to be inserted or added; and
          (4) A statement of the basis for the requested correction or amendment, with all available supporting documents and materials which substantiate the statement.
          (f) The provisions of § 16.3(b) (2) and (3) apply to the information obtained under paragraph (e) of this section.
        
        
          § 16.9
          Agency procedures upon request for correction or amendment of record.
          (a)(1) Not later than ten days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) after receipt of a request to correct or amend a record, the Privacy Act Officer shall send an acknowledgment providing an estimate of time within which action will be taken on the request and asking for such further information as may be necessary to process the request. The estimate of time may take into account unusual circumstances as described in § 16.5(a). No acknowledgment will be sent if the request can be reviewed, processed, and the individual notified of the results of review (either compliance or denial) within the ten days. Requests filed in person will be acknowledged at the time submitted.
          (2) Promptly after acknowledging receipt of a request, or after receiving such further information as might have been requested, or after arriving at a decision within the time prescribed in § 16.9(a)(1), the Privacy Act Officer shall either:
          (i) Make the requested correction or amendment and advise the individual in writing of such action, providing either a copy of the corrected or amended record or a statement as to the means whereby the correction or amendment was effected in cases where a copy cannot be provided; or,
          (ii) Inform the individual in writing that his or her request is denied and provide the following information:

          (A) The Privacy Act Officer's name and title and position;
          
          (B) The date of the denial;
          (C) The reasons for the denial, including citation to the appropriate sections of the Act and this part; and,

          (D) The procedures for appeal of the denial as set forth in § 16.10, including the name and address of the Privacy Appeals Officer. The term promptly in this § 16.9 means within thirty days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays). If the Privacy Act Officer cannot make the determination within thirty days, the individual will be advised in writing of the reason therefor and of the estimated date by which the determination will be made.
          (b) Whenever an individual's record is corrected or amended pursuant to a request by that individual, the Privacy Act Officer shall see to the notification of all persons and agencies to which the corrected or amended portion of the record had been disclosed prior to its correction or amendment, if an accounting of such disclosure was made as required by the Act. The notification shall require a recipient agency maintaining the record to acknowledge receipt of the notification, to correct or amend the record and to appraise any agency or person to which it had disclosed the record of the substance of the correction or amendment.
          (c) The following criteria will be considered by the Privacy Act Officer in reviewing a request for correction or amendment:
          (1) The sufficiency of the evidence submitted by the individual;
          (2) The factual accuracy of the information;
          (3) The relevance and necessity of the information in terms of the purpose for which it was collected;
          (4) The timeliness and currency of the information in terms of the purpose for which it was collected:
          (5) The completeness of the information in terms of the purpose for which it was collected:
          (6) The possibility that denial of the request could unfairly result in determinations adverse to the individual;
          (7) The character of the record sought to be corrected or amended; and
          (8) The propriety and feasibility of complying with the specific means of correction or amendment requested by the individual.
          (d) The Department will not undertake to gather evidence for the individual, but does reserve the right to verify the evidence which the individual submits.
          (e) Correction or amendment of a record requested by an individual will be denied only upon a determination by the Privacy Act Officer that:
          (1) There has been a failure to establish, by the evidence presented, the propriety of the correction or amendment in light of the criteria set forth in paragraph (c) of this section;
          (2) The record sought to be corrected or amended was compiled in a terminated judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative or quasi-legislative proceeding to which the individual was a party or participant;
          (3) The information in the record sought to be corrected or amended, or the record sought to be corrected or amended, is the subject of a pending judicial, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative proceeding to which the individual is a party or participant;
          (4) The correction or amendment would violate a duly enacted statute or promulgated regulation; or,
          (5) The individual unreasonably has failed to comply with the procedural requirements of this part.
          (f) If a request is partially granted and partially denied, the Privacy Act Officer shall follow the appropriate procedures of this section as to the records within the grant and the records within the denial.
        
        
          § 16.10
          Appeal of initial adverse agency determination on correction or amendment.
          (a) Appeal shall be available only from a written denial of a request for correction or amendment of a record issued under § 16.9, and only if a written appeal is filed within thirty calendar days after the issuance of the written denial.
          (b) Each appeal shall be addressed to the Privacy Appeals Officer identified in the written denial. The envelope containing the appeal and the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is PRIVACY ACT APPEAL.

          (c) When an appeal is misdirected by the requester, or not addressed as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the Department official receiving same shall promptly refer it to the appropriate Privacy Appeals Officer and the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is received by the appropriate official.
          (d) When an appeal fails to provide the necessary information as set forth in paragraph (e) of this section, the requester shall be advised that the time for receipt for processing purposes will be the time when the additional necessary information is received by the appropriate official.
          (e) The individual's appeal papers shall include the following: A copy of the original request for correction or amendment; a copy of the initial denial; and a statement of the reasons why the initial denial is believed to be in error. The appeal shall be signed by the individual. The record which the individual requests be corrected or amended will be supplied by the Privacy Act Officer who issued the initial denial. While the foregoing normally will comprise the entire record on appeal, the Privacy Appeals Officer may seek additional information necessary to assure that the final determination is fair and equitable and, in such instances, the additional information will be disclosed to the individual to the greatest extent possible and an opportunity provided for comment thereon.
          (f) No hearing on appeal will be allowed.
          (g) The Privacy Appeals Officer shall act upon the appeal and issue a final Department determination in writing not later than thirty days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) from the date on which the appeal is received; provided, that the Privacy Appeals Officer may extend the thirty days upon deciding that a fair and equitable review cannot be made within that period, but only if the individual is advised in writing of the reason for the extension and the estimated date by which a final determination will issue (which estimated date should not be later than the sixtieth day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) after receipt of the appeal unless unusual circumstances, as described in § 16.5(a), are met).
          (h) If the appeal is determined in favor of the individual, the final determination shall include the specific corrections or amendments to be made and a copy thereof shall be transmitted promptly both to the individual and to the Privacy Act Officer who issued the initial denial. Upon receipt of such final determination, the Privacy Act Officer promptly shall take the actions set forth in § 16.9(a)(2)(i) and § 16.9(b).
          (i) If the appeal is denied, the final determination shall be transmitted promptly to the individual and shall state the reasons for the denial. The notice of final determination also shall inform the individual of the following information:
          (1) The right of the individual to file a concise statement of reasons for disagreeing with the final determination. The statement ordinarily should not exceed one page and the Department reserves the right to reject a statement of excessive length. Such a statement shall be filed with the Privacy Appeals Officer. It should identify the date of the final determination and be signed by the individual. The Privacy Appeals Officer shall acknowledge receipt of such statement and inform the individual of the date on which it was received;
          (2) The fact that any such disagreement statement filed by the individual will be noted in the disputed record and that a copy of the statement will be provided to persons and agencies to which the record is disclosed subsequent to the date of receipt of such statement;
          (3) The fact that prior recipients of the disputed record will be provided a copy of any statement of the dispute to the extent that an accounting of disclosures, as required by the Act, was made;
          (4) The fact that the Department will append to any such disagreement statement filed by the individual, a copy of the final determination or summary thereof which also will be provided to persons and agencies to which the disagreement statement is disclosed; and,

          (5) The right of the individual to judicial review of the final determination under 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1)(A), as limited by 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(5).
          
          (j) In making the final determination, the Privacy Appeals Officer shall employ the criteria set forth in paragraph 16.9(c) and shall deny an appeal only on the grounds set forth in § 16.9(e).
          (k) If an appeal is partially granted and partially denied, the Privacy Appeals Officer shall follow the appropriate procedures of this section as to the records within the grant and the records within the denial.
          (l) Although a copy of the final determination or a summary thereof will be treated as part of the individual's record for purposes of disclosure in instances where the individual has filed a disagreement statement, it will not be subject to correction or amendment by the individual.
          (m) The provisions of § 16.3(b) (2) and (3) apply to the information obtained under paragraphs (e) and (i)(1) of this section.
        
        
          § 16.11
          Disclosure of record to person other than the individual to whom it pertains.
          (a) The Department may disclose a record pertaining to an individual to a person other than the individual only in the following instances:
          (1) Upon written request by the individual, including authorization under § 16.5(e);
          (2) With the prior written consent of the individual;
          (3) To a parent or legal guardian under 5 U.S.C. 552a(h); and,
          (4) When required by the Act and not covered explicitly by the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a(b); and,

          (5) When permitted under 5 U.S.C. 552a(b) (1) through (11), which read as follows:
          
          
            (1) To those officers and employees of the agency which maintains the record who have a need for the record in the performance of their duties;
            (2) Required under section 552 of this title;
            (3) For a routine use as defined in subsection (a)(7) of this section and described under subsection (e)(4)(D) of this section;
            (4) To the Bureau of the Census for purposes of planning or carrying out a census or survey or related activity pursuant to the provisions of title 13;
            (5) To a recipient who has provided the agency with advance adequate written assurance that the record will be used solely as a statistical research or reporting record, and the record is to be transferred in a form that is not individually identifiable;
            (6) To the National Archives of the United States as a record which has sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued preservation by the United States Government, or for evaluation by the Administrator of General Services or his designee to determine whether the record has such value;
            (7) To another agency or to an instrumentality of any governmental jurisdiction within or under the control of the United States for a civil or criminal law enforcement activity if the activity is authorized by law, and if the head of the agency or instrumentality has made a written request to the agency which maintains the record specifying the particular portion desired and the law enforcement activity for which the record is sought;
            (8) To a person pursuant to a showing of compelling circumstances affecting the health or safety of an individual if upon such disclosure notification is transmitted to the last known address of such individual;
            (9) To either House of Congress, or, to the extent of matter within its jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, any joint committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee;
            (10) To the Comptroller General, or any of his authorized representatives, in the course of the performance of the duties of the General Accounting Office; or
            (11) Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
          
          
          (b) The situations referred to in paragraph (a)(4) of this section include the following:
          (1) 5 U.S.C. 552a(c)(4) requires dissemination of a corrected or amended record or notation of a disagreement statement by the Department in certain circumstances:
          (2) 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(g) authorizes civil action by an individual and requires disclosure by the Department or the court;
          (3) Section 5(e)(2) of the Act authorizes release of any records or information by the Department to the Privacy Protection Study Commission upon request of the Chairman; and
          (4) Section 6 of the Act authorizes the Office of Management and Budget to provide the Department with continuing oversight and assistance in implementation of the Act.

          (c) The Department shall make an accounting of each disclosure of any record contained in a system of records in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552a(c) (1) and (2). Except for a disclosure made under 5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(7), the Privacy Act Officer shall make such accounting available to any individual, insofar as it pertains to that individual, on request submitted in accordance with § 16.4. The Privacy Act Officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify any individual when any record in a system of records is disclosed to any person under compulsory legal process, promptly upon being informed that such process has become a matter of public record.
        
        
          § 16.12
          Fees.
          (a) The only fees to be charged to or collected from an individual under the provisions of this part are for copying records at the request of the individual.
          (1) No fees shall be charged or collected for the following: Search for and retrieval of the records; review of the records; copying at the initiative of the Department without a request from the individual; transportation of records and personnel; and first class postage.
          (2) It is the policy of the Department to provide an individual with one copy of each record corrected or amended pursuant to his or her request without charge as evidence of the correction or amendment.
          (3) As requested by the United States Civil Service Commission in its published regulations implementing the Act, the Department will charge no fee to an individual who requests copies of a personnel record covered by that Commission's Government-wide published notice of systems of records. However, when such records are voluminous and the cost of copying would be in excess of five dollars ($5) the Department may, in its discretion, charge a fee.

          (b) The copying fees prescribed by paragraph (a) of this section are:
          
          
            $0.10 Each copy of each page, up to 81/2″ × 14″ made by photocopy or similar process.
            $0.20 Each page of computer printout without regard to the number of carbon copies concurrently printed.
          
          
          (c) Payment of fees under this section shall be made in cash, or preferably by check or money order payable to the “Treasurer of the United States.” Payment shall be delivered or sent to the office stated in the billing notice or, if none is stated, to the Privacy Act Officer processing the request. Payment may be required in the form of a certified check in appropriate circumstances. Postage stamps will not be accepted.
          (d) A copying fee totaling $1 or less shall be waived, but the copying fees for contemporaneous requests by the same individual shall be aggregated to determine the total fee. A copying fee shall not be charged or collected, or alternatively, it may be reduced when such action is determined by the Privacy Act Officer to be in the public interest.
          (e) Special and additional services provided at the request of the individual, such as certification or authentication, postal insurance and special mailing arrangement costs, will be charged to the individual in accordance with other published regulations of the Department pursuant to statute (for example, 31 U.S.C. 433a).
          (f) This section applies only to individuals making requests under this part. All other persons shall remain subject to fees and charges prescribed by other and appropriate authorities.
          [40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 29479, June 9, 1977]
        
        
          § 16.13
          Penalties.
          (a) The Act provides, in pertinent part:
          
          
            Any person who knowingly and willfully requests or obtains any record concerning an individual from an agency under false pretences shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $5,000. (5 U.S.C. 552a(i)(3))
          
          
          (b) A person who falsely or fraudulently attempts to obtain records under the Act may also be subject to prosecution under such other criminal statutes as 18 U.S.C. 494, 495 and 1001.
        
        
          § 16.14
          General exemptions.

          (a) Individuals may not have access to records maintained by the Department but which were provided by another agency which has determined by regulation that such information is subject to general exemption under 5 U.S.C. 552a(j). If such exempt records are within a request for access, the Department will advise the individual of their existence and of the name and address of the source agency. For any further information concerning the record and the exemption, the individual must contact that source agency.
          (b) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development has determined that the Office of the Assistant Inspector General for Investigation performs, as its principal function, activities pertaining to the enforcement of criminal laws. The records maintained by that office in a system identified as “HUD/DEPT-24, Investigation Files,” primarily consist of information compiled for the purpose of criminal investigations and are associated with identifiable individuals. Therefore, the Secretary has determined that this system of records shall be exempt, consistent with 5 U.S.C. 552a(j)(2), from all requirements of the Privacy Act except 5 U.S.C. 552a (b), (c) (1) and (2), (e)(4) (A) through (F), (e) (6), (7), (9), (10), and (11), and (i) unless elsewhere exempted.
          [40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 49 FR 20486, May 15, 1984]
        
        
          § 16.15
          Specific exemptions.

          Whenever the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development determines it to be necessary and proper, with respect to any system of records maintained by the Department, to exercise the right to promulgate rules to exempt such systems in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a(k), each specific exemption, including the parts of each system to be exempted, the provisions of the Act from which they are exempted, and the justification for each exemption shall be published in the Federal Register as part of the Department's Notice of Systems of Records.

          (a) Exempt under 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2) from the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 552a (c)(3), (d), (e)(1), (e)(4) (G), (H), (I), and (f). This exemption allows the Department to withhold records compiled for law enforcement purposes. The reasons for adopting this exemption are to prevent individuals, who are the subjects of investigation, from frustrating the investigatory process, to ensure the integrity of the investigatory process, to ensure the integrity of law enforcement activities, to prevent disclosure of investigative techniques, and to protect the confidentiality of sources of information. The names of systems correspond to those published in the Federal Register as part of the Department's Notice of Systems of Records.
          (1) HUD/DEPT-15. Equal Opportunity Housing Complaints.
          (2) HUD/DEPT-24. Investigation Files in the Office of the Inspector General.
          (3) HUD/DEPT-25. Legal Action Files.

          (b) Exempt under 5 U.S.C. 552(k)(5) from the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 552a (c)(3), (d), (e)(1), (e)(4), (G), (H), and (I), and (f). This exemption allows the Department to withhold records compiled solely for the purpose of determining suitability, eligibility, or qualifications for Federal contracts, or access to classified material. The reasons for adopting this exemption are to insure the proper functioning of the investigatory process, to insure effective determination of suitability, eligibility and qualification for employment and to protect the confidentiality of sources of information. The names of systems correspond to those published in the Federal Register as part of the Department's Notice of Systems of Records.
          (1) HUD/DEPT-24. Investigation Files in the Office of the Inspector General.
          (2) HUD/DEPT-25. Legal Action Files.
          (c) The system of records entitled “HUD/PIH-1. Tenant Eligibility Verification Files” consists in part of investigatory material compiled for law enforcement purposes. Relevant records will be used by appropriate Federal, state or local agencies charged with the responsibility for investigating or prosecuting violations of law. Therefore, to the extent that information in the system falls within the coverage of subsection (k)(2) of the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2), the system is exempt from the requirements of the following subsections of the Privacy Act, for the reasons stated below.

          (1) From subsection (c)(3) because release of an accounting of disclosures to an individual who may be the subject of an investigation could reveal the nature and scope of the investigation and could result in the altering or destruction of evidence, improper influencing of witnesses, and other evasive actions that could impede or compromise the investigation.
          (2) From subsection (d)(1) because release of the records to an individual who may become or has become the subject of an investigation could interfere with pending or prospective law enforcement proceedings, constitute an unwarranted invasion of the personal privacy of third parties, reveal the identity of confidential sources, or reveal sensitive investigative techniques and procedures.
          (3) From subsection (d)(2) because amendment or correction of the records could interfere with pending or prospective law enforcement proceedings, or could impose an impossible administrative and investigative burden by requiring the office that maintains the records to continuously retrograde its verifications of tenant eligibility attempting to resolve questions of accuracy, relevance, timeliness and completeness.
          (4) From subsection (e)(1) because it is often impossible to determine relevance or necessity of information in pre-investigative early stages. The value of such information is a question of judgment and timing; what appears relevant and necessary when collected may ultimately be evaluated and viewed as irrelevant and unnecessary to an investigation. In addition, the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, or investigators, may obtain information concerning the violation of laws other than those within the scope of its jurisdiction. In the interest of effective law enforcement, the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, or investigators, should retain this information because it may aid in establishing patterns of unlawful activity and provide leads for other law enforcement agencies. Further, in obtaining the evidence, information may be provided which relates to matters incidental to the main purpose of the inquiry or investigation but which may be pertinent to the investigative jurisdiction of another agency. Such information cannot readily be identified.
          (d) The system of records entitled “HUD/PIH-1. Tenant Eligibility Verification Files” consists in part of material that may be used for the purpose of determining suitability, eligibility, or qualifications for Federal civilian employment or Federal contracts, the release of which would reveal the identity of a source who furnished information to the Government under an express promise that the identity of the source would be held in confidence. Therefore, to the extent that information in this system falls within the coverage of subsection (k)(5) of the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5), the system is exempt from the requirements of the following subsection of the Privacy Act, for the reasons stated below.
          (1) From subsection (d)(1) because release would reveal the identity of a source who furnished information to the Government under an express promise of confidentiality. Revealing the identity of a confidential source could impede future cooperation by sources, and could result in harassment or harm to such sources.
          [42 FR 49810, Sept. 28, 1977, as amended at 59 FR 9407, Feb. 28, 1994]
        
      
      
        Pt. 17
        PART 17—ADMINISTRATIVE CLAIMS
        
          
            Subpart A—Claims Against Government Under Federal Tort Claims Act
            
              General Provisions
              Sec.
              17.1
              Scope; definitions.
            
            
              Procedures
              17.2
              Administrative claim; when presented; appropriate HUD office.
              17.3
              Administrative claim; who may file.
              17.4
              Administrative claim; evidence and information to be submitted.
              17.5
              Investigations.
              17.6
              Claims investigation.
              17.7
              Authority to adjust, determine, compromise, and settle claims.
              17.8
              Limitations on authority.
              17.9
              Referral to Department of Justice.
              17.11
              Final denial of claim.
              17.12
              Action on approved claim.
            
          
          
            Subpart B—Claims Under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees Claims Act of 1964
            17.40
            Scope and purpose.
            17.41
            Claimants.
            17.42
            Time limitations.
            
            17.43
            Allowable claims.
            17.44
            Restrictions on certain claims.
            17.45
            Unallowable claims.
            17.46
            Claims involving carriers or insurers.
            17.47
            Settlement of claims.
            17.48
            Computation of amount of award.
            17.49
            Attorney's fees.
            17.50
            Claims procedures.
          
          
            Subpart C—Procedures for the Collection of Claims by the Government
            
              General Provisions
              17.61
              Purpose and scope.
              17.63
              Definitions.
            
            
              Administrative Offset and Other Actions
              17.65
              Demand and notice of intent to collect.
              17.67
              Review of departmental records related to the debt.
              17.69
              Review within HUD of a determination that an amount is past due and legally enforceable.
              17.71
              Request for hearing.
              17.73
              Determination of the HUD Office of Appeals.
              17.75
              Postponements, withdrawals, and extensions of time.
              17.77
              Stay of referral for offset.
              17.79
              Administrative actions for nonpayment of debt.
            
            
              Administrative Wage Garnishment
              17.81
              Administrative wage garnishment.
            
            
              Salary Offset
              17.83
              Scope and definitions.
              17.85
              Coordinating offset with another Federal agency.
              17.87
              Determination of indebtedness.
              17.89
              Notice requirements before offset.
              17.91
              Request for a hearing.
              17.93
              Result if employee fails to meet deadlines.
              17.95
              Written decision following a hearing.
              17.97
              Review of departmental records related to the debt.
              17.99
              Written agreement to repay debt as an alternative to salary offset.
              17.101
              Procedures for salary offset: when deductions may begin.
              17.103
              Procedures for salary offset: types of collection.
              17.105
              Procedures for salary offset: methods of collection.
              17.107
              Procedures for salary offset: imposition of interest.
              17.109
              Nonwaiver of rights.
              17.111
              Refunds.
              17.113
              Miscellaneous provisions: correspondence with the Department.
            
          
        
        
          Authority:
          28 U.S.C. 2672; 31 U.S.C. 3711, 3716-18, 3721, and 5 U.S.C. 5514; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Subpart A—Claims Against Government Under Federal Tort Claims Act
          
            Authority:
            5 U.S.C. 5514; 28 U.S.C. 2672; 31 U.S.C. 3711, 3716-3718, 3721; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
          
          
            Source:
            36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            General Provisions
            
              § 17.1
              Scope; definitions.
              (a) This subpart applies to claims asserted under the Federal Tort Claims Act, as amended, accruing on or after January 18, 1967, for money damages against the United States for injury to or loss of property or personal injury or death caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of an officer or employee of the Department while acting within the scope of his office or employment.
              (b) This subpart is issued subject to and consistent with applicable regulations on administrative claims under the Federal Tort Claims Act issued by the Attorney General (31 FR 16616; 28 CFR part 14).
              (c) The terms Department and Organizational unit are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
              [36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996]
            
          
          
            Procedures
            
              § 17.2
              Administrative claim; when presented; appropriate HUD office.

              (a) For purposes of this subpart, a claim shall be deemed to have been presented when the Department receives, at a place designated in paragraph (b) of this section, an executed Claim for Damages or Injury, Standard Form 95, or other written notification of an incident, accompanied by a claim for money damages in a sum certain for injury to or loss of property, for personal injury, or for death alleged to have occurred by reason of the incident. A claim which should have been presented to the Department, but which was mistakenly addressed to or filed with another Federal agency, is deemed to be presented to the Department as of the date that the claim is received by the Department. If a claim is mistakenly addressed to or filed with the Department, the Department shall forthwith transfer it to the appropriate Federal agency, if ascertainable, or return it to the claimant.
              (b) A claimant shall mail or deliver his claim to the office of employment of the Department employee or employees whose negligent or wrongful act or omission is alleged to have caused the loss or injury complained of. Where such office of employment is the Department Central Office in Washington, or is not reasonably known and not reasonably ascertainable, claimant shall file his claim with the Assistant Secretary for Administration, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410. In all other cases, claimant shall address his claim to the head of the appropriate office, the address of which will generally be found listed in the local telephone directory.
            
            
              § 17.3
              Administrative claim; who may file.
              (a) A claim for injury to or loss of property may be presented by the owner of the property, his duly authorized agent, or his legal representative.
              (b) A claim for personal injury may be presented by the injured person, his duly authorized agent, or his legal representative.
              (c) A claim based on death may be presented by the executor or administrator of the decedent's estate, or by any other person legally entitled to assert such a claim in accordance with applicable State law.
              (d) A claim for loss wholly compensated by an insurer with the rights of a subrogee may be presented by the insurer. A claim for loss partially compensated by an insurer with the rights of a subrogee may be presented by the insurer or the insured individually, as their respective interests appear, or jointly. Whenever an insurer presents a claim asserting the rights of a subrogee, he shall present with his claim appropriate evidence that he has the rights of a subrogee.
              (e) A claim presented by an agent or legal representative shall be presented in the name of the claimant, be signed by the agent or legal representative, show the title or legal capacity of the person signing, and be accompanied by evidence of his authority to present a claim on behalf of the claimant as agent, executor, administrator, parent, guardian, or other representative.
            
            
              § 17.4
              Administrative claim; evidence and information to be submitted.
              (a) Personal injury. In support of a claim for personal injury, including pain and suffering, the claimant may be required to submit the following evidence or information:
              (1) A written report by his attending physician or dentist setting forth the nature and extent of the injury, nature and extent of treatment, any degree of temporary or permanent disability, the prognosis, period of hospitalization, and any diminished earning capacity. In addition, the claimant may be required to submit to a physical or mental examination by a physician employed or designated by the Department or another Federal agency. A copy of the report of the examining physician shall be made available to the claimant upon the claimant's written request provided that he has, upon request, furnished the report referred to in the first sentence of this subparagraph and has made or agrees to make available to the Department any other physician's report previously or thereafter made of the physical or mental condition which is the subject matter of his claim;
              (2) Itemized bills for medical, dental, and hospital expenses incurred, or itemized receipts of payment for such expenses;
              (3) If the prognosis reveals the necessity for future treatment, a statement of expected expenses for such treatment;
              (4) If a claim is made for loss of time from employment, a written statement from his employer showing actual time lost from employment, whether he is a full- or part-time employee, and wages or salary actually lost;
              (5) If a claim is made for loss of income and the claimant is self-employed, documentary evidence showing the amount of earnings actually lost;

              (6) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on either the responsibility of the United States for the personal injury or the damages claimed.
              (b) Death. In support of a claim based on death, the claimant may be required to submit the following evidence or information:
              (1) An authenticated death certificate or other competent evidence showing cause of death, date of death, and age of the decedent;
              (2) Decedent's employment or occupation at time of death, including his monthly or yearly salary or earnings (if any), and the duration of his last employment or occupation;
              (3) Full names, addresses, birth dates, kinship, and marital status of the decedent's survivors, including identification of those survivors who were dependent for support upon the decedent at the time of his death;
              (4) Degree of support afforded by the decedent to each survivor dependent upon him for support at the time of his death;
              (5) Decedent's general physical and mental condition before death;
              (6) Itemized bills for medical and burial expenses incurred by reason of the incident causing death, or itemized receipts of payment for such expenses;
              (7) If damages for pain and suffering prior to death are claimed, a physician's detailed statement specifying the injuries suffered, duration of pain and suffering, any drugs administered for pain, and the decedent's physical condition in the interval between injury and death;
              (8) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on either the responsibility of the United States for the death or the damages claimed.
              (c) Property damage. In support of a claim for injury to or loss of property, real or personal, the claimant may be required to submit the following evidence or information:
              (1) Proof of ownership;
              (2) A detailed statement of the amount claimed with respect to each item of property;
              (3) An itemized receipt of payment for necessary repairs or itemized written estimates of the cost of such repairs;
              (4) A statement listing date of purchase, purchase price, and salvage value where repair is not economical;
              (5) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on either the responsibility of the United States for the injury to or loss of property or the damages claimed.
            
            
              § 17.5
              Investigations.
              The Department may investigate, or may request any other Federal agency to investigate, a claim filed under this subpart.
            
            
              § 17.6
              Claims investigation.
              (a) When a claim has been filed with the Department, the head of the organizational unit concerned or his designee shall designate one employee in that unit who shall act as, and who shall be referred to herein as, the Claims Investigating Officer for that particular claim. When a claim is received by the head of an organizational unit to which this subpart applies, it shall be forwarded with or without comment to the designated Claims Investigating Officer, who shall:
              (1) Investigate as completely as is practicable the nature and circumstances of the occurrence causing the loss or damage of the claimant's property;
              (2) Ascertain the extent of loss or damage to the claimant's property;
              (3) Assemble the necessary forms with required data contained therein;
              (4) Prepare a brief statement setting forth the facts relative to the claim, a statement whether the claim satisfies the requirements of this subpart, and a recommendation as to the amount to be paid in settlement of the claim;
              (5) Submit such forms, statements, and all necessary supporting papers to the head of the organizational unit having jurisdiction over the employee involved, who will be responsible for assuring that all necessary data has been obtained for the file. The head of the organizational unit will transmit the entire file to the General Counsel.
            
            
              § 17.7
              Authority to adjust, determine, compromise, and settle claims.

              The General Counsel, the Deputy General Counsel, and such employees of the Office of the General Counsel as may be designated by the General Counsel, are authorized to consider, ascertain, adjust, determine, compromise, and settle claims pursuant to the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. 2671, and the regulations contained in 28 CFR part 14 and in this subpart.
            
            
              § 17.8
              Limitations on authority.
              (a) An award, compromise, or settlement of a claim under section 2672 of Title 28, United States Code, and this subpart in excess of $25,000 may be effected only with the prior written approval of the Attorney General or his designee. For the purpose of this paragraph, a principal claim and any derivative or subrogated claim shall be treated as a single claim.
              (b) An administrative claim may be adjusted, determined, compromised, or settled only after consultation with the Department of Justice when, in the opinion of the General Counsel or his designee:
              (1) A new precedent or a new point of law is involved; or
              (2) A question of policy is or may be involved; or
              (3) The United States is or may be entitled to indemnity or contribution from a third party, and the Department is unable to adjust the third party claim; or
              (4) The compromise of a particular claim, as a practical matter, will or may control the disposition of a related claim in which the amount to be paid may exceed $25,000.
              (c) An administrative claim may be adjusted, determined, compromised, or settled only after consultation with the Department of Justice when the Department is informed or is otherwise aware that the United States or an officer, employee, agent, or cost-type contractor of the United States is involved in litigation based on a claim arising out of the same incident or transaction.
            
            
              § 17.9
              Referral to Department of Justice.
              When Department of Justice approval or consultation is required under § 17.8, the referral or request shall be transmitted to the Department of Justice by the General Counsel of the Department or his designee.
            
            
              § 17.11
              Final denial of claim.
              Final denial of an administrative claim shall be in writing, and notification of denial shall be sent to the claimant, his attorney, or legal representative by certified or registered mail. The notification of final denial may include a statement of the reasons for the denial and shall include a statement that, if the claimant is dissatisfied with the Department action, he may file suit in an appropriate U.S. District Court not later than 6 months after the date of mailing of the notification.
            
            
              § 17.12
              Action on approved claim.

              (a) Payment of a claim approved under this subpart is contingent on claimant's execution of: (1) A Claim for Damage or Injury, Standard Form 95; (2) a claims settlement agreement; and (3) a Voucher for Payment, Standard Form 1145, as appropriate. When a claimant is represented by an attorney, the voucher for payment shall designate both the claimant and his attorney as payees, and the check shall be delivered to the attorney, whose address shall appear on the voucher.
              (b) Acceptance by the claimant, his agent, or legal representative of an award, compromise, or settlement made under section 2672 or 2677 of Title 28, United States Code, is final and conclusive on the claimant, his agent or legal representative, and any other person on whose behalf or for whose benefit the claim has been presented, and constitutes a complete release of any claim against the United States and against any officer or employee of the Government whose act or omission gave rise to the claim, by reason of the same subject matter.
            
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Claims Under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees Claims Act of 1964
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 3, 78 Stat. 767 (31 U.S.C. 3721).
          
          
            Source:
            36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            
            § 17.40
            Scope and purpose.
            (a) This subpart applies to all claims filed by or on behalf of employees of the Department of Housing and Urban Development for loss of or damage to personal property which occurs incident to their service with HUD under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees' Claims Act of 1964. A claim must be substantiated and the possession of the property determined to be reasonable, useful, or proper. The maximum amount that can be paid under any claim under the Act is $25,000 and property may be replaced in kind at the option of the Government. Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to bar claims payable under statutory authority.
            (b) HUD is not an insurer and does not underwrite all personal property losses that an employee may sustain. Employees are encouraged to carry private insurance to the maximum extent practicable to avoid large losses or losses which may not be recoverable from HUD. The procedures set forth in this section are designed to enable the claimant to obtain the maximum amount of compensation for his loss or damage. Failure of the claimant to comply with these procedures may reduce or preclude payment of his claim under this subpart.
            [36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 48 FR 6536, Feb. 14, 1983]
          
          
            § 17.41
            Claimants.
            (a) A claim pursuant to this subpart may only be made by:
            (1) An employee of HUD.
            (2) A former employee of HUD whose claim arises out of an incident occurring before his separation from HUD.
            (3) Survivors of a person named in paragraph (a) (1) or (2) of this section, in the following order of precedence:
            (i) Spouse.
            (ii) Children.
            (iii) Father or mother, or both.
            (iv) Brothers or sisters, or both.
            (4) The authorized agent or legal representative of a person named in paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section.
            (b) A claim may not be presented by or for the benefit of a subrogee, assignee, conditional vendor, or other third party.
          
          
            § 17.42
            Time limitations.
            A claim under this part may be allowed only if:
            (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, it is filed in writing within 2 years after accrual. For purposes of this part, a claim accrues at the time of the accident or incident causing the loss or damage, or at such time as the loss or damage should have been discovered by the claimant by the exercise of due diligence.
            (b) It cannot be filed within the time limits of paragraph (a) of this section, because it accrues in time of war or in time of armed conflict in which any armed force of the United States is engaged or if such a war or armed conflict intervenes within 2 years after it accrues, and if good cause is shown, and if it is filed not later than 2 years after that cause ceases to exist, or 2 years after the war or armed conflict is terminated, whichever is earlier.
          
          
            § 17.43
            Allowable claims.
            (a) A claim may be allowed only if:
            (1) The damage or loss was not caused wholly or partly by the negligent or wrongful act of the claimant, his agent, the members of his family, or his private employee (the standard to be applied is that of reasonable care under the circumstances); and
            (2) The possession of the property lost or damaged and the quantity possessed is determined to have been reasonable, useful, or proper under the circumstances; and
            (3) The claim is substantiated by proper and convincing evidence.
            (b) Claims which are otherwise allowable under this part shall not be disallowed solely because the property was not in the possession of the claimant at the time of the damage or loss, or solely because the claimant was not the legal owner of the property for which the claim is made. For example, borrowed property may be the subject of a claim.

            (c) Subject to the conditions in paragraph (a) of this section, and the other provisions of this subpart, any claim for damage to, or loss of, personal property incident to service with HUD may be considered and allowed. The following are examples of the principal types of claims which may be allowed, but these examples are not exclusive and other types of claims may be allowed, unless excluded by §§ 17.44 and 17.45:
            (1) Property loss or damage in quarters or other authorized places. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, property arising from fire, flood, hurricane, other natural disaster, theft, or other unusual occurrence, while such property is located at:
            (i) Quarters within the 50 States or the District of Columbia that were assigned to the claimant or otherwise provided in kind by the United States;
            (ii) Quarters outside the 50 States and the District of Columbia that were occupied by the claimant, whether or not they were assigned or otherwise provided in kind by the United States, except when the claimant is a civilian employee who is a local inhabitant; or
            (iii) Any warehouse, office, working area, or other place (except quarters) authorized or apparently authorized for the reception or storage of property.
            (2) Transportation or travel losses. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, property incident to transportation or storage pursuant to orders, or in connection with travel under orders, including property in the custody of a carrier, an agent or agency of the Government, or the claimant.
            (3) Manufactured homes. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, manufactured homes and their contents under the provisions of paragraph (c)(2) of this section. Claims for structural damage to manufactured homes, other than that caused by collision, and damage to contents of manufactured homes resulting from such structural damage, must contain conclusive evidence that the damage was not caused by structural deficiency of the manufactured home and that it was not overloaded. Claims for damage to, or loss of, tires mounted on manufactured homes will not be allowed, except in cases of collision, theft, or vandalism.
            (4) Enemy action or public service. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, property as a direct consequence of:
            (i) Enemy action or threat thereof, or combat, guerrilla, brigandage, or other belligerent activity, or unjust confiscation by a foreign power or its nationals;
            (ii) Action by the claimant to quiet a civil disturbance or to alleviate a public disaster; or
            (iii) Efforts by the claimant to save human life or Government property.
            (5) Property used for benefit of the Government. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, property when used for the benefit of the Government at the request of, or with the knowledge and consent of, superior authority.
            (6) Clothing and accessories. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, clothing or accessories customarily worn on the person, such as eyeglasses, hearing aids, or dentures.
            [36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 50 FR 9268, Mar. 7, 1985]
          
          
            § 17.44
            Restrictions on certain claims.
            Claims of the type described in this section are only allowable subject to the restrictions noted:
            (a) Money or currency. Claims may be allowed for loss of money or currency only when lost incident to fire, flood, hurricane, other natural disaster, or by theft from quarters (as limited by paragraph (a) of § 17.45). In instances of theft from quarters, it must be conclusively shown that the quarters were locked at the time of the theft. Reimbursement for loss of money or currency is limited to an amount which is determined to have been reasonable for the claimant to have had in his possession at the time of the loss.
            (b) Government property. Claims may only be allowed for property owned by the United States for which the claimant is financially responsible to any agency of the Government other than HUD.
            (c) Estimate fees. Claims may include fees paid to obtain estimates of repair only when it is clear that an estimate could not have been obtained without paying a fee. In that case, the fee may be allowed only in an amount determined to be reasonable in relation to the value of the property or the cost of the repairs.
            
            (d) Automobiles and other motor vehicles. Claims may only be allowed for damage to, or loss of, automobiles and other motor vehicles if:
            (1) Such motor vehicles were required to be used for official Government business (official Government business, as used here, does not include travel, or parking incident thereto, between quarters and office, or use of vehicles for the convenience of the owner. However, it does include travel, and parking incident thereto, between quarters and assigned place of duty specifically authorized by the employee's supervisor as being more advantageous to the Government); or
            (2) Shipment of such motor vehicles was being furnished or provided by the Government, subject to the provisions of § 17.46.
          
          
            § 17.45
            Unallowable claims.
            Claims are not allowable for the following:
            (a) Unassigned quarters in United States. Property loss or damage in quarters occupied by the claimant within the 50 States or the District of Columbia that were not assigned to him or otherwise provided in kind by the United States.
            (b) Business property. Property used for business or profit.
            (c) Unserviceable property. Wornout or unserviceable property.
            (d) Illegal possession. Property acquired, possessed, or transported in violation of law or in violation of applicable regulations or directives.
            (e) Articles of extraordinary value. Valuable articles, such as cameras, watches, jewelry, furs, or other articles of extraordinary value, when shipped with household goods or as unaccompanied baggage (shipment includes storage). This prohibition does not apply to articles in the personal custody of the claimant or articles properly checked, provided that reasonable protection or security measures have been taken by claimant.
            (f) Minimum amount. Loss or damage amounting to less than $10.
          
          
            § 17.46
            Claims involving carriers or insurers.
            In the event the property which is the subject of a claim was lost or damaged while in the possession of a carrier or was insured, the following procedures will apply:
            (a) Whenever property is damaged, lost, or destroyed while being shipped pursuant to authorized travel orders, the owner must file a written claim for reimbursement with the last commercial carrier known or believed to have handled the goods, or the carrier known to be in possession of the property when the damage or loss occurred, according to the terms of its bill of lading or contract, before submitting a claim against the Government under this subpart.
            (1) If more than one bill of lading or contract was issued, a separate demand should be made against the last carrier on each such document.
            (2) The demand should be made within 9 months of the date that delivery was made, or within 9 months of the date that delivery should ordinarily have been made.
            (3) If it is apparent that the damage or loss is attributable to packing, storage, or unpacking while in the custody of the Government, no demand need be made against the carrier.
            (b) Whenever property which is damaged, lost, or destroyed incident to the claimant's service is insured in whole or in part, the claimant must make demand in writing against the insurer for reimbursement under the terms and conditions of the insurance coverage, prior to the filing of the concurrent claim against the Government.

            (c) Failure to make a demand on a carrier or insurer or to make all reasonable efforts to protect and prosecute rights available against a carrier or insurer and to collect the amount recoverable from the carrier or insurer may result in reducing the amount recoverable from the Government by the maximum amount which would have been recoverable from the carrier or insurer, had the claim been timely or diligently prosecuted. However, no deduction will be made where the circumstances of the claimant's service preclude reasonable filing of such a claim or diligent prosecution, or the evidence indicates a demand was impracticable or would have been unavailing.
            
            (d) Following the submission of the claim against the carrier or insurer, the claimant may immediately submit his claim against the Government in accordance with the provisions of this subpart, without waiting until either final approval or denial of his claim is made by the carrier or insurer.
            (1) Upon submitting his claim, he will certify in his claim that he has or has not gained any recovery from a carrier or insurer, and enclose all correspondence pertinent thereto.
            (2) If final action has not been taken by the carrier or insurer on his claim, he will immediately notify them to address all correspondence in regard to his claim to him, in care of the General Counsel of HUD.
            (3) The claimant shall advise the General Counsel of any action taken by the carrier or insurer on his claim and upon request shall furnish all correspondence documents, and other evidence pertinent to the matter.
            (e) The claimant will assign to the United States to the extent of any payment on his claim accepted by him, all his right, title and interest in any claim he may have against any carrier, insurer, or other party arising out of the incident on which the claim against the United States is based. After payment of his claim by the United States, the claimant will, upon receipt of any payment from a carrier or insurer, pay the proceeds to the United States to the extent of the payment received by him from the United States.
            (f) Where a claimant recovers for the loss from the carrier or insurer before his claim under this subpart is settled, the amount or recovery shall be applied to his claim as follows:
            (1) When the amount recovered from a carrier, insurer, or other third party is greater than or equal to the claimant's total loss as determined under this part, no compensation is allowable under this part.
            (2) When the amount recovered is less than such total loss, the allowable amount is determined by deducting the recovery from the amount of such total loss.
            (3) For the purpose of this paragraph (f) the claimant's total loss is to be determined without regard to the $6,500 maximum set forth above. However, if the resulting amount, after making this deduction, exceeds $6,500, the claimant will be allowed only $6,500.
          
          
            § 17.47
            Settlement of claims.
            (a) The General Counsel, HUD, is authorized to settle (consider, ascertain, adjust, determine, and dispose of, whether by full or partial allowance or disallowance) any claim under this subpart.
            (b) The General Counsel may formulate such procedures and make such redelegations as may be required to fulfill the objectives of this subpart.
            (c) The General Counsel shall conduct such investigation as may be appropriate in order to determine the validity of a claim.
            (d) The General Counsel shall notify a claimant in writing of action taken on his claim, and if partial or full disallowance is made, the reasons therefor.
            (e) In the event a claim submitted against a carrier under § 17.46 has not been settled before settlement of the claim against the Government pursuant to this subpart, the General Counsel shall notify such carrier or insurer to pay the proceeds of the claim to HUD to the extent HUD has paid such to claimant in settlement.
          
          
            § 17.48
            Computation of amount of award.
            (a) The amount allowed for damage to or loss of any item of property may not exceed the cost of the item (either the price paid in cash or property, or the value at the time of acquisition if not acquired by purchase or exchange); and there will be no allowance for replacement cost or for appreciation in the value of the property. Subject to these limitations, the amount allowable is either:
            (1) The depreciated value, immediately prior to the loss or damage, of property lost or damaged beyond economical repair, less any salvage value; or

            (2) The reasonable cost of repairs, when property is economically repairable, provided that the cost of repairs does not exceed the amount allowable under paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
            
            (b) Depreciation in value is determined by considering the type of article involved, its cost, its condition when damaged or lost, and the time elapsed between the date of acquisition and the date of damage or loss.
            (c) Replacement of lost or damaged property may be made in kind whenever appropriate.
          
          
            § 17.49
            Attorney's fees.
            No more than 10 per centum of the amount paid in settlement of each individual claim submitted and settled under this subpart shall be paid or delivered to or received by any agent or attorney on account of services rendered in connection with that claim.
          
          
            § 17.50
            Claims procedures.
            (a) Claims by, or on behalf of, employees of field offices shall be filed in writing with the appropriate Regional Counsel. Claims by, or on behalf of, employees of Department Headquarters shall be filed in writing with the General Counsel, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410.
            (b) Each written claim shall contain, as a minimum:
            (1) Name, address, place of employment of claimant.
            (2) Place and date of loss or damage.
            (3) A brief statement of the facts and circumstances surrounding loss or damage.
            (4) Cost, date, and place of acquisition of each piece of property lost or damaged.
            (5) Two itemized repair estimates, or value estimates, whichever is applicable.
            (6) Copies of police reports, if applicable.
            (7) With respect to claims involving thefts or losses in quarters or other places where the property was reasonably kept, a statement as to what security precautions were taken to protect the property involved.
            (8) With respect to claims involving property being used for the benefit of the Government, a statement by the employee's supervisor evidencing that the claimant was required to provide such property or that his providing it was in the interest of the Government.
            (9) Other evidence as may be required by the General Counsel.
            [36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 48 FR 6536, Feb. 14, 1983]
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Procedures for the Collection of Claims by the Government
          
            Source:
            76 FR 69045, Nov. 7, 2011, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            General Provisions
            
              § 17.61
              Purpose and scope.
              (a) In general. HUD will undertake debt collection pursuant to this subpart in accordance with the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, codified in scattered sections of 31 U.S.C. chapter 37; the revised Federal Claims Collection Standards, codified at 31 CFR parts 900 through 904; the Treasury debt collection regulations set forth in 31 CFR part 285; and such additional provisions as provided in this subpart.
              (b) Applicability of other statutes and regulations. (1) Nothing in this subpart precludes the authority under statutes and regulations other than those described in this subpart to collect, settle, compromise, or close claims, including, but not limited to:
              (i) Debts incurred by contractors under contracts for supplies and services awarded by HUD under the authority of subpart 32.6 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR);
              (ii) Debts arising out of the business operations of the Government National Mortgage Association; and

              (iii) Debts arising under Title I or section 204(g) of Title II of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).
              (2) This subpart is not applicable to tax debts or to any debt for which there is an indication of fraud or misrepresentation, unless the debt is returned by the Department of Justice to HUD for handling.
              (c) Scope. Sections 17.65 through 17.79, under the heading Administrative Offset and Other Actions, includes the procedures that apply when HUD seeks satisfaction of debts owed to HUD by administrative offset of payments by the Federal Government other than Federal salary payments, and when HUD takes other administrative actions for nonpayment of debt. Section 17.81, under the heading Administrative Wage Garnishment, includes the procedures that apply when HUD seeks to satisfy a debt owed to HUD out of the debtor's compensation from an employer other than the Federal Government. Sections 17.83 through 17.113, under the heading Salary Offset, include procedures that apply when HUD or another Federal agency seeks to satisfy a debt owed to it through offset of the salary of a current Federal employee.
            
            
              § 17.63
              Definitions.
              As used in this subpart:
              
                Department or HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and includes a person authorized to act for HUD.
              
                Office means the organization of each Assistant Secretary of HUD or other HUD official at the Assistant Secretary level, and each Field Office.
              
                Office of Appeals or OA means the HUD Office of Appeals within the HUD Office of Hearings and Appeals.
              
                Secretary means the Secretary of HUD.
              
                Treasury means the Department of the Treasury.
              
                United States includes an agency of the United States.
            
          
          
            Administrative Offset and Other Actions
            
              § 17.65
              Demand and notice of intent to offset.
              HUD will make written demand upon the debtor pursuant to the requirements of 31 CFR 901.2 and send written notice of intent to offset to the debtor pursuant to the requirements of 31 CFR 901.3 and 31 CFR part 285, subpart A. The Secretary shall mail the demand and notice of intent to offset to the debtor, at the most current address that is available to the Secretary. HUD may refer the debt to the Treasury for collection and shall request that the amount of the debt be offset against any amount payable by the Treasury as a Federal payment, at any time after 60 days from the date such notice is sent to the debtor.
            
            
              § 17.67
              Review of departmental records related to the debt.
              (a) Notification by the debtor. A debtor who intends to inspect or copy departmental records related to the debt pursuant to 31 CFR 901.3 must, within 20 calendar days after the date of the notice in § 17.65, send a letter to HUD, at the address indicated in the notice of intent to offset, stating his or her intention. A debtor may also request, within 20 calendar days from the date of such notice, that HUD provide the debtor with a copy of departmental records related to the debt.
              (b) HUD's response. In response to a timely notification by the debtor as described in paragraph (a) of this section, HUD shall notify the debtor of the location and the time when the debtor may inspect or copy departmental records related to the debt. If the debtor requests that HUD provide a copy of departmental records related to the debt, HUD shall send the records to the debtor within 10 calendar days from the date that HUD receives the debtor's request. HUD may charge the debtor a reasonable fee to compensate for the cost of providing a copy of the departmental records related to the debt.
            
            
              § 17.69
              Review within HUD of a determination that an amount is past due and legally enforceable.
              (a) Notification by the debtor. A debtor who receives notice of intent to offset pursuant to § 17.65 has the right to a review of the case and to present evidence that all or part of the debt is not past due or not legally enforceable. The debtor may send a copy of the notice with a letter notifying the Office of Appeals of his or her intention to present evidence. Failure to give this notice shall not jeopardize the debtor's right to present evidence within the 60 calendar days provided for in paragraph (b) of this section. If the Office of Appeals has additional procedures governing the review process, a copy of the procedures shall be mailed to the debtor after the request for review is received and docketed by the Office of Appeals.
              (b) Submission of evidence. If the debtor wishes to submit evidence showing that all or part of the debt is not past due or not legally enforceable, the debtor must submit such evidence to the Office of Appeals within 60 calendar days after the date of the notice of intent to offset. Failure to submit evidence will result in a dismissal of the request for review by the OA.
              (c) Review of the record. After timely submission of evidence by the debtor, the OA will review the evidence submitted by the Department that shows that all or part of the debt is past due and legally enforceable. The decision of an administrative judge of the OA will be based on a preponderance of the evidence as to whether there is a debt that is past due and whether it is legally enforceable. The administrative judge of the OA shall make a determination based upon a review of the evidence that comprises the written record, except that the OA may order an oral hearing if the administrative judge of the OA finds that:
              (1) An applicable statute authorizes or requires the Department to consider a waiver of the indebtedness and the waiver determination turns on credibility or veracity; or
              (2) The question of indebtedness cannot be resolved by review of the documentary evidence.
              (d) Previous decision by an administrative judge of the Office of Appeals. The debtor is not entitled to a review of the Department's intent to offset if an administrative judge of the OA has previously issued a decision on the merits that the debt is past due and legally enforceable, except when the debt has become legally unenforceable since the issuance of that decision, or the debtor can submit newly discovered material evidence that the debt is presently not legally enforceable.
            
            
              § 17.71
              Request for hearing.
              The debtor shall file a request for a hearing with the OA at the address specified in the notice or at such other address as the OA may direct in writing to the debtor.
            
            
              § 17.73
              Determination of the HUD Office of Appeals.
              (a) Determination. An administrative judge of the OA shall issue a written decision that includes the supporting rationale for the decision. The decision of the administrative judge of the OA concerning whether a debt or part of a debt is past due and legally enforceable is the final agency decision with respect to the past due status and enforceability of the debt.
              (b) Copies. Copies of the decision of the administrative judge of the OA shall be distributed to HUD's General Counsel, HUD's Chief Financial Officer (CFO), or other appropriate HUD program official, the debtor, and the debtor's attorney or other representative, if any.
              (c) Notification to the Department of the Treasury. If the decision of the administrative judge of the OA affirms that all or part of the debt is past due and legally enforceable, HUD shall notify the Treasury after the date that the determination of the OA has been issued under paragraph (a) of this section and a copy of the determination has been received by HUD's CFO or other appropriate HUD program official. No referral shall be made to the Treasury if the review of the debt by an administrative judge of the OA subsequently determines that the debt is not past due or not legally enforceable.
            
            
              § 17.75
              Postponements, withdrawals, and extensions of time.
              (a) Postponements and withdrawals. HUD may, for good cause, postpone or withdraw referral of the debt to the Treasury.
              (b) Extensions of time. At the discretion of an administrative judge of the OA, time limitations required in these procedures may be extended in appropriate circumstances for good cause.
            
            
              § 17.77
              Stay of referral for offset.
              If the debtor timely submits evidence in accordance with § 17.69(b), the referral to the Treasury in § 17.65 shall be stayed until the date of the issuance of a written decision by an administrative judge of the OA that determines that a debt or part of a debt is past due and legally enforceable.
            
            
              § 17.79
              Administrative actions for nonpayment of debt.
              (a) Referrals for nonpayment of debt. When a contractor, grantee, or other participant in a program sponsored by HUD, fails to pay its debt to HUD within a reasonable time after demand, HUD shall take such measures to:
              (1) Refer such contractor, grantee, or other participant to the Office of General Counsel for investigation of the matter and possible suspension or debarment pursuant to 2 CFR part 2424, 2 CFR 180.800, and 48 CFR subpart 9.4 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR); and
              (2) In the case of matters involving fraud or suspected fraud, refer such contractor, grantee, or other participant to the Office of Inspector General for investigation. However, the failure to pay HUD within a reasonable time after demand is not a prerequisite for referral for fraud or suspected fraud.
              (b) Excluded Parties List System (EPLS). Depending upon the outcome of the referral in paragraph (a) of this section, HUD shall take such measures to insure that the contractor, grantee, or other participant is placed on the EPLS.
              (c) Report to the Treasury. The failure of any surety to honor its obligations in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 9304 shall be reported to the Chief Financial Officer, who shall inform the Treasury.
            
          
          
            Administrative Wage Garnishment
            
              § 17.81
              Administrative wage garnishment.
              (a) In general. HUD may collect a debt by using administrative wage garnishment pursuant to 31 CFR 285.11. To the extent that situations arise that are not covered by 31 CFR 285.11, those situations shall be governed by 24 CFR part 26, subpart A.
              (b) Hearing official. Any hearing required to establish HUD's right to collect a debt through administrative wage garnishment shall be conducted by an administrative judge of the OA under 24 CFR part 26, subpart A of part 26.
            
          
          
            Salary Offset
            
              § 17.83
              Scope and definitions.
              (a) The provisions set forth in §§ 17.83 through 17.113 are the Department's procedures for the collection of delinquent nontax debts by salary offset of a Federal employee's pay to satisfy certain debts owed the government, including centralized salary offsets in accordance with 31 CFR part 285.
              (b)(1) This section and §§ 17.85 through 17.99 apply to collections by the Secretary through salary offset from current employees of the Department and other agencies who owe debts to the Department; and
              (2) This section, § 17.85, and §§ 17.101 through 17.113 apply to HUD's offset of pay to current employees of the Department and of other agencies who owe debts to HUD or other agencies under noncentralized salary offset procedures, in accordance with 5 CFR 550.1109.
              (c) These regulations do not apply to debts or claims arising under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. 1-9602), the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301-1397f), the tariff laws of the United States, or to any case where collection of a debt by salary offset is explicitly provided for or prohibited by another statute.
              (d) These regulations identify the types of salary offset available to the Department, as well as certain rights provided to the employee, which include a written notice before deductions begin, the opportunity to petition for a hearing, receiving a written decision if a hearing is granted, and the opportunity to propose a repayment agreement in lieu of offset. These employee rights do not apply to any adjustment to pay arising out of an employee's election of coverage or a change in coverage under a Federal benefits program requiring periodic deductions from pay, if the amount to be recovered was accumulated over four pay periods or less.
              (e) Nothing in these regulations precludes the compromise, suspension, or termination of collection actions where appropriate under the Department's regulations contained elsewhere in this subpart (see 24 CFR 17.61 through 17.79).
              (f) As used in the salary offset provisions at §§ 17.83 through 17.113:
              
                Agency means:

              (i) An Executive department, military department, Government corporation, or independent establishment as defined in 5 U.S.C. 101, 102, 103, or 104, respectively;
              
              (ii) The United States Postal Service; or
              (iii) The Postal Regulatory Commission.
              
                Debt means an amount owed to the United States and past due, from sources which include loans insured or guaranteed by the United States and all other amounts due the United States from assigned mortgages or deeds of trust, direct loans, advances, repurchase demands, fees, leases, rents, royalties, services, sale of real or personal property, overpayments, penalties, damages, interest, fines and forfeitures (except those arising under the Uniform Code of Military Justice), and all other similar sources.
              
                Determination means the point at which the Secretary or his designee decides that the debt is valid.
              
                Disposable pay means that part of current basic pay, special pay, incentive pay, retired pay, retainer pay, or in the case of an employee not entitled to basic pay, other authorized pay remaining after deductions required by law. Deductions from pay include:
              (i) Amounts owed by the individual to the United States;
              (ii) Amounts withheld for Federal employment taxes;
              (iii) Amounts properly withheld for Federal, state, or local income tax purposes, if the withholding of the amount is authorized or required by law and if amounts withheld are not greater than would be the case if the individual claimed all dependents to which he or she were entitled. The withholding of additional amounts under 26 U.S.C. 3402(i) may be permitted only when the individual presents evidence of tax obligation that supports the additional withholding;
              (iv) Amounts deducted as health insurance premiums, including, but not limited to, amounts deducted from civil service annuities for Medicare where such deductions are requested by the Health Care Financing Administration;
              (v) Amounts deducted as normal retirement contributions, not including amounts deducted for supplementary coverage. Amounts withheld as Survivor Benefit Plan or Retired Serviceman's Family Protection Plan payments are considered to be normal retirement contributions. Amounts voluntarily contributed toward additional civil service annuity benefits are considered to be supplementary;
              (vi) Amounts deducted as normal life insurance premiums from salary or other remuneration for employment, not including amounts deducted for supplementary coverage. Both Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance and “Basic Life” Federal Employees' Group Life Insurance premiums are considered to be normal life insurance premiums; all optional Federal Employees' Group Life Insurance premiums and life insurance premiums paid for by allotment, such as National Service Life Insurance, are considered to be supplementary;
              (vii) Amounts withheld from benefits payable under title II of the Social Security Act where the withholding is required by law;
              (viii) Amounts mandatorily withheld for the U.S. Soldiers' and Airmen's Home; and
              (ix) Fines and forfeitures ordered by a court-martial or by a commanding officer.
              
                Employee means a current employee of a Federal agency, including a current member of the Armed Forces or Reserve of the Armed Forces of the United States.
              
                Pay means basic pay, special pay, income pay, retired pay, retainer pay, or, in the case of an employee not entitled to basic pay, other authorized pay.
              
                Salary offset means a deduction from the pay of an employee without his or her consent to satisfy a debt. Salary offset is one type of administrative offset that may be used by the Department in the collection of claims.
              
                Waiver means the cancellation, remission, forgiveness, or nonrecovery of a debt allegedly owed by an employee of an agency as permitted or required by 5 U.S.C. 5584, 10 U.S.C. 2774, 32 U.S.C. 716, or 5 U.S.C. 8346(b), or any other law.
            
            
              § 17.85
              Coordinating offset with another Federal agency.
              (a) When HUD is owed the debt. When the Department is owed a debt by an employee of another agency, the other agency shall not initiate the requested offset until the Department provides the agency with a written certification that the debtor owes the Department a debt (including the amount and basis of the debt and the due date of the payment) and that the Department has complied with these regulations.
              (b) When another agency is owed the debt. The Department may use salary offset against one of its employees who is indebted to another agency if requested to do so by that agency. Such a request must be accompanied by a certification by the requesting agency that the person owes the debt (including the amount) and that the employee has been given the procedural rights required by 5 U.S.C. 5514 and 5 CFR part 550, subpart K.
            
            
              § 17.87
              Determination of indebtedness.
              In determining that an employee is indebted to HUD, the Secretary will review the debt to make sure that it is valid and past due.
            
            
              § 17.89
              Notice requirements before offset.
              Except as provided in § 17.83(d), deductions will not be made unless the Secretary first provides the employee with a minimum of 30 calendar days written notice. This Notice of Intent to Offset Salary (Notice of Intent) will state:
              (a) That the Secretary has reviewed the records relating to the claim and has determined that a debt is owed, the amount of the debt, and the facts giving rise to the debt;
              (b) The Secretary's intention to collect the debt by means of deduction from the employee's current disposable pay account until the debt and all accumulated interest are paid in full;
              (c) The amount, frequency, approximate beginning date, and duration of the intended deductions;
              (d) An explanation of the Department's requirements concerning interest, penalties, and administrative costs, including a statement that such assessments must be made unless excused in accordance with the Federal Claims Collection Standards as provided in 31 CFR 901.9 (although this information may alternatively be provided in the demand notice pursuant to 24 CFR 17.65);
              (e) The employee's right to inspect and copy Department records relating to the debt or, if the employee or his or her representative cannot personally inspect the records, to request and receive a copy of such records;
              (f) The employee's right to enter into a written agreement with the Secretary for a repayment schedule differing from that proposed by the Secretary, so long as the terms of the repayment schedule proposed by the employee are agreeable to the Secretary;
              (g) The right to a hearing, conducted in accordance with subpart A of part 26 of this chapter by an administrative law judge of the Department or a hearing official of another agency, on the Secretary's determination of the debt, the amount of the debt, or percentage of disposable pay to be deducted each pay period, so long as a petition is filed by the employee as prescribed by the Secretary;
              (h) That the timely filing of a petition for hearing will stay the collection proceedings (See § 17.91);
              (i) That a final decision on the hearing will be issued at the earliest practical date, but not later than 60 calendar days after the filing of the petition requesting the hearing, unless the employee requests and the hearing officer grants a delay in the proceedings;
              (j) That any knowingly false or frivolous statements, representations, or evidence may subject the employee to:
              (1) Disciplinary procedures appropriate under 5 U.S.C. Ch. 75, 5 CFR part 752, or any other applicable statutes or regulations;
              (2) Penalties under the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. 3729-3731, or any other applicable statutory authority; or
              (3) Criminal penalties under 18 U.S.C. 286, 287, 1001, and 1002 or any other applicable statutory authority.
              (k) Any other rights and remedies available to the employee under statutes or regulations governing the program for which the collection is being made;

              (l) Unless there are applicable contractual or statutory provisions to the contrary, that amounts paid on or deducted for the debt which are later waived or found not owed to the United States will be promptly refunded to the employee; and
              
              (m) The method and time period for requesting a hearing, including the address of the Office of Appeals to which the request must be sent.
            
            
              § 17.91
              Request for a hearing.
              (a) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, an employee must file a petition for a hearing that is received by the Office of Appeals not later than 20 calendar days from the date of the Department's notice described in § 17.89 if an employee wants a hearing concerning—
              (1) The existence or amount of the debt; or
              (2) The Secretary's proposed offset schedule.
              (b) The petition must be signed by the employee, must include a copy of HUD's Notice of Intent to Offset Salary, and should admit or deny the existence of or the amount of the debt, or any part of the debt, briefly setting forth any basis for a denial. If the employee objects to the percentage of disposable pay to be deducted from each check, the petition should state the objection and the reasons for it. The petition should identify and explain with reasonable specificity and brevity the facts, evidence, and witnesses that the employee believes support his or her position.
              (c) Upon receipt of the petition, the Office of Appeals will send the employee a copy of the Salary Offset Hearing Procedures Manual of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
              (d) If the employee files a petition for hearing later than the 20 calendar days as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the hearing officer may accept the request if the employee can show that the delay was because of circumstances beyond his or her control or because of failure to receive notice of the filing deadline (unless the employee has actual notice of the filing deadline).
            
            
              § 17.93
              Result if employee fails to meet deadlines.
              An employee waives the right to a hearing, and will have his or her disposable pay offset in accordance with the Secretary's offset schedule, if the employee:
              (a) Fails to file a petition for a hearing as prescribed in § 17.91; or
              (b) Is scheduled to appear and fails to appear at the hearing.
            
            
              § 17.95
              Written decision following a hearing.
              Written decisions provided after a request for a hearing will include:
              (a) A statement of the facts presented to support the nature and origin of the alleged debt;
              (b) The hearing officer's analysis, findings, and conclusions, in light of the hearing, concerning the employee's or the Department's grounds;
              (c) The amount and validity of the alleged debt; and
              (d) The repayment schedule, if applicable.
            
            
              § 17.97
              Review of departmental records related to the debt.
              (a) Notification by employee. An employee who intends to inspect or copy departmental records related to the debt must send a letter to the Secretary stating his or her intention. The letter must be received by the Secretary within 20 calendar days of the date of the Notice of Intent.
              (b) Secretary's response. In response to timely notice submitted by the debtor as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will notify the employee of the location and time when the employee may inspect and copy Department records related to the debt.
            
            
              § 17.99
              Written agreement to repay debt as alternative to salary offset.
              (a) Notification by employee. The employee may propose, in response to a Notice of Intent, a written agreement to repay the debt as an alternative to salary offset. Any employee who wishes to do this must submit a proposed written agreement to repay the debt, which is received by the Secretary within 20 calendar days of the date of the Notice of Intent.
              (b) Secretary's response. In response to timely notice by the debtor as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will notify the employee whether the employee's proposed written agreement for repayment is acceptable. It is within the Secretary's discretion to accept a repayment agreement instead of proceeding by offset. In making this determination, the Secretary will balance the Department's interest in collecting the debt against hardship to the employee. If the debt is delinquent and the employee has not disputed its existence or amount, the Secretary will accept a repayment agreement instead of offset only if the employee is able to establish that offset would result in undue financial hardship or would be against equity and good conscience.
            
            
              § 17.101
              Procedures for salary offset: when deductions may begin.
              (a) Deductions to liquidate an employee's debt will be by the method and in the amount stated in the Secretary's Notice of Intent to collect from the employee's current pay.
              (b) If the employee filed a petition for hearing with the Secretary before the expiration of the period provided for in § 17.91, then deductions will begin after:
              (1) The hearing officer has provided the employee with a hearing; and
              (2) The hearing officer has issued a final written decision in favor of the Secretary.
              (c) If an employee retires or resigns before collection of the amount of the indebtedness is completed, the remaining indebtedness will be collected according to the procedures for the collection of claims under §§ 17.61 through 17.79.
            
            
              § 17.103
              Procedures for salary offset: types of collection.
              A debt will be collected in a lump sum or in installments. Collection will be by lump-sum collection unless the debt is for other than travel advances and training expenses, and the employee is financially unable to pay in one lump sum, or the amount of the debt exceeds 15 percent of disposable pay. In these cases, deduction will be by installments.
            
            
              § 17.105
              Procedures for salary offset: methods of collection.
              (a) General. A debt will be collected by deductions at officially established pay intervals from an employee's current pay account, unless the employee and the Secretary agree to alternative arrangements for repayment. The alternative arrangement must be in writing, signed by both the employee and the Secretary.
              (b) Installment deductions. Installment deductions will be made over a period not greater than the anticipated period of employment. The size and frequency of installment deductions will bear a reasonable relation to the size of the debt and the employee's ability to pay. However, the amount deducted for any period will not exceed 15 percent of the disposable pay from which the deduction is made, unless the employee has agreed in writing to the deduction of a greater amount. If possible, the installment payment will be sufficient in size and frequency to liquidate the debt in 3 years. Installment payments of less than $25 per pay period or $50 a month will be accepted only in the most unusual circumstances.
              (c) Sources of deductions. The Department will make deductions only from basic pay, special pay, incentive pay, retired pay, retainer pay, or, in the case of an employee not entitled to basic pay, other authorized pay.
            
            
              § 17.107
              Procedures for salary offset: imposition of interest.
              Interest will be charged in accordance with the Federal Claims Collection Standards as provided in 31 CFR 901.9.
            
            
              § 17.109
              Nonwaiver of rights.
              So long as there are no statutory or contractual provisions to the contrary, no employee involuntary payment (of all or a portion of a debt) collected under these regulations will be interpreted as a waiver of any rights that the employee may have under 5 U.S.C. 5514 or any other provision of contract or law.
            
            
              § 17.111
              Refunds.

              The Department will refund promptly to the appropriate individual amounts offset under these regulations when:
              (a) A debt is waived or otherwise found not owing the United States (unless expressly prohibited by statute or regulation); or
              (b) The Department is directed by an administrative or judicial order to refund amounts deducted from the employee's current pay.
            
            
              § 17.113
              Miscellaneous provisions: correspondence with the Department.
              The employee shall file a request for a hearing with the Clerk, OA, 409 3rd Street SW., 2nd Floor, Washington, DC 20024, on official work days between the hours of 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. (or such other address as HUD may provide by notice from time to time). All other correspondence shall be submitted to the Departmental Claims Officer, Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410 (or such other officer or address as HUD may provide by notice from time to time). Documents may be filed by personal delivery or mail.
            
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 18
        PART 18—INDEMNIFICATION OF HUD EMPLOYEES
        
          Authority:
          5 U.S.C. 301; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          62 FR 6096, Feb. 10, 1997, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 18.1
          Policy.
          (a) The Department of Housing and Urban Development may indemnify, in whole or in part, a Department employee (which for the purpose of this part includes a former Department employee) for any verdict, judgment or other monetary award which is rendered against any such employee, provided the Secretary or his or her designee determines that:
          (1) The conduct giving rise to the verdict, judgment or award was taken within the scope of his or her employment with the Department; and
          (2) Such indemnification is in the interest of the United States.
          (b) The Department of Housing and Urban Development may settle or compromise a personal damage claim against a Department employee by the payment of available funds, at any time, provided the Secretary or his or her designee determines that:
          (1) The alleged conduct giving rise to the personal damage claim was taken within the scope of employment; and
          (2) That such settlement or compromise is in the interest of the United States.
          (c) Absent exceptional circumstances, as determined by the Secretary or his or her designee, the Department will not entertain a request either to agree to indemnify or to settle a personal damage claim before entry of an adverse verdict, judgment or monetary award.

          (d) When an employee of the Department becomes aware that an action has been filed against the employee in his or her individual capacity as a result of conduct taken within the scope of his or her employment, the employee should immediately notify his or her supervisor that such an action is pending. The supervisor shall promptly notify the head of his or her operating component and the Associate General Counsel for Litigation and Fair Housing Enforcement, if the supervisor is located at headquarters, or Field Assistant General Counsel—who shall promptly notify the Associate General Counsel for Litigation and Fair Housing Enforcement—if the supervisor is located in the field. As used in this section, the term “principal operating component” means an office in the Department headed by an Assistant Secretary, the General Counsel, the Inspector General, or an equivalent departmental officer who reports directly to the Secretary. Questions regarding representation of the employee will be determined by the Department of Justice pursuant to 28 CFR 50.15 (Representation of Federal officials and employees by Department of Justice attorneys or by private counsel furnished by the Department in civil, criminal, and congressional proceedings in which Federal employees are sued, subpoenaed, or charged in their individual capacities).
          
          (e) The employee may, thereafter, request indemnification to satisfy a verdict, judgment or monetary award entered against the employee or to compromise a claim pending against the employee. The employee shall submit a written request, with appropriate documentation including a copy of the verdict, judgment, award or other order or settlement proposal, in a timely manner to the head of the employee's principal operating component. The head of the employee's principal operating component shall submit the written request and accompanying documentation, together with a recommended disposition of the request, in a timely manner to the General Counsel.
          (f) The General Counsel shall seek the views of the Department of Justice on the request. Where the Department of Justice has rendered a decision denying representation of the employee pursuant to 28 CFR 50.15, the General Counsel shall seek the concurrence of the Department of Justice on the request. If the Department of Justice does not concur in the request, the General Counsel shall so advise the employee and no further action on the employee's request shall be taken.
          (g) In all instances except those where the Department of Justice has non-concurred in the request, the General Counsel shall forward for decision to the Secretary or his or her designee the employee's request, the recommendation of the head of the employee's principal operating component, the views of the Department of Justice, and the General Counsel's recommendation.
          (h) Any payment under this part, either to indemnify a Department employee or to settle a personal damage claim, is contingent upon the availability of appropriated funds of the Department that are permitted by law to be utilized for this purpose.
        
      
      
        Pt. 20
        PART 20—OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
        
          Sec.
          20.1
          Establishment of the Office of Hearings and Appeals.
          20.3
          Location, organization, and officer qualifications.
          20.5
          Jurisdiction of Office of Appeals.
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          72 FR 53878, Sept. 20, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 20.1
          Establishment of the Office of Hearings and Appeals.
          There is established in the Office of the Secretary the Office of Hearings and Appeals.
        
        
          § 20.3
          Location, organization, and officer qualifications.
          (a) Mailing address. The Office of Hearings and Appeals is located at the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Room B-133, Washington, DC 20410.
          (b) Location. For deliveries, the Office of Hearings and Appeals is physically located at 409 Third Street, SW., Suite 201, Washington, DC 20024. The telephone number of the Office of Hearings and Appeals is 202-254-0000. Hearing- or speech-impaired individuals may access this number via TTY by calling the toll-free Federal Information Relay Service at 800-877-8339. The facsimile number is 202-619-7304.
          (c) Organization. The Office of Hearings and Appeals consists of two divisions: the Office of Administrative Law Judges and the Office of Appeals. Its administrative activities are supervised by the Director of the Office of Hearings and Appeals.
          (d) Officer qualifications. The Director, Administrative Judges, and Administrative Law Judges of the Office of Hearings and Appeals shall be attorneys at law duly licensed by any state, commonwealth, territory, or the District of Columbia.
          [72 FR 53878, Sept. 20, 2007, as amended at 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009]
        
        
          § 20.5
          Jurisdiction of Office of Appeals.

          The Office of Appeals shall, consistent with statute and regulation, have jurisdiction over matters assigned to it by the Secretary or designee. Determinations shall have the finality provided by the applicable statute, regulation, or agreement.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 24
        PART 24—GOVERNMENTWIDE DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION (NONPROCUREMENT)
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          § 24.1
          Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement).
          The policies, procedures, and requirements for debarment, suspension, and limited denial of participation are set forth in 2 CFR part 2424.
          [72 FR 73491, Dec. 27, 2007]
        
      
      
        Pt. 25
        PART 25—MORTGAGEE REVIEW BOARD
        
          Sec.
          25.1
          Scope of rules in this part.
          25.2
          Establishment and authority of Board.
          25.3
          Definitions.
          25.4
          Operation of the Mortgagee Review Board.
          25.5
          Administrative actions.
          25.6
          Violations creating grounds for administrative action.
          25.7
          Notice of violation.
          25.8
          Factors considered in taking administrative action.
          25.9
          Notice of administrative action.
          25.10
          Hearings and hearing request.
          25.11
          Modification of Board orders.
          25.12
          Public access to information; publication of actions.
          25.13
          Notifying GNMA of withdrawal actions.
          25.15
          Retroactive application of Board regulations.
          25.17
          [Reserved]
        
        
          Authority:
          12 U.S.C. 1708(c), 1708(d), 1709(s), 1715b and 1735(f)-14; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 25.1
          Scope of rules in this part.
          The rules in this part are applicable to the operation of the Mortgagee Review Board and to proceedings arising from administrative actions of the Mortgagee Review Board.
        
        
          § 25.2
          Establishment and authority of Board.
          (a) Establishment of the Board. The Mortgagee Review Board (Board) was established in the Federal Housing Administration, which is in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, by section 202(c)(1) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1708(c)(1)), as added by section 142 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (Pub. L. 101-235, approved December 15, 1989).
          (b) Authority of the Board. The Board has the authority to initiate administrative actions against mortgagees and lenders under 12 U.S.C. 1708(c) and shall exercise all of the functions of the Secretary with respect to administrative actions against mortgagees and lenders and such other functions as are provided in this part. The Board shall have all powers necessary and incident to the performance of these functions and such other functions as are provided in this part, except as limited by this part.
          (1) Administrative Actions. The Board has the authority to take any administrative action against mortgagees and lenders as provided in 12 U.S.C. 1708(c). The Board may delegate its authority to take all nondiscretionary acts.
          (2) Civil Money Penalties. The Board is authorized pursuant to section 536 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1735(f)-14) to impose civil money penalties upon mortgagees and lenders, as set forth in 24 CFR part 30. The violations for which a civil money penalty may be imposed are listed in subpart B (Violations) of 24 CFR part 30. Hearings to challenge the imposition of civil money penalties shall be conducted according to the applicable rules of 24 CFR part 30.
          (3) Authorization for other administrative actions. The Board may, in its discretion, approve the initiation of a suspension or debarment action against a mortgagee or lender by any Suspending or Debarring Official under 24 CFR part 24.
          [73 FR 60540, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.3
          Definitions.
          
            Adequate evidence. Information sufficient to support the reasonable belief that a particular act or omission has occurred.
          
            Board. The Mortgagee Review Board.
          
            Lender. A financial institution as defined in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of lender in § 202.2 of this title.
          
            Mortgagee. For purposes of this part, the term “mortgagee” includes:
          
          (1) The original lender under the mortgage, as that term is defined at sections 201(a) and 207(a)(1) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1707(a), 1713(a)(1));
          (2) A lender, as defined in this section;
          (3) A branch office or subsidiary of the mortgagee or lender; or
          (4) Successors and assigns of the mortgagee or lender, as are approved by the Commissioner.
          
            Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, unit of government or legal entity, however organized.
          
            Secretary. The Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development or a person designated by the Secretary.
          [57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992; 57 FR 37085, Aug. 18, 1992, as amended at 60 FR 13835, Mar. 14, 1995; 60 FR 39237, Aug. 1, 1995; 61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996; 62 FR 20081, Apr. 24, 1997; 72 FR 53878, Sept. 20, 2007; 73 FR 60540, Oct. 10, 2008; 77 FR 51467, Aug. 24, 2012]
        
        
          § 25.4
          Operation of the Mortgagee Review Board.
          (a) Members. The Board consists of the following HUD officials designated to serve on the Board by section 202(c)(2) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1708(c)(2)):
          (1) The Assistant Secretary of Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner;
          (2) The General Counsel of the Department;
          (3) The President of the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA);
          (4) The Assistant Secretary for Administration;
          (5) The Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (in cases involving violations of nondiscrimination requirements);
          (6) The Chief Financial Officer of the Department; and
          (7) The Director of the Enforcement Center; or their designees.
          (b) Advisors. The Inspector General or his or her designee, and the Director of the Office of Lender Activities and Program Compliance (or such other position as may be assigned such duties), and such other persons as the Board may appoint, shall serve as nonvoting advisors to the Board.
          (c) Quorum. Four members of the Board or their designees shall constitute a quorum.
          (d) Determination by the Board. Any administrative action taken by the Board shall be determined by a majority vote of the quorum.
          [57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992; 57 FR 37085, Aug. 18, 1992, as amended at 73 FR 60540, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.5
          Administrative actions.
          (a) General. The Board is authorized to take administrative actions in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 1708(c), including, but not limited to, the following: issue a letter of reprimand, probation, suspension, or withdrawal; or enter into a settlement agreement.
          (b) Letter of reprimand. A letter of reprimand shall be effective upon receipt of the letter by the mortgagee. Failure to comply with a directive in the letter of reprimand may result in any other administrative action that the Board finds appropriate as provided by 12 U.S.C. 1708(c).
          (c) Probation. Probation shall be effective upon receipt of the notice of probation by the mortgagee. Failure to comply with the terms of probation may result in any other administrative action that the Board finds appropriate as provided by 12 U.S.C. 1708(c).
          (d) Suspension—(1) Effect of suspension. (i) During the period of suspension, HUD will not endorse any mortgage originated by the suspended mortgagee under the Title II program unless prior to the date of suspension:
          (A) A firm commitment has been issued relating to any such mortgage; or
          (B) A Direct Endorsement underwriter has approved the mortgagor for any such mortgage.
          (ii) During the period of suspension, a lender may not originate new Title I loans under its Title I Contract of Insurance or apply for a new Contract of Insurance.
          (2) Effective date of suspension. A suspension issued pursuant to § 25.7(d) is effective upon issuance. Any other suspension is effective upon receipt of the notice of suspension by the mortgagee.
          (e) Withdrawal—(1) Effect of withdrawal. (i) During the period of withdrawal, HUD will not endorse any mortgage originated by the withdrawn mortgagee under the Title II program, unless prior to the date of withdrawal:
          (A) A firm commitment has been issued relating to any such mortgage; or
          (B) A Direct Endorsement underwriter has approved the mortgagor for any such mortgage.
          (ii) During the period of withdrawal, a lender may not originate new Title I loans under its Title I Contract of Insurance or apply for a new Contract of Insurance. The Board may limit the geographical extent of the withdrawal, or limit its scope (e.g., to either the single family or multifamily activities of a withdrawn mortgagee). Upon the expiration of the period of withdrawal, the mortgagee may file a new application for approval under 24 CFR part 202.
          (2) Effective date of withdrawal. (i) If the Board determines that immediate action is in the public interest or in the best interests of the Department, then withdrawal shall be effective upon receipt of the Board's notice of withdrawal.
          (ii) If the Board does not determine that immediate action is necessary according to paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section, then withdrawal shall be effective either:
          (A) Upon the expiration of the 30-day period specified in § 25.10, if the mortgagee has not requested a hearing; or
          (B) Upon receipt of the Board's decision under § 25.10, if the mortgagee requests a hearing.
          [73 FR 60540, Oct. 10, 2008, as amended at 77 FR 51467, Aug. 24, 2012]
        
        
          § 25.6
          Violations creating grounds for administrative action.
          Any administrative action imposed under 12 U.S.C. 1708(c) shall be based upon one or more of the following violations:
          (a) The transfer of an insured mortgage to non-approved mortgagee, except pursuant to 24 CFR 203.433 or 203.435;
          (b) The failure of a mortgagee to segregate all escrow funds received from mortgagors on account of ground rents, taxes, assessments and insurance premiums, or failure to deposit these funds with one or more financial institutions in a special account or accounts that are fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or by the National Credit Union Administration except as otherwise provided in writing by the Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner;
          (c) The use of escrow funds for any purpose other than that for which they are received;
          (d) The termination of a mortgagee's supervision by a governmental agency;
          (e) The failure of a nonsupervised mortgagee to submit the required annual audit report of its financial condition prepared in accordance with instructions issued by the Secretary within 90 days of the close of its fiscal year, or such longer period as the Assistant Secretary of Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner may authorize in writing prior to the expiration of 90 days;
          (f) The payment by a mortgagee of a referral fee to any person or organization; or payment of any thing of value, directly or indirectly, in connection with any insured mortgage transaction or transactions to any person, including but not limited to an attorney, escrow agent, title company, consultant, mortgage broker, seller, builder or real estate agent, if that person has received any other compensation from the mortgagor, the seller, the builder or any other person for services related to such transactions or from or related to the purchase or sale of the mortgaged property, except compensation paid for the actual performance of such services as may be approved by the Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner;
          (g) Failure to comply with any agreement, certification, undertaking, or condition of approval listed on, or applicable to, either a mortgagee's application for approval or an approved mortgagee's branch office notification;
          (h) Failure of an approved mortgagee to meet or maintain the applicable net worth, liquidity or warehouse line of credit requirements of 24 CFR part 202 pertaining to net worth, liquid assets, and warehouse line of credit or other acceptable funding plan;

          (i) Failure or refusal of an approved mortgagee to comply with an order of the Board, the Secretary, the hearing official, hearing officer or other independent official to whom matters are referred under § 25.8(d)(2).
          (j) Violation of the requirements of any contract or agreement with the Department, or violation of the requirements set forth in any statute, regulation, handbook, mortgagee letter, or other written rule or instruction;
          (k) Submission of false information to HUD in connection with any HUD/FHA insured mortgage transaction;
          (l) Failure of a mortgagee to respond to inquiries from the Board;
          (m) Indictment or conviction of a mortgagee or any of its officers, directors, principals or employees for an offense which reflects upon the responsibility, integrity, or ability of the mortgagee to participate in HUD/FHA programs as an approved mortgagee;
          (n) Employing or retaining:
          (1) An officer, partner, director, or principal at such time when such person was suspended, debarred, ineligible, or subject to a limited denial of participation under 2 CFR part 2424 or otherwise prohibited from participation in HUD programs, where the mortgagee knew or should have known of the prohibition;
          (2) An employee who is not an officer, partner, director, or principal and who is or will be working on HUD/FHA program matters at a time when such person was suspended, debarred, ineligible, or subject to a limited denial of participation under 2 CFR part 2424 or otherwise prohibited from participation in HUD programs, where the mortgagee knew or should have known of the prohibition;
          (o) Violation by an approved mortgagee of the nondiscrimination requirements of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691-1691f), Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619), Executive Order 11063 (27 FR 11527), and all regulations issued pursuant thereto;
          (p) Business practices which do not conform to generally accepted practices of prudent mortgagees or which demonstrate irresponsibility;
          (q) Failure to cooperate with an audit or investigation by the Department's Office of Inspector General or an inquiry by HUD/FHA into the conduct of the mortgagee's HUD/FHA insured business or any other failure to provide information to the Secretary or a representative related to the conduct of the mortgagee's HUD/FHA business;
          (r) Violation by an approved mortgagee of the requirements or prohibitions of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (12 U.S.C. 2601-2617);
          (s) Without regard to the date of the insurance of the mortgage, failure to service an insured mortgage in accordance with the regulations and any other requirements of the Secretary which are in effect at the time the act or omission occurs;
          (t) Failure to administer properly an assistance payment contract under section 235 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z);
          (u) Failure to pay the application and annual fees required by 24 CFR part 202;
          (v) The failure of a coinsuring mortgagee:
          (1) To properly perform underwriting, servicing or property disposition functions in accordance with instructions and standards issued by the Commissioner;
          (2) To make full payment to an investing mortgagee as required by 24 CFR part 204;
          (3) To discharge responsibilities under a contract for coinsurance;
          (4) To comply with restrictions concerning the transfer of a coinsured mortgage to an agency not approved under 24 CFR part 250;
          (5) To maintain additional net worth requirements, as applicable;
          (w) Failure to remit, or timely remit, mortgage insurance premiums, loan insurance charges, late charges, or interest penalties to the Department;
          (x) Failure to submit a report required under 24 CFR 202.12(c) within the time determined by the Commissioner, or to commence or complete a plan for corrective action under that section within the time agreed upon with the Commissioner.
          (y) Failure to properly perform underwriting functions in accordance with instructions and standards issued by the Department;

          (z) Failure to fund mortgage loans or any other misuse of mortgage loan proceeds;
          
          (aa) Permitting the use of strawbuyer mortgagors in an insured mortgage transaction where the mortgagee knew or should have known of such use of strawbuyers;
          (bb) Breach by the mortgagee of a fiduciary duty owed by it to any person as defined in § 25.3, including GNMA and the holder of any mortgage-backed security guaranteed by GNMA, with respect to an insured loan or mortgage transaction.
          (cc) Violation by a Title I lender of any of the applicable provisions of this section or 24 CFR 202.11(a)(2).
          (dd) Failure to pay any civil money penalty, but only after all administrative appeals requested by the mortgagee have been exhausted.
          (ee) Submitting, or causing to be submitted, with an application for FHA mortgage insurance an appraisal, valuation condition sheet, or any other documentation relating to an appraisal that does not satisfy FHA requirements.
          (ff) Any other violation of Federal Housing Administration requirements that the Board or the Secretary determines to be so serious as to justify an administrative sanction.
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 2502-0450)
          [57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992; 57 FR 37085, Aug. 18, 1992, as amended at 57 FR 58339, Dec. 9, 1992; 60 FR 13836, Mar. 14, 1995; 60 FR 39238, Aug. 1, 1995; 61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996; 62 FR 20081, Apr. 24, 1997; 69 FR 43509, July 20, 2004; 72 FR 73492, Dec. 27, 2007. Redesignated and amended at 73 FR 60541, Oct. 10, 2008; 77 FR 51467, Aug. 24, 2012]
        
        
          § 25.7
          Notice of violation.
          (a) General. The Chairperson of the Board, or the Chairperson's designee, shall issue a written notice to the mortgagee at the mortgagee's address of record at least 30 days prior to taking any action under 12 U.S.C. 1708(c) against the mortgagee. Proof of delivery to the mortgagee's address of record shall establish the mortgagee's receipt of the notice. The notice shall state the specific violations that have been alleged, and shall direct the mortgagee to reply in writing to the Board within 30 days after receipt of the notice by the mortgagee. The notice shall also provide the address to which the response shall be sent. If the mortgagee fails to reply during such time period, the Board may make a determination without considering any comments of the mortgagee.
          (b) Mortgagee's response. The mortgagee's response to the Board shall be in a format prescribed by the Secretary and shall not exceed 15 double-spaced typewritten pages. The response shall include an executive summary, a statement of the facts surrounding the matter, an argument, and a conclusion. Such response shall also address the factors listed in § 25.8. A more lengthy submission, including documents and other exhibits, may be simultaneously submitted to Board staff for review.
          (c) Exception for letter of reprimand. Whenever information comes before the Board that discloses a basis for the issuance of a letter of reprimand, the Board may issue the letter without having previously issued a notice of violation.
          (d) Exception for immediate suspension. If the Board determines that there exists adequate evidence that immediate action is required to protect the financial interests of the Department or the public, the Board may take a suspension action without having previously issued a notice of violation.
          [73 FR 60541, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.8
          Factors considered in taking administrative action.
          In determining which administrative action under 12 U.S.C. 1708(c), if any, should be taken, the Board will consider, among other factors, the seriousness and extent of the violations, the degree of mortgagee responsibility for the occurrences, and any other mitigating or aggravating facts. Where the Board is considering a withdrawal action, the Board will also consider whether the violations were egregious or willful, in order to determine whether a permanent withdrawal is mandated by 12 U.S.C. 1708(c).
          [73 FR 60541, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.9
          Notice of administrative action.

          (a) Whenever the Board decides to take an action in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 1708(c)(3), the Chairperson of the Board, or the Chairperson's designee, shall issue a written notice of the action to the mortgagee at the mortgagee's address of record of the determination. Proof of delivery to the mortgagee's address of record shall establish the mortgagee's receipt of the notice.
          (b) In actions for probation, suspension, or withdrawal, the notice shall describe the nature and duration of the administrative action, and shall specifically state the reasons for the action. In actions for probation, suspension, or withdrawal, the notice shall inform the mortgagee of its right to a hearing regarding the administrative action and of the manner and time in which to request a hearing.
          [73 FR 60541, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.10
          Hearings and hearing request.
          (a) Hearing request. A mortgagee subject to any administrative action under 12 U.S.C. 1708(c), except for a letter of reprimand, may request a hearing, which shall be held on the record before an administrative law judge. The mortgagee shall submit its request for a hearing within 30 days of receiving the Board's notice of administrative action. The request shall be addressed to the Mortgagee Review Board Docket Clerk, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410. The request shall specifically respond to the violations set forth in the notice of administrative action. If the mortgagee fails to request a hearing within 30 days after receiving the notice of administrative action, the Board's action shall become final.
          (b) Hearing by Administrative Law Judge. Hearings are to be conducted by an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), as set forth in this part. The ALJ shall commence a de novo hearing within 30 days of HUD's receipt of the mortgagee's request, unless the mortgagee moves for an extension of time. The ALJ may extend this time period for good cause.
          (c) Procedural rules. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of 24 CFR part 26, with the following modifications:
          (1) The mortgagee or its representative shall be afforded an opportunity to appear, submit documentary evidence, present witnesses, and confront any witness the agency presents, except that the parties shall not be allowed to present members of the Board as witnesses.
          (2) Discovery of information and/or documents that do not pertain to the appealing mortgagee, including, but not limited to, reviews or audits by the Department or administrative actions by the Board against mortgagees other than the appealing mortgagee, shall not be permitted. Members of the Board shall not be subject to deposition.
          (3) The hearing shall generally be held in Washington, DC. However, upon a showing of undue hardship or other cause, the ALJ may, in his or her discretion, order the hearing to be held in a location other than Washington, DC.
          [73 FR 60542, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.11
          Modification of Board orders.
          No order of an ALJ before whom proceedings are conducted under § 25.10 may modify or otherwise disturb in any way an order or notice by the Board, unless the order of the ALJ becomes final agency action in accordance with subpart B of part 26 of this title.
          [73 FR 60542, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.12
          Public access to information; publication of actions.
          (a) Where a notice of administrative action does not result in a hearing and in any cases in which a settlement is entered into by the Board and a mortgagee, all non-privileged information regarding the nature of the violation and the resolution of the action shall be available to the public.
          (b) Publication in the Federal Register. The Secretary shall publish, in the Federal Register, a description of and the cause for each administrative action taken by the Board against a mortgagee.
          (c) Notification of other agencies. Whenever the Board has taken any discretionary action to suspend and/or withdraw the approval of a mortgagee, the Secretary shall provide prompt notice of the action and a statement of the reasons for the action to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs; the chief executive officer of the Federal National Mortgage Association; the chief executive officer of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation; the Administrator of the Rural Housing Service (formerly the Farmers Home Administration); the Comptroller of the Currency, if the mortgagee is a National Bank or District Bank or subsidiary or affiliate of such a bank; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, if the mortgagee is a state bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System or a subsidiary or affiliate of such a bank, or a bank holding company or a subsidiary or affiliate of such a company; the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, if the mortgagee is a state bank that is not a member of the Federal Reserve System, or is a subsidiary or affiliate of such a bank; and the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, if the mortgagee is a federal or state savings association or a subsidiary or affiliate of a savings association.
          (d) Notification to GNMA of withdrawal actions. Whenever the Board issues a notice of violation that could lead to withdrawal of a mortgagee's approval, or is notified by GNMA of an action that could lead to withdrawal of GNMA approval, the Board shall proceed in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 1708(d).
          [73 FR 60542, Oct. 10, 2008]
        
        
          § 25.13
          Notifying GNMA of withdrawal actions.
          When the Board issues a notice of violation that could lead to withdrawal of a mortgagee's approval, or is notified by GNMA of an action that could lead to withdrawal of GNMA approval, the Board shall proceed in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 1708(d).
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 2502-0450)
          [61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996]
        
        
          § 25.15
          Retroactive application of Board regulations.
          Limitations on participation in HUD mortgage insurance programs proposed or imposed prior to August 12, 1992, under an ancillary procedure shall not be affected by this part. This part shall apply to sanctions initiated after the effective date of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (December 15, 1989) regardless of the date of the cause giving rise to the sanction.
          [57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992. Redesignated at 61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996]
        
        
          § 25.17
          [Reserved]
        
      
      
        Pt. 26
        PART 26—HEARING PROCEDURES
        
          
            Subpart A—Hearings Before Hearing Officers
            Sec.
            26.1
            Purpose and scope.
            
              Hearing Officer
              26.2
              Hearing officer, powers, and duties.
              26.3
              
                Ex parte communications.
              26.4
              Sanctions.
              26.5
              Disqualification of hearing officer.
            
            
              Representation of the Parties
              26.6
              Department representative.
              26.7
              Respondent's representative.
              26.8
              Standards of practice.
            
            
              Pleadings and Motions
              26.9
              Form and filing requirements.
              26.10
              Service.
              26.11
              Time computation.
              26.12
              Notice of administrative action.
              26.13
              Complaint.
              26.14
              Answer.
              26.15
              Amendments and supplemental pleadings.
              26.16
              Motions.
            
            
              Discovery
              26.17
              Prehearing conference.
              26.18
              Discovery.
              26.19
              Request for production of documents.
              26.20
              Depositions.
              26.21
              Written interrogatories.
              26.22
              Requests for admissions.
            
            
              Hearings
              26.23
              Public nature and timing of hearings; transcripts.
              26.24
              Rules of evidence.
              26.25
              Hearing officer's determination and order.
            
            
              Secretarial Review
              26.26
              Review of determination of hearing officers.
              26.27
              Interlocutory rulings.
            
          
          
            
            Subpart B—Hearings Pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act
            26.28
            Purpose and scope.
            26.29
            Definitions.
            26.30
            Service and filing.
            26.31
            Time computations.
            
              Administrative Law Judge
              26.32
              Powers and duties of the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).
              26.33
              
                Ex parte communications.
              26.34
              Sanctions.
              26.35
              Disqualification of ALJ.
            
            
              Parties
              26.36
              Parties to the hearing.
              26.37
              Separation of functions.
            
            
              Prehearing Procedures
              26.38
              Commencement of action.
              26.39
              Prehearing conferences.
              26.40
              Motions.
              26.41
              Default.
            
            
              Discovery
              26.42
              Discovery.
              26.43
              Subpoenas.
              26.44
              Protective orders.
            
            
              Hearings
              26.45
              General.
              26.46
              Witnesses.
              26.47
              Evidence.
              26.48
              Posthearing briefs.
              26.49
              The record.
              26.50
              Initial decision.
              26.51
              Interlocutory rulings.
              26.52
              Appeal to the Secretary.
              26.53
              Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
              26.54
              Judicial review.
              26.55
              Collection of civil penalties and assessments.
              26.56
              Right to administrative offset.
            
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          73 FR 76833, Dec. 17, 2008, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—Hearings Before Hearing Officers
          
            § 26.1
            Purpose and scope.
            This part sets forth rules of procedure in certain proceedings of the Department of Housing and Urban Development presided over by a hearing officer. These rules of procedure apply to administrative sanction hearings pursuant to 2 CFR part 2424 and to hearings with respect to determinations by the Multifamily Participation Review Committee pursuant to 24 CFR part 200, subpart H, to the extent that these regulations are not inconsistent and unless these regulations provide otherwise. They also apply in any other case where a hearing is required by statute or regulation, to the extent that rules adopted under such statute or regulation are not inconsistent.
          
          
            Hearing Officer
            
              § 26.2
              Hearing officer, powers, and duties.
              (a) Hearing officer. Proceedings conducted under these rules shall be presided over by a hearing officer who shall be an Administrative Law Judge or Office of Appeals Administrative Judge authorized by the Secretary or designee to conduct proceedings under this part.
              (b) Time and place of hearing. The hearing officer shall set the time and place of any hearing and shall give reasonable notice to the parties.
              (c) Powers of hearing officers. The hearing officer shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing and take all action necessary to avoid delay in the disposition of proceedings and to maintain order. The hearing officer shall have all powers necessary to those ends, including, but not limited to, the power:
              (1) To administer oaths and affirmations;
              (2) To cause subpoenas to be issued as authorized by law;
              (3) To rule upon offers of proof and receive evidence;
              (4) To order or limit discovery as the interests of justice may require;
              (5) To regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of the parties and their counsel;
              (6) To hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by consent of the parties;
              (7) To consider and rule upon all procedural and other motions appropriate in adjudicative proceedings;
              (8) To take notice of any material fact not appearing in evidence in the record that is properly a matter of judicial notice;
              (9) To make and file determinations; and
              
              (10) To exercise such other authority as is necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the hearing officer under subpart A of this part.
            
            
              § 26.3
              
                Ex parte communications.
              (a) Definition. An ex parte communication is any communication with a hearing officer, direct or indirect, oral or written, concerning the merits or procedures of any pending proceeding that is made by a party in the absence of any other party.
              (b) Prohibition of ex parte communications. Ex parte communications are prohibited except where:
              (1) The purpose and content of the communication have been disclosed in advance or simultaneously to all parties; or
              (2) The communication is a request for information concerning the status of the case.
              (c) Procedure after receipt of ex parte communication. Any hearing officer who receives an ex parte communication that the hearing officer knows or has reason to believe is unauthorized shall promptly place the communication, or its substance, in all files and shall furnish copies to all parties. Unauthorized ex parte communications shall not be taken into consideration in deciding any matter in issue.
            
            
              § 26.4
              Sanctions.
              (a) The hearing officer may sanction a person, including any party or representative, for failing to comply with an order, rule, or procedure governing the proceeding; failing to prosecute or defend an action; or engaging in other misconduct that interferes with the speedy, orderly, or fair conduct of the hearing.
              (b) Any sanction, including, but not limited to, those listed in paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of this section, shall reasonably relate to the severity and nature of the failure or misconduct.
              (c) If a party refuses or fails to comply with an order of the hearing officer, including an order compelling discovery, the hearing officer may enter any appropriate order necessary to the disposition of the hearing including a determination against the noncomplying party, including but not limited to, the following:
              (1) Draw an inference in favor of the requesting party with regard to the information sought;
              (2) In the case of requests for admission, regard each matter about which an admission is requested to be admitted;
              (3) Prohibit the party failing to comply with the order from introducing evidence concerning, or otherwise relying upon, testimony relating to the information sought; or
              (4) Strike any part of the pleadings or other submissions of the party failing to comply with the order.
              (d) If a party fails to prosecute or defend an action brought under subpart A of this part, the hearing officer may dismiss the action or may issue an initial decision against the non-prosecuting or defending party.
              (e) The hearing officer may refuse to consider any motion, request, response, brief, or other document that is not filed in a timely fashion.
            
            
              § 26.5
              Disqualification of hearing officer.
              (a) When a hearing officer believes there is a basis for disqualification in a particular proceeding, the hearing officer shall withdraw by notice on the record and shall notify the Secretary and the official initiating the action under appeal.
              (b) Whenever any party believes that the hearing officer should be disqualified from presiding in a particular proceeding, the party may file a motion with the hearing officer requesting the hearing officer to withdraw from presiding over the proceedings. This motion shall be supported by affidavits setting forth the alleged grounds for disqualification.
              (c) Upon the filing of a motion and affidavit, the hearing officer shall proceed no further in the case until the matter of disqualification is resolved.
              (d) If the hearing officer does not withdraw, a written statement of his or her reasons shall be incorporated in the record and the hearing shall proceed, unless the decision is appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 26.27.
            
          
          
            
            Representation of the Parties
            
              § 26.6
              Department representative.
              In each case heard before a hearing officer under this part, the Department shall be represented by attorneys from the Office of General Counsel.
            
            
              § 26.7
              Respondent's representative.
              The party against whom the administrative action is taken may be represented at hearing, as follows:
              (a) Individuals may appear on their own behalf;
              (b) A member of a partnership or joint venture may appear on behalf of the partnership or joint venture;
              (c) A bona fide officer may appear on behalf of a corporation or association upon a showing of adequate authorization;
              (d) An attorney who files a notice of appearance with the hearing officer may represent any party. For purposes of this paragraph, an attorney is defined as a member of the bar of a federal court or of the highest court of any state or territory of the United States; or
              (e) An individual not included within paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section may represent the respondent upon an adequate showing, as determined by the hearing officer, that the individual possesses the legal, technical, or other qualifications necessary to advise and assist in the presentation of the case.
            
            
              § 26.8
              Standards of practice.
              Attorneys shall conform to the standards of professional and ethical conduct required of practitioners in the courts of the United States and by the bars of which the attorneys are members. Any attorney may be prohibited by the hearing officer from representing a party if the attorney is not qualified under § 26.7 or if such action is necessary to maintain order in or the integrity of the pending proceeding.
            
          
          
            Pleadings and Motions
            
              § 26.9
              Form and filing requirements.
              (a) Filing. Unless otherwise provided by statute, rule, or regulation:
              (1) Requests for hearings shall be filed with the Office of General Counsel's Docket Clerk, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410. The OGC Docket Clerk shall assign the docket number and forward the case to HUD's Office of Appeals.
              (2) All other pleadings, submissions, and documents should be filed directly with the appropriate hearing officer.
              (3) Filing may be made by first class mail, delivery, facsimile transmission, or electronic means; however, the hearing officer may place reasonable limits on filing by facsimile or electronic means. Duplicate copies are not required unless so ordered by the hearing officer. A document is considered timely filed if postmarked on or before the date due or delivered to the appropriate person by the date due.
              (b) Title. Documents shall show clearly the title of the action and the docket number assigned by the Docket Clerk.
              (c) Form. To the fullest extent possible, all documents shall be printed or typewritten in clear, legible form.
            
            
              § 26.10
              Service.
              (a) Method of Service. One copy of all pleadings, motions, and other documents required or permitted under these rules shall be served upon all parties by the person filing them and shall be accompanied by a certificate of service stating how and when such service has been made. Whenever these rules require or permit service to be made upon a party represented by an attorney, the service shall be made upon the attorney, unless service upon the party is ordered by the hearing officer. Service shall be made by delivery, by first class mail or overnight delivery to that person's last known address, by facsimile transmission, or by electronic means; however, the hearing officer may place reasonable limits on service by facsimile transmission or electronic means. Delivery of a copy within this rule means: handing it to the person to be served; or leaving it at that person's office with a clerk or other person in charge; or, if there is no one in charge, leaving it in a conspicuous place in the office; or, if the office is closed or the person to be served has no office, leaving it at that person's residence or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion who resides there. Service by mail, overnight delivery, facsimile transmission, or electronic means is complete upon deposit in a mail box, or upon posting, or upon electronic transmission.
              (b) Proof of Service. Proof of service shall not be required unless the fact of service is put in issue by appropriate motion or objection on the part of the person allegedly served. In these cases, service may be established by written receipt signed by or on behalf of the person to be served, or may be established prima facie by affidavit, certificate of service of mailing, or electronic receipt of sending.
            
            
              § 26.11
              Time computation.
              (a) Generally. Computation of any period of time prescribed or allowed by this part shall begin with the first business day following the day on which the act, event, development, or default initiating the period of time occurred. When the last day of the period computed is a Saturday, Sunday, national holiday, or other day on which the Department of Housing and Urban Development is closed, the period shall run until the end of the next following business day. When any prescribed or allowed period of time is 7 days or less, each of the Saturdays, Sundays, and national holidays shall be excluded from the computation of the prescribed or allowed period.
              (b) Entry of orders. In computing any time period involving the date of the issuance of an order or decision by a hearing officer, the date of the issuance is the date the order or decision is served on the parties by the hearing officer or Docket Clerk.
              (c) Service by mail. If a document is served by mail, 3 days shall be added to the time permitted for a response.
              (d) Extensions of time periods. Except where mandated by statute, the hearing officer (or in the case of a review under §§ 26.26 and 26.27, the Secretary or designee) may upon motion enlarge the time within which any act required by these rules must be performed where necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest or the rights of the parties.
            
            
              § 26.12
              Notice of administrative action.
              In every case, there shall be a notice of administrative action. The notice shall be in writing and inform the party of the nature of that administrative action. The notice shall state the reasons for the proposed or imposed action, except where general terms are permitted by 2 CFR part 2424, and shall inform the party of any right to a hearing to challenge the administrative action, and the manner and time in which to request such hearing. A supplemental notice may be issued in the discretion of the initiating official to add to or modify the reasons for the action.
            
            
              § 26.13
              Complaint.
              (a) Respondent. A complaint shall be served upon the party against whom an administrative action is taken, who shall be called the respondent.
              (b) Grounds. The complaint shall state the legal and factual grounds upon which the administrative action is based. The grounds set forth in the complaint may not contain allegations beyond the scope of the notice of administrative action or any amendment thereto.
              (c) Notice of administrative action as complaint. A notice of administrative action may serve as a complaint provided the notice states it is also a complaint and complies with paragraph (b) of this section.
              (d) Timing. When the notice does not serve as a complaint, the complaint shall be served on or before the 30th day after the referral to a hearing officer or a request for hearing is made, or within any other time period designated by the hearing officer.
            
            
              § 26.14
              Answer.
              (a) Respondent shall file an answer within 30 days of receipt of the complaint, unless otherwise specified in this title or ordered by the hearing officer.
              (b) The answer shall:
              (1) Respond specifically to each factual allegation contained in the complaint;
              (2) Specifically plead any affirmative defense; and

              (3) Set forth any mitigating factors or extenuating circumstances.
              
              (c) A general denial shall not be permitted. Allegations are admitted when not specifically denied in respondent's answer.
            
            
              § 26.15
              Amendments and supplemental pleadings.
              (a) Amendments. (1) By right: The Department may amend its complaint without leave at any time within 30 days of the date the complaint is filed or at any time before respondent's responsive pleading is filed, whichever is later. Respondent may amend its answer without leave at any time within 30 days of filing of its answer. A party shall plead in response to an amended pleading within 15 days of receipt of the amended pleading.
              (2) By leave: Upon conditions as are necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest and the rights of the parties, the hearing officer may allow amendments to pleadings upon motion of any party.
              (3) Conformance to evidence: When issues not raised by the pleadings, but reasonably within the scope of the proceeding initiated by the complaint, are tried by express or implied consent to the parties, they shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings, and amendments of the pleadings necessary to make them conform to the evidence shall be allowed at any time.
              (b) Supplemental pleadings. The hearing officer may, upon reasonable notice, permit service of a supplemental pleading concerning transactions, occurrences, or events that have happened or been discovered since the date of prior pleadings.
            
            
              § 26.16
              Motions.
              (a) Motions. Requests for rulings or actions to be taken by the hearing officer should be made, wherever appropriate, in the form of a motion. All motions from the commencement of the action until the issuance of a decision shall be addressed to the hearing officer, and shall be served upon all parties to the proceeding.
              (b) Content. All written motions shall state the particular order, ruling, or action desired and the grounds for granting the motion. The parties may submit a proposed order with any motion.
              (c) Responses to motions. Within 10 days after receipt of any written motion, or within any other period as may be designated by the hearing officer, the opposing party shall respond to the motion and set forth any objections to the motion. Failure to file a timely response to the motion may constitute a party's consent to the granting of the motion. The moving party shall have no right to reply, except as permitted by the hearing officer.
              (d) Motions for extensions of time. Either party may file a motion for extension. At the discretion of the hearing officer, a motion for an extension of time may be granted for good cause at any time, notwithstanding an objection or any reply to the motion consistent with the provisions of § 26.2(c)(5) and (7). The hearing officer may waive the requirements of this section as to motions for extensions of time.
              (e) Oral argument. The hearing officer may order oral argument on any motion.
              (f) Motions for summary judgment. (1) A party claiming relief or a party against whom relief is sought may timely move, with or without supporting affidavits, for summary judgment on all or part of the claim.
              (2) Objections in the consideration of summary judgment motions or answers thereto based upon a failure to strictly comply with the provisions of Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure may, at the discretion of the hearing officer, be overruled.
              (g) Motions for dismissal. When a motion to dismiss the proceeding is granted, the hearing officer shall issue a determination and order in accordance with the provisions of § 26.25.
            
          
          
            Discovery
            
              § 26.17
              Prehearing conference.
              (a) Prehearing conference. The hearing officer may, sua sponte or at the request of any party, direct counsel for all parties to confer with the hearing officer before the hearing for the purpose of considering:

              (1) Simplification and clarification of the issues;
              
              (2) Stipulations and admissions of fact and of the contents and authenticity of documents;
              (3) The disclosure of the names of witnesses;
              (4) Matters of which official notice will be taken;
              (5) Other matters as may aid in the orderly disposition of the proceeding, including disclosure of the documents or other physical exhibits that will be introduced into evidence in the course of the proceeding.
              (b) Recordation of prehearing conference. The prehearing conference shall, at the request of any party, be recorded or transcribed.
              (c) Order on prehearing conference. The hearing officer shall enter in the record an order that states the rulings upon matters considered during the conference, together with appropriate directions to the parties. The order shall control the subsequent course of the proceeding, subject to modifications upon good cause shown.
            
            
              § 26.18
              Discovery.
              (a) General. The parties are encouraged to engage in voluntary discovery procedures, which may commence at any time after an answer has been filed. Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, that is relevant to the claim or defense of any party, including the existence, description, nature, custody, condition, and location of any books, documents, or other tangible things and the identity and location of persons having knowledge of any discoverable matter. For good cause, the hearing officer may order discovery of any matter relevant to the subject matter involved in the action. To be relevant, information need not be admissible at the hearing, if the discovery appears reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence. Each party shall bear its own expenses associated with discovery. Discovery may include:
              (1) Requests for production of documents as set forth in § 26.19;
              (2) Depositions as set forth in § 26.20;
              (3) Written interrogatories as set forth in § 26.21; and
              (4) Requests for admissions as set forth in § 26.22.
              (b) Supplementation of responses. A party who has responded to a request for discovery with a response is under a duty to timely amend a prior response to an interrogatory, request for production, or request for admission if so ordered by the hearing officer, or if the party learns that the response is in some material respect incomplete or incorrect and if the additional or corrective information has not otherwise been made known to the other parties during the discovery process or in writing.
              (c) Requesting an order. In connection with any discovery procedure, by motion addressed to the hearing officer and upon a showing of a good faith attempt to resolve the issue without the hearing officer's intervention, either party may:
              (1) Request an order compelling a response with respect to any objection to or other failure to respond to the discovery requested or any part thereof, or any failure to respond as specifically requested, or
              (2) Request a protective order limiting the scope, methods, time and place for discovery, and provisions for protecting privileged information or documents.
              (d) Limitations. (1) By order, the hearing officer may set or alter limits on the number of document requests, depositions, and interrogatories, or the length of depositions.
              (2) Orders compelling discovery shall be issued only where such discovery will not compel the disclosure of privileged information, unduly delay the hearing, or result in prejudice to the public interest or the rights of the parties, and upon a showing of good cause.
              (3) Protective orders may be issued by a hearing officer if the hearing officer determines such an order is necessary to protect a party or other person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense because:
              (i) The discovery sought is unreasonably cumulative or duplicative, or is obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive;

              (ii) The party seeking discovery has had ample opportunity by discovery in the action to obtain the information sought; or
              (iii) The burden or expense of the proposed discovery outweighs its likely benefit, taking into account the needs of the case, the amount in controversy, the parties' resources, the importance of the issues at stake in the litigation, and the importance of the proposed discovery in resolving the issues.
              (4) A party need not provide discovery of electronically stored information from sources that the party identifies as not reasonably accessible because of undue burden or cost. On motion to compel discovery or for a protective order, the party from whom discovery is sought must show that the information is not reasonably accessible because of undue burden or cost. If that showing is made, the hearing officer may nonetheless order discovery from such sources if the requesting party shows good cause or, when the party's refusal to provide the information sought is solely due to undue expense, if the party seeking the discovery agrees to bear the expense associated with the request.
              (e) Refusal to honor discovery order. When a party refuses to honor a discovery order, the hearing officer may issue such orders in regard to the refusal as justice shall require.
            
            
              § 26.19
              Request for production of documents.
              (a) Request to produce. Any party may serve upon any other party a written request to produce, and permit the party making the request, or someone acting on the requestor's behalf, to inspect, copy, test, or sample any designated documents—including writings, drawings, graphs, charts, photographs, sound recordings, images, and other data or data compilations stored in any medium from which information can be obtained—translated, if necessary, by the respondent into reasonably usable form, or to inspect, copy, test, or sample any designated tangible things that constitute or contain matters within the scope of § 26.18(a) and which are in the possession, custody, or control of the party upon whom the request is served.
              (b) Procedure. The request shall set forth, either by individual item or by category, the items to be inspected, and describe each with reasonable particularity. The request shall specify a reasonable time, place, and manner of making the inspection and performing the related acts. The request may specify the form or forms in which electronically stored information is to be produced.
              (c) Response to request to produce. The party upon whom the request is served shall serve a written response within 20 days after service of the request. A shorter or longer time may be directed by the hearing officer, or in the absence of such an order, agreed to by the parties in a written document that shall be timely submitted to the hearing officer. The response shall state, with respect to each item or category, whether inspection and related activities will be permitted as requested. If there are any objections to any requests, including objections to the requested form or forms for producing electronically stored information, the response shall state the reasons for such objections. If objection is made to part of an item or category, the part shall be specified and inspection of the remaining parts shall be permitted. If objection is made to the requested format or forms for producing electronically stored information—or if no form was specified in the request—the responding party must state the form or forms it intends to use. The party submitting the request may move for an order under § 26.18(c)(1) with respect to any objection to or other failure to respond to the request or any part thereof, or any failure to permit inspection as requested.
              (d) Form of production. Unless the parties otherwise agree, or the hearing officer otherwise orders:
              (1) A party who produces documents for inspection shall produce them as they are kept in the usual course of business or shall organize and label them to correspond with the categories in the request;

              (2) If a request does not specify the format or forms for producing electronically stored information, a responding party must produce the information in a form or forms in which it is ordinarily maintained or in a form or forms that are reasonably usable; and
              (3) A party need not produce the same electronically stored information in more than one form.
            
            
              § 26.20
              Depositions.
              (a) Taking oral deposition. A party may take the oral deposition of any person. Reasonable written notice of deposition shall be served upon the opposing party and the deponent. The attendance of a deponent may be compelled by subpoena where authorized by law or by other order of the hearing officer.
              (b) Testifying on oral deposition. Each person testifying on oral deposition shall be placed under oath by the person before whom the deposition is taken. The deponent may be examined and cross-examined. The questions and the answers, together with all objections made, shall be recorded by the person before whom the deposition is to be taken, or under that person's direction.
              (c) Objections. Objection may be made to questions or answers for any reason that would require the exclusion of the testimony under § 26.24 as if the witness were present and testifying at hearing. Objections shall be in short form, stating every ground for objection. Failure to object to any question or answer shall be considered a waiver of objection, unless the parties agree otherwise. Rulings on any objections shall be made by the hearing officer at hearing, or at such other time requested by motion. The examination shall proceed, with the testimony being taken subject to the objections; the deponent may be instructed not to answer only when necessary to preserve a privilege, to enforce a limitation directed by the hearing officer, or to present a motion for a protective order under § 26.18(c)(2).
              (d) Submission to deponent. A transcript of the deposition shall be submitted to the deponent for examination and signature, unless submission is waived by the deponent and the parties. Any changes in form or substance that the deponent desires to make shall be entered upon the transcript by the person before whom the deposition was taken, with a statement of reasons given by the deponent for making them. The transcript shall then be signed by the deponent, unless the parties by stipulation waive the signing or the deponent is ill, cannot be found, or refuses to sign. If the transcript is not signed, the person before whom the deposition was taken shall sign it and state on the record the reason that it is not signed.
              (e) Certification and filing. The person before whom the deposition was taken shall make a certification on the transcript as to its accuracy. Interested parties shall make their own arrangements with the person recording the testimony for copies of the testimony and the exhibits.
              (f) Deposition as evidence. Subject to appropriate rulings by the hearing officer on objections, the deposition or any part may be introduced into evidence for any purpose if the deponent is unavailable. Only that part of a deposition that is received in evidence at a hearing shall constitute a part of the record in the proceeding upon which a decision may be based. Nothing in this rule is intended to limit the use of a deposition for impeachment purposes.
              (g) Payment of fees. Fees shall be paid by the person upon whose application the deposition is taken.
            
            
              § 26.21
              Written interrogatories.
              (a) Service of interrogatories. Any party may serve upon any other party written interrogatories, not to exceed 25 in number, including all discrete subparts, unless additional interrogatories are agreed to by the parties or leave to serve additional interrogatories is granted by the hearing officer.
              (b) Response to interrogatories. Within 20 days after service of the request, the party upon whom the interrogatories are served shall serve a written response, unless the parties agree in a written document submitted to the hearing officer or the hearing officer determines that a shorter or longer period is appropriate under the circumstances. The response shall specifically answer each interrogatory, separately and fully in writing, unless it is objected to, in which event the objecting party shall state the reasons for any objections with specificity. Any ground not stated in a timely objection is waived unless the party's failure to object is excused by the hearing officer for good cause shown. If objection is made to only part of an interrogatory, the objectionable part shall be specified and the party shall answer to the extent that the interrogatory is not objectionable.
              (c) Option to produce business records. Where the answer to an interrogatory may be derived or ascertained from the business records, including electronically stored information, of the party upon whom the interrogatory has been served or from an examination, audit, or inspection of such business records, including a compilation, abstract, or summary thereof, and the burden of deriving or ascertaining the answer is substantially the same for the party serving the interrogatory as for the party served, it is a sufficient answer to such interrogatory to specify the records from which the answer may be derived or ascertained and to afford to the party serving the interrogatory reasonable opportunity to examine, audit, or inspect such records and to make copies, compilations, abstracts, or summaries. A specification shall be in sufficient detail to permit the interrogating party to locate and to identify, as readily as can by the party served, the records from which the answer may be ascertained.
            
            
              § 26.22
              Requests for admissions.
              (a) Any party may serve upon any other party a written request for the admission of the genuineness of any relevant documents described in the request or of the truth of any relevant matters of fact. Copies of documents shall be delivered with the request unless copies have already been furnished. Each requested admission shall be considered admitted, unless within 30 days after service of the request, or within such other time as the parties may agree, or the hearing officer determines, the party from whom the admission is sought serves upon the party making the request either:
              (1) A statement that:
              (i) Denies specifically the relevant matters for which an admission is requested, or sets forth in detail the reasons why the party can neither truthfully admit nor deny them;
              (ii) Fairly meets the substance of the requested admission and, when good faith requires that a party qualify an answer or deny only a part of the matter of which an admission is requested, specifies as much of it as is true and qualifies or denies the remainder; and
              (iii) Does not assert lack of information or knowledge as a reason for failure to admit or deny, unless the party states that the party has made reasonable inquiry, and that the information known or readily obtainable by the party is insufficient to enable the party to admit or deny; or
              (2) Written objections to a requested admission that:
              (i) State the grounds for the objection; and
              (ii) Object to a requested admission, if necessary, either in whole or in part, on the basis of privilege or relevance.
              (b) Responses to the request for admission on matters to which objections have been made may be deferred until the objection is ruled upon, but if written objections are made only to a part of a request, a response to the remainder of the request shall be provided.
              (c) Any matter admitted under this rule is conclusively established unless the hearing officer, on motion, permits withdrawal or amendment of the admission. Admissions obtained pursuant to this procedure may be used in evidence only for the purposes of the pending action. The use of obtained admissions as evidence is permitted to the same extent and subject to the same objections as other evidence.
            
          
          
            Hearings
            
              § 26.23
              Public nature and timing of hearings; transcripts.
              (a) Public hearings. All hearings in adjudicative proceedings shall be public.
              (b) Conduct of hearing. Hearings shall proceed with all reasonable speed. The hearing officer may order recesses for good cause, stated on the record. The hearing officer may, for convenience of the parties or witnesses, or in the interests of justice, order that hearings be conducted outside of Washington, DC, and, if necessary, in more than one location.
              
              (c) Transcripts. Hearings shall be recorded and transcribed only by a reporter designated by the Department under the supervision of the hearing officer. The original transcript shall be a part of the record and shall constitute the sole official transcript. Any party or a member of the public, at his own expense, may obtain copies of transcripts from the reporter.
            
            
              § 26.24
              Rules of evidence.
              (a) Evidence. Every party shall have the right to present its case or defense by oral and documentary evidence, unless otherwise limited by law or regulation, to conduct such cross-examination and to submit rebuttal evidence as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. Irrelevant, immaterial, privileged, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Unless otherwise provided for in this part, the Federal Rules of Evidence shall provide guidance to the hearing officer in the conduct of proceedings under this part, but shall not be binding. Parties may object to clearly irrelevant material, but technical and hearsay objections to testimony as used in a court of law will not be sustained.
              (b) Testimony under oath or affirmation. All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
              (c) Objections. Objections to the admission or exclusion of evidence shall be in short form, stating the grounds of objections. Rulings on objections shall be a part of the transcript. Failure to object to admission or exclusion of evidence or to any evidentiary ruling shall be considered a waiver of objection, but no exception to a ruling on an objection is necessary in order to preserve it for appeal.
              (d) Authenticity of documents. Unless specifically challenged, it shall be presumed that all relevant documents are authentic. An objection to the authenticity of a document shall not be sustained merely on the basis that it is not the original.
              (e) Stipulations. The parties may stipulate as to any relevant matters of fact. Stipulations may be received in evidence at a hearing, and when received shall be binding on the parties with respect to the matters stipulated. The parties are encouraged to enter into stipulations of fact whenever possible.
              (f) Official notice. All matters officially noticed by the hearing officer shall appear on the record.
              (g) Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be upon the proponent of an action or affirmative defense, including, where applicable, mitigating factors, unless otherwise provided by law or regulation.
            
            
              § 26.25
              Hearing officer's determination and order.
              (a) Scope of review. The hearing officer shall conduct a de novo review of the administrative action to determine whether it is supported by a preponderance of the evidence, unless a different standard of proof is required by law or regulation. Each and every charge alleged by the Department need not be proven to support the administrative action. The hearing officer may modify or vacate the administrative action under review only upon a particularized finding of facts that justifies a deviation from the administrative action.
              (b) Closing of hearing. At the discretion of the hearing officer, the closing of the record may be postponed in order to permit the admission of other evidence into the record. In the event further evidence is admitted, each party shall be given an opportunity to respond to such evidence.
              (c) Briefs. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may request the parties to file proposed findings of fact and legal briefs. The hearing officer shall make a written determination and order based upon evidence and arguments presented by the parties. The determination shall be founded upon reliable and probative evidence. This determination and order shall be served upon all parties.
              (d) Bench decisions. Where the parties agree and where appropriate in the judgment of the hearing officer, a bench decision will be issued.
              (e) Time period for issuance of decision. The hearing officer shall endeavor to issue a determination within 60 days from the date of the closing of the record.
              (f) Finality of determination. The determination and order shall be final unless a party timely appeals the determination in accordance with § 26.26. The determination shall inform the parties that, if provided for and consistent with Departmental regulations, any party may request, in writing, Secretarial review of the determination within 30 days after the hearing officer issues the determination, in accordance with § 26.26 of this part. The determination shall include the mailing address, facsimile number, and electronic submission information to which the request for Secretarial review should be sent. A request for Secretarial review may be made by mail, delivery, facsimile, or electronic submission.
            
          
          
            Secretarial Review
            
              § 26.26
              Review of determination of hearing officers.
              (a) Except in matters arising under 2 CFR part 2424, any party may file with the Secretary an appeal within 30 days after the date that the hearing officer issues a determination or order. The Secretary or designee may extend the 30-day period, in the Secretary's sole discretion, for good cause.
              (b) Brief in support of appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by a written brief, not to exceed 15 pages, setting forth the party's specific objections to the determination or order of the hearing officer and the party's supporting reasons for any objections. The appealing party may request leave to file a brief in excess of 15 pages for good cause shown. Alternative proposed findings and conclusions, if any, may be appended as an exhibit.
              (c) Briefs in opposition. Any opposing party may submit a brief in opposition to the appeal, not to exceed 15 pages, within 20 days of receiving a copy of the appeal and accompanying brief. The opposing party may request leave to file a brief in excess of 15 pages for good cause shown. The brief in opposition shall specifically state the opposing party's reasons for supporting the hearing officer's determination, or for objecting to any part of the hearing officer's determination.
              (d) Service. The appeal and all briefs shall be served on all parties and on the Docket Clerk.
              (e) Forwarding of the record. Upon request by the Office of the Secretary, the hearing officer shall forward the record of the proceeding to the Secretary or the Secretary's designee.
              (f) Time extensions. The Secretary, or designee, in his or her sole discretion, may extend the deadlines or page limitations set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. The Secretary or designee may also permit the filing of additional briefs, in his or her sole discretion.
              (g) Personal appearance. There is no right to appear personally before the Secretary or designee.
              (h) Interlocutory rulings. There is no right to appeal any interlocutory ruling by the hearing officer, except as provided for in § 26.27.
              (i) Objection not raised before hearing officer. In reviewing the determination or order, the Secretary, or designee, shall not consider any objection that was not raised before the hearing officer unless a demonstration is made of extraordinary circumstances causing the failure to raise the objection.
              (j) Evidence in the record. The Secretary or designee shall consider only evidence contained in the record forwarded by the hearing officer. However, if any party demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary or designee that additional evidence not presented at the hearing is material, and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to present such evidence at the hearing, the Secretary or designee shall remand the matter to the hearing officer for reconsideration in light of the additional evidence.
              (k) Ex parte communications. The prohibitions of ex parte communications in § 26.3 shall apply to contacts with the Secretary or the Secretary's designee.
              (l) Determination. The Secretary or designee may affirm, modify, reverse, remand, reduce, compromise, or settle any determination made or action ordered in the initial determination or order. The Secretary or designee shall consider, and include in any final determination, such factors as may be set forth in applicable statutes or regulations.
              (m) Written determination. Where a request for Secretarial review has been timely made, the Secretary, or designee, shall issue a written determination within 30 days after receipt of the request for review, and shall serve it upon the parties to the hearing and the hearing officer. The Secretary, or designee, may extend the time in which a written determination must be issued by an additional 60 days for good cause shown in a written justification issued to the parties. The written determination of the Secretary shall be final. If the Secretary, or designee, does not act upon the request for review of a determination within 90 days of service of the request, then the initial determination shall be the final agency action.
            
            
              § 26.27
              Interlocutory rulings.
              (a) Interlocutory rulings by the hearing officer. A party seeking review of an interlocutory ruling shall file a motion with the hearing officer within 10 days of the ruling requesting certification of the ruling for review by the Secretary, or in cases arising under 2 CFR part 2424, with the Debarring Official. Certification may be granted if the hearing officer believes that:
              (1) It involves an important issue of law or policy as to which there is substantial ground for difference of opinion; and
              (2) An immediate appeal from the order may materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation.
              (b) Petition for review. Any party may file a petition for review of an interlocutory ruling within 10 days of the hearing officer's determination regarding certification.
              (c) Secretarial review. The Secretary, or designee, or Debarring Official shall review a certified ruling. The Secretary, designee, or Debarring Official has the discretion to grant or deny a petition for review from an uncertified ruling.
              (d) Continuation of hearing. Unless otherwise ordered by the hearing officer or the Secretary, designee, or Debarring Official, the hearing shall proceed pending the determination of any interlocutory appeal, and the order or ruling of the hearing officer shall be effective pending review.
            
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Hearings Pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act
          
            § 26.28
            Purpose and scope.

            Unless otherwise specified in this title, the rules in this subpart B of this part apply to hearings that HUD is required by statute to conduct pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 554 et seq.)
          
          
            § 26.29
            Definitions.
            The following definitions apply to subpart B of this part:
            
              Complaint means the notice from HUD alleging violations of a HUD statute and/or regulation, citing the legal authority upon which it is issued, stating the relief HUD seeks, and informing a respondent of his or her right to submit a response to a designated office and to request an opportunity for a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge.
            
              Docket Clerk means the Docket Clerk of the Office of Administrative Law Judges, located at the following address—409 Third Street, SW., Second Floor, Washington, DC 20024; mailing address is 451 7th Street, SW., Room B-133, Washington, DC 20410.
            
              Respondent, unless otherwise identified by other governing statute, rule, or regulation, is the party against whom the administrative action is taken.
            
              Response means the written response to a complaint, admitting or denying the allegations in the complaint and setting forth any affirmative defense and any mitigating factors or extenuating circumstances. The response shall be submitted to the division of the Office of General Counsel that initiates the complaint or to such other office as may be designated in the complaint. A response is deemed a request for a hearing.
          
          
            § 26.30
            Service and filing.
            (a) Filing. Unless otherwise provided by statute, rule, or regulation, all documents shall be filed with the Docket Clerk. Filing may be by delivery, first-class mail, overnight delivery, facsimile transmission, or electronic means; however, the ALJ may place reasonable limits on filing by facsimile transmission or electronic means. All documents shall clearly designate the docket number and title of the proceeding. Duplicate copies are not required unless ordered by the ALJ.
            (b) Service. One copy of all documents filed with the Docket Clerk shall be served upon each party by the persons filing them and shall be accompanied by a certificate of service stating how and when such service has been made. Service may be made by delivery, first-class mail, overnight delivery, facsimile transmission, or electronic means; however, the ALJ may place reasonable limits on service by facsimile transmission or electronic means. Documents shall be served upon a party's address of residence or principal place of business, or, if the party is represented by counsel, upon counsel of record at the address of counsel. Service is complete when handed to the person or delivered to the person's office or residence and deposited in a conspicuous place. If service is by first-class mail, overnight delivery, facsimile transmission, or electronic means, service is complete upon deposit in the mail or upon electronic transmission.
          
          
            § 26.31
            Time computations.
            (a) General. In computing any period of time under subpart B of this part, the time period begins the day following the act, event, or default, and includes the last day of the period, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday observed by the Federal Government, in which case the time period includes the next business day. When the prescribed time period is 7 days or less, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded from the computation.
            (b) Entry of orders. In computing any time period involving the date of the issuance of an order or decision by an Administrative Law Judge, the date of issuance is the date the order or decision is served by the Docket Clerk.
            (c) Service by mail. If a document is served by mail, 3 days shall be added to the time permitted for a response.
          
          
            Administrative Law Judge
            
              § 26.32
              Powers and duties of the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).
              The ALJ shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing, avoid delay, maintain order, and ensure that a record of the proceeding is made. The ALJ is authorized to:
              (a) Set and change the date, time, and place of the hearing upon reasonable notice to the parties;
              (b) Continue or recess the hearing, in whole or in part, for a reasonable period of time;
              (c) Hold conferences to identify or simplify the issues, or to consider other matters that may aid in the expeditious disposition of the proceeding;
              (d) Administer oaths and affirmations;
              (e) Issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at depositions or at hearings;
              (f) Rule on motions and other procedural matters;
              (g) Regulate the scope and timing of discovery;
              (h) Regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of representatives and parties;
              (i) Examine witnesses;
              (j) Receive, rule on, exclude, or limit evidence;
              (k) Upon motion of a party, take official notice of facts;
              (l) Upon motion of a party, decide cases, in whole or in part, by summary judgment where there is no disputed issue of material fact;
              (m) Conduct any conference, argument, or hearing on motions in person or by telephone;
              (n) Upon motion, except where mandated by statute, extend the time within which any act required by these rules must be performed where necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest or the rights of the parties, or upon showing of good cause; and
              (o) Exercise such other authority as is necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the ALJ under subpart B of this part.
            
            
              § 26.33
              Ex parte communications.

              No party or person (except employees of the ALJ's office) shall communicate in any way with the ALJ on any matter at issue in a case, unless on notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. This provision does not prohibit a person or party from inquiring about the status of a case or asking routine questions concerning administrative functions or procedures.
            
            
              § 26.34
              Sanctions.
              (a) The ALJ may sanction a person, including any party or representative, for failing to comply with an order, rule, or procedure governing the proceeding; failing to prosecute or defend an action; or engaging in other misconduct that interferes with the speedy, orderly, or fair conduct of the hearing.
              (b) Any sanction, including, but not limited to, those listed in paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of this section, shall reasonably relate to the severity and nature of the failure or misconduct.
              (c) When a party fails to comply with an order, including an order compelling discovery, the ALJ may impose an appropriate sanction for such noncompliance, including, but not limited to, the following:
              (1) Drawing an inference in favor of the requesting party with regard to the information sought;
              (2) In the case of requests for admission, deeming any matter about which an admission is requested to be admitted;
              (3) Prohibiting the party failing to comply with the order from introducing evidence concerning, or otherwise relying upon, testimony relating to the information sought; or
              (4) Striking any part of the pleadings or other submissions of the party failing to comply with the order.
              (d) If a party fails to prosecute or defend an action brought under subpart B of this part, the ALJ may dismiss the action or may issue a decision against the non-prosecuting or defending party. Such decision of the ALJ shall constitute final agency action and shall not be appealable to the Secretary under § 26.52 of this part.
              (e) The ALJ may refuse to consider any motion, request, response, brief, or other document that is not filed in a timely fashion.
            
            
              § 26.35
              Disqualification of ALJ.
              (a) An ALJ in a particular case may disqualify himself or herself.
              (b) A party may file with the ALJ a motion for the ALJ's disqualification. The motion shall be accompanied by an affidavit alleging the grounds for disqualification.
              (c) Upon the filing of a motion and affidavit, the ALJ shall proceed no further in the case until the matter of disqualification is resolved.
              (d) If the ALJ does not withdraw from the proceedings, a written statement of his or her reasons for electing not to withdraw shall be incorporated into the record and the hearing shall proceed.
            
          
          
            Parties
            
              § 26.36
              Parties to the hearing.
              (a) General. The parties to the hearing shall be the respondent and HUD.
              (b) Rights of parties. Except as otherwise limited by subpart B of this part, all parties may:
              (1) Be accompanied, represented, and advised by a representative;
              (2) Participate in any conference held by the ALJ;
              (3) Conduct discovery;
              (4) Agree to stipulations of fact or law, which shall be made part of the record;
              (5) Present evidence relevant to the issues at the hearing;
              (6) Present and cross-examine witnesses;
              (7) Present oral arguments at the hearing as permitted by the ALJ; and
              (8) Submit written briefs and proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law after the hearing, as permitted by the ALJ.
            
            
              § 26.37
              Separation of functions.
              No officer, employee, or agent of the Federal Government engaged in the performance of investigative, conciliatory, or prosecutorial functions in connection with the proceeding shall, in that proceeding or any factually related proceeding under subpart B of this part, participate or advise in the decision of the Administrative Law Judge, except as a witness or counsel during the proceeding, or in its appellate review.
            
          
          
            
            Prehearing Procedures
            
              § 26.38
              Commencement of action.
              Proceedings under subpart B of this part shall commence with the Government's filing of a complaint, as that term is defined in § 26.29, with the Docket Clerk. The respondent's response to the complaint shall be timely filed with the Docket Clerk and served upon the Government in accordance with the procedures set forth in the complaint. If the respondent fails to submit a response to the Docket Clerk, then the Government may file a motion for a default judgment in accordance with § 26.41.
            
            
              § 26.39
              Prehearing conferences.
              (a) The ALJ may schedule prehearing conferences as appropriate.
              (b) Upon the motion of any party or sua sponte, the ALJ may schedule a prehearing conference at a reasonable time in advance of the hearing.
              (c) The ALJ may consider the following at a prehearing conference:
              (1) Simplification of the issues;
              (2) Stipulations of fact and of the authenticity, accuracy, and admissibility of documents;
              (3) Submission of the case on briefs in lieu of an oral hearing;
              (4) Limitation of the number of witnesses;
              (5) The exchange of witness lists and of proposed exhibits;
              (6) Discovery;
              (7) The time and place for the hearing; and
              (8) Such other matters as may tend to expedite the fair and just disposition of the proceedings.
            
            
              § 26.40
              Motions.
              (a) General. All motions shall state the specific relief requested and the basis therefore and, except during a conference or the hearing, shall be in writing. Written motions shall be filed and served in accordance with § 26.30. Either party may submit a proposed order with any motion.
              (b) Response to motions. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, a response to a written motion may be filed within 10 days after service of the motion. A party failing to respond timely to a motion may be deemed to have waived any objection to the granting of the motion.
              (c) Motions for extensions. Either party may file a motion for extension. At the discretion of the ALJ, a motion for an extension of time may be granted for good cause at any time, notwithstanding an objection or any reply to the motion, consistent with § 26.32(f). The ALJ may waive the requirements of this section as to motions for extensions of time or any page limits.
              (d) Right to reply. The moving party shall have no right to reply, except as permitted by the ALJ.
              (e) Oral Argument. Either party may request oral argument on any motion, but such argument shall be available at the sole discretion of the ALJ.
              (f) Motions for summary judgment. (1) A party claiming relief or a party against whom relief is sought may timely move, with or without supporting affidavits, for summary judgment on all or part of the claim.
              (2) Objections in the consideration of summary judgment motions or answers thereto based upon a failure to strictly comply with the provisions of Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure may, at the discretion of the ALJ, be overruled.
              (g) Motions for dismissal. When a motion to dismiss the proceeding is granted, the ALJ shall make and file a determination and order in accordance with the provisions of § 26.50.
            
            
              § 26.41
              Default.
              (a) General. The respondent may be found in default, upon motion, for failure to file a timely response to the Government's complaint. The motion shall include a copy of the complaint and a proposed default order, and shall be served upon all parties. The respondent shall have 10 days from such service to respond to the motion.
              (b) Default order. The ALJ shall issue a decision on the motion within 15 days after the expiration of the time for filing a response to the default motion. If a default order is issued, it shall constitute the final agency action.
              (c) Effect of default. A default shall constitute an admission of all facts alleged in the Government's complaint and a waiver of respondent's right to a hearing on such allegations. The penalty proposed in the complaint shall be set forth in the default order and shall be immediately due and payable by respondent without further proceedings.
            
          
          
            Discovery
            
              § 26.42
              Discovery.
              (a) General. The parties are encouraged to engage in voluntary discovery procedures, which may commence at any time after an answer has been filed. Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, that is relevant to the claim or defense of any party, including the existence, description, nature, custody, condition, and location of any books, documents, or other tangible things and the identity and location of persons having knowledge of any discoverable matter. For good cause, the ALJ may order discovery of any matter relevant to the subject matter of the action. To be relevant, information need not be admissible at the hearing, if the discovery appears reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence. Each party shall bear its own expenses associated with discovery.
              (b) Discovery in Program Fraud Civil Remedies Actions. (1) Upon receipt of a complaint, the defendant may, upon written request to the Office of General Counsel, review any relevant and material nonprivileged documents, including any exculpatory documents, that relate to the allegations set out in the complaint. Exculpatory information that is contained in a privileged document must be disclosed; however, the privileged document need not be provided.
              (2) With the exception of the limited discovery permitted under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, unless agreed to by the parties, discovery shall be available only as ordered by the ALJ. The ALJ shall order only that discovery that he or she determines is necessary for the expeditious, fair, and reasonable consideration of the issues, is not unduly costly or burdensome, and will not unduly delay the proceeding. Discovery of privileged information shall not be permitted. The request for approval sent to the Attorney General from the General Counsel or designee, as described in 31 U.S.C. § 3803(a)(2), is not discoverable under any circumstances. The ALJ may grant discovery subject to a protective order under § 26.44.
              (c) Authorized discovery. The following types of discovery are authorized:
              (1) Requests for production of documents. (i) Any party may serve upon any other party a written request to produce and permit the party making the request, or someone acting on the requestor's behalf, to inspect, copy, test, or sample any designated documents or electronically stored information—including writings, drawings, graphs, charts, photographs, sound recordings, images, and other data or data compilations stored in any medium from which information can be obtained—translated, if necessary, by the respondent into reasonably usable form, or to inspect, copy, test, or sample any designated tangible things that constitute or contain matters within the scope of § 26.42(a) and which are in the possession, custody, or control of the party upon whom the request is served.
              (ii) The request shall set forth, either by individual item or by category, the items to be inspected, and describe each with reasonable particularity. The request shall specify a reasonable time, place, and manner of making the inspection and performing the related acts. The request may specify the form or forms in which electronically stored information is to be produced.

              (iii) The party upon whom the request is served shall serve a written response within 20 days after the service of the request. A shorter or longer time may be directed by the ALJ or, in the absence of such an order, agreed to in a written document by the parties, which shall be submitted to the ALJ in a timely manner. The response shall state, with respect to each item or category, whether inspection and related activities will be permitted as requested. If there are any objections to any requests, including objections to the requested form or forms for producing electronically stored information, the response shall state the reasons for such objections. If objection is made to part of an item or category, the part shall be specified and inspection permitted of the remaining parts. If objection is made to the requested format for producing electronically stored information—or if no format was specified in the request—the responding party must state the format it intends to use. The party submitting the request may move for an order under paragraph (e) of this section with respect to any objection to or other failure to respond to the request or any part thereof, or any failure to permit inspection as requested.
              (iv) Unless the parties otherwise agree, or the ALJ otherwise orders:
              (A) A party who produces documents for inspection shall produce them as they are kept in the usual course of business or shall organize and label them to correspond with the categories in the request;
              (B) If a request does not specify the form or forms for producing electronically stored information, a responding party must produce the information in a format in which it is ordinarily maintained or in a format that is reasonably usable; and
              (C) A party need not produce the same electronically stored information in more than one form.
              (2) Requests for admissions. Any party may serve upon any other party a written request for the admission of the genuineness of any documents described in the request or of the truth of any relevant matters of fact. Copies of documents shall be delivered with the request unless copies have already been furnished. Each requested admission shall be considered admitted, unless, within 30 days after service of the request, or within such other time as the parties may agree to or the ALJ determines, the party from whom the admission is sought serves upon the party making the request either:
              (i) A statement, which:
              (A) Denies specifically the relevant matters for which an admission is requested, or sets forth in detail the reasons why the party can neither truthfully admit nor deny them;
              (B) Fairly meets the substance of the requested admission, and when good faith requires that a party qualify an answer or deny only a part of the matter of which an admission is requested, the party specifies as much of it as is true and qualifies or denies the remainder; and
              (C) Does not assert lack of information or knowledge as a reason for failure to admit or deny, unless the party states that the party has made reasonable inquiry, and that the information known or readily obtainable by the party is insufficient to enable the party to admit or deny; or
              (ii) Written objections to a requested admission, which state the grounds for the objection and which object to a requested admission, if necessary, either in whole or in part, on the basis of privilege or relevance. Responses to the request for admission on matters to which objections have been made may be deferred until each objection is ruled upon, but if written objections are made only to a part of a request, a response to the remainder of the request shall be provided.
              (iii) Any matter admitted under this rule is conclusively established unless the ALJ, on motion, permits withdrawal or amendment of the admission. Admissions obtained pursuant to this procedure may be used in evidence only for the purposes of the pending action. The use of obtained admissions as evidence is permitted to the same extent and subject to the same objections as other evidence.
              (3) Written interrogatories—(i) Service of written interrogatories. Any party may serve upon any other party written interrogatories, not exceeding 25 in number, including all discrete subparts, unless additional interrogatories are agreed to by the parties or leave to serve additional interrogatories is granted by the ALJ.
              (ii) Response to interrogatories. Within 20 days after service of the request, the party upon whom the interrogatories are served shall serve a written response, unless the parties agree in a written document submitted to the ALJ or the ALJ determines that a shorter or longer period is appropriate under the circumstances. The response shall specifically answer each interrogatory separately and fully in writing, unless it is objected to, in which event the objecting party shall state the reasons for objection with specificity. Any ground not stated in a timely objection is waived unless the party's failure to object is excused by the ALJ for good cause shown. If objection is made to only part of an interrogatory, the objectionable part shall be specified and the party shall answer to the extent the interrogatory is not objectionable.
              (iii) Option to produce business records. Where the answer to an interrogatory may be derived or ascertained from the business records, including electronically stored information, of the party upon whom the interrogatory has been served or from an examination, audit, or inspection of such business records, including a compilation, abstract, or summary thereof, and the burden of deriving or ascertaining the answer is substantially the same for the party serving the interrogatory as for the party served, it is a sufficient answer to such interrogatory to specify the records from which the answer may be derived or ascertained and to afford to the party serving the interrogatory reasonable opportunity to examine, audit, or inspect such records and to make copies, compilations, abstracts, or summaries. A specification shall be in sufficient detail to permit the interrogating party to locate and to identify, as readily as can the party served, the records from which the answer may be ascertained.
              (4) Depositions. (i) A party may take the oral deposition of any person. Reasonable written notice of deposition shall be served upon the opposing party and the deponent. The attendance of a deponent may be compelled by subpoena where authorized by law or other order by the ALJ.
              (ii) Each person testifying on oral deposition shall be placed under oath by the person before whom the deposition is taken. The deponent may be examined and cross-examined. The questions and the answers, together with all objections made, shall be recorded by the person before whom the deposition is to be taken or under that person's direction.
              (iii) Objections. Objection may be made to questions or answers for any reason that would require the exclusion of the testimony under § 26.47 as if the witness were present and testifying at hearing. Objections shall be in short form, stating every ground for objection. Failure to object to any question or answer shall be considered a waiver of objection, unless the parties agree otherwise. Rulings on any objections shall be made by the ALJ at hearing, or at such other time as is requested by motion. The examination shall proceed, with the testimony being taken subject to the objections; a person may instruct a deponent not to answer only when necessary to preserve a privilege, to enforce a limitation directed by the ALJ, or to present a motion under § 26.44.
              (iv) Submission to deponent. A transcript of the deposition shall be submitted to the deponent for examination and signature, unless submission is waived by the deponent and the parties. Any changes in form or substance that the deponent desires to make shall be entered upon the transcript by the person before whom the deposition was taken, with a statement of reasons given by the deponent for making them. The transcript shall then be signed by the deponent, unless the parties by stipulation waive the signing or the deponent is ill, cannot be found, or refuses to sign. If the transcript is not signed, the person before whom the deposition was taken shall sign it and state on the record the reason that it is not signed by the deponent.
              (v) Certification and filing. The person before whom the deposition was taken shall make a certification on the transcript as to its accuracy. Interested parties shall make their own arrangements with the person recording the testimony for copies of the testimony and the exhibits.
              (vi) Deposition as evidence. Subject to appropriate rulings by the ALJ on objections, the deposition or any part may be introduced into evidence for any purpose if the deponent is unavailable. Only that part of a deposition that is received in evidence at hearing shall constitute a part of the record in the proceeding upon which a decision may be based. Nothing in this rule is intended to limit the use of a deposition for impeachment purposes.
              (vii) Payment of fees. Fees shall be paid by the person upon whose application the deposition is taken.
              (d) Supplementation of responses. A party who has responded to a request for discovery by providing a response is under a duty to timely amend any prior response to an interrogatory, request for production, or request for admission if so ordered by the ALJ, or if the party learns that the response is in some material respect incomplete or incorrect and if the additional or corrective information has not otherwise been made known to all other parties during the discovery process or in writing.
              (e) Motions to compel. (1) In connection with any discovery procedure, by motion addressed to the ALJ and upon a showing of a good faith attempt to resolve the issue without the ALJ's intervention, either party may file a motion to compel a response with respect to any objection or other failure to respond to the discovery requested or to any part thereof, or any failure to respond as specifically requested. An evasive or incomplete answer to a request for discovery is treated as a failure to answer.
              (2) The motion shall describe the information sought, cite the opposing party's objection, and provide arguments supporting the motion.
              (3) The opposing party may file a response to the motion, including a request for a protective order in accordance with § 26.44.
              (4) Orders compelling discovery shall be issued only where such discovery will not compel the disclosure of privileged information, unduly delay the hearing, or result in prejudice to the public interest or the rights of the parties, and upon a showing of good cause.
              (5) A party need not provide discovery of electronically stored information from sources that the party identifies as not reasonably accessible because of undue burden or cost. On motion to compel discovery, the party from whom discovery is sought must show that the information is not reasonably accessible because of undue burden or cost. If that showing is made, the ALJ may nonetheless order discovery from such sources if the requesting party shows good cause or, when the party's refusal to provide the information sought is solely due to undue expense, the party seeking the discovery agrees to bear the expense associated with the request.
              (f) Refusal to honor discovery order. When a party refuses to honor a discovery order, the ALJ may issue such orders in regard to the refusal as justice shall require, including the imposition of sanctions pursuant to § 26.34.
            
            
              § 26.43
              Subpoenas.
              (a) General. Upon written request of a party, the ALJ may issue a subpoena requiring the attendance of a witness at a deposition or hearing, and/or the production of documents. The request shall specify any documents to be produced and shall list the names and addresses of the witnesses.
              (b) Time of request. A request for a subpoena in aid of discovery shall be filed in time to permit the conclusion of discovery 15 days before the date fixed for the hearing. A request for a subpoena to testify at the hearing shall be filed at least 3 days prior to the hearing, unless otherwise allowed by the ALJ for good cause shown.
              (c) Content. The subpoena shall specify the time and place at which the witness is to appear and any documents the witness is to produce.
              (d) Service and fees. Subpoenas shall be served, and fees and costs paid to subpoenaed witnesses, in accordance with Rule 45(b)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
              (e) Motion to quash. The individual to whom the subpoena is directed or a party may file a motion to quash the subpoena within 10 days after service, or on or before the time specified in the subpoena for compliance if it is less than 10 days after service.
            
            
              § 26.44
              Protective orders.
              (a) A party, a prospective witness, or a deponent may file a motion for a protective order with respect to discovery sought by an opposing party or with respect to the hearing, seeking to limit the availability or disclosure of evidence.
              (b) Protective orders may be issued by an ALJ if the ALJ determines such an order is necessary to protect a party or other person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense because:

              (1) The discovery sought is unreasonably cumulative or duplicative, or is obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive;
              (2) The party seeking discovery has had ample opportunity by discovery in the action to obtain the information sought; or
              (3) The burden or expense of the proposed discovery outweighs its likely benefit, taking into account the needs of the case, the amount in controversy, the parties' resources, the importance of the issues at stake in the litigation, and the importance of the proposed discovery in resolving the issues.
            
          
          
            Hearings
            
              § 26.45
              General.
              (a) Time of hearing. The hearing shall commence not later than 90 days following the date of the Government's filing of the complaint and response with the Docket Clerk under § 26.38, unless the time is extended for good cause. The ALJ shall provide written notice to all parties of the reasons for any extension of time.
              (b) Location of hearing. The hearing shall be held in a place most convenient for the respondent and witnesses, or in such other place as may be agreed upon by the parties and the ALJ.
              (c) Notice of hearing. The ALJ shall issue a notice of hearing to all parties specifying the time and location of the hearing, the matters of fact and law to be heard, the legal authority under which the hearing is to be held, a description of the procedures for the conduct of the hearing, and such other matters as the ALJ determines to be appropriate.
              (d) Exceptions for Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act matters. For Program Fraud Civil Remedies actions, the hearing is commenced by the issuance of a notice of hearing and order by the ALJ, as set forth in 31 U.S.C. 3803(d)(2)(B). Hearings for Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act matters shall be located in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3803(g)(4).
              (e) Burden and standard of proof. HUD shall prove the respondent's liability and any aggravating factors by a preponderance of the evidence. Respondent shall prove any affirmative defenses and any mitigating factors by a preponderance of the evidence.
              (f) Public hearings. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ for good cause shown, the hearing shall be open to the public.
            
            
              § 26.46
              Witnesses.
              (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, testimony at the hearing shall be given orally by witnesses under oath or affirmation.
              (b) At the discretion of the ALJ, testimony may be admitted in the form of a written statement or deposition. In order to be admissible, any written statement must be provided to all other parties along with the last known address of the witness, in a manner that allows sufficient time for other parties to subpoena the witness for cross-examination at the hearing.
            
            
              § 26.47
              Evidence.
              The ALJ shall admit any relevant oral or documentary evidence that is not privileged. Unless otherwise provided for in this part, the Federal Rules of Evidence shall provide guidance to the ALJ's evidentiary ruling, but shall not be binding. Parties may object to clearly irrelevant material, but technical and hearsay objections to testimony as used in a court of law will not be sustained. The ALJ may, however, exclude evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed by confusion of the issues, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
            
            
              § 26.48
              Posthearing briefs.
              Posthearing briefs shall be filed only upon order by the ALJ.
            
            
              § 26.49
              The record.
              The hearing will be recorded and transcribed by a reporter designated by the Department under the supervision of the ALJ. The parties and the public, at their own expense, may obtain copies of transcripts from the reporter. A copy of the transcript shall be made available at cost to the parties upon request. The transcript of testimony, exhibits, and other evidence admitted at the hearing and all papers and requests filed in the proceeding constitute the record for the decision by the ALJ and the Secretary or designee.
            
            
              
              § 26.50
              Initial decision.
              (a) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision based only on the record, which shall contain findings of fact, conclusions of law, and the relief granted. The ALJ's initial decision shall not become effective unless it becomes or is incorporated into final agency action in accordance with § 26.50(c) or § 26.52(l).
              (b) The ALJ shall serve the initial decision on all parties within 60 days after either the close of the record or the expiration of time permitted for submission of posthearing briefs, whichever is later. The ALJ may extend the 60-day period for serving the initial decision in writing for good cause. The initial decision shall inform the parties that, if provided for and consistent with Departmental regulations, any party may request, in writing, Secretarial review of the determination within 30 days after the ALJ issues the initial decision, in accordance with § 26.52 of this part. The determination shall include the mailing address, facsimile number, and electronic submission information to which the request for Secretarial review should be sent. A request for Secretarial review may be made by mail, delivery, facsimile, or electronic submission.
              (c) If no appeal is timely filed with the Secretary or designee, the initial decision shall become the final agency action.
            
            
              § 26.51
              Interlocutory rulings.
              (a) Interlocutory rulings by the ALJ. A party seeking review of an interlocutory ruling shall file a motion with the ALJ within 10 days of the ruling requesting certification of the ruling for review by the Secretary. Certification may be granted if the ALJ believes that:
              (1) It involves an important issue of law or policy as to which there is substantial ground for difference of opinion; and
              (2) An immediate appeal from the order may materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation.
              (b) Petition for review. Any party may file a petition for review of an interlocutory ruling within 10 days of the ALJ's determination regarding certification.
              (c) Secretarial review. The Secretary, or designee, shall review a certified ruling. The Secretary, or designee, has the discretion to grant or deny a petition for review from an uncertified ruling.
              (d) Continuation of hearing. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ or the Secretary, or designee, the hearing shall proceed pending the determination of any interlocutory appeal, and the order or ruling of the ALJ shall be effective pending review.
            
            
              § 26.52
              Appeal to the Secretary.
              (a) General. Either party may file with the Secretary an appeal within 30 days after the date that the ALJ issues an initial decision. The Secretary or the Secretary's designee may extend the 30-day period in his or her sole discretion, for good cause.
              (b) Brief in support of appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by a written brief, not to exceed 15 pages, specifically identifying the party's objections to the initial decision or order of the ALJ and the party's supporting reasons for any objections. The appealing party may request leave to file a brief in excess of 15 pages for good cause shown. Alternative proposed findings and conclusions, if any, may be appended as an exhibit.
              (c) Briefs in opposition. Any opposing party may submit a brief in opposition to the appeal, not to exceed 15 pages, within 20 days of the date a copy of the appeal and accompanying brief were received. The opposing party may request leave to file a brief in excess of 15 pages for good cause shown. The brief in opposition shall specifically state the opposing party's reasons for supporting the ALJ's determination or taking exceptions to any part of the ALJ's determination.
              (d) Extensions and additional briefs. The Secretary or Secretary's designee may extend the deadlines or page limitations set forth in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, in his or her sole discretion. The Secretary may also permit the filing of additional briefs, in his or her sole discretion.
              (e) Forwarding of the record. Upon request by the Office of the Secretary, the ALJ shall forward the record of the proceeding to the Secretary or designee.
              (f) Personal appearance. There is no right to appear personally before the Secretary or designee.
              (g) ALJ decisions upon failure to prosecute or defend. There is no right to appeal any decision issued by an ALJ in accordance with § 26.37(d) of this part.
              (h) Objections not raised before ALJ. In reviewing the initial decision, the Secretary or designee shall not consider any objection that was not raised before the ALJ, unless a demonstration is made of extraordinary circumstances causing the failure to raise the objection.
              (i) Evidence considered. The Secretary or designee shall consider only evidence contained in the record forwarded by the ALJ. However, if any party demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary or designee that additional evidence not presented at the hearing is material and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to present such evidence at the hearing, the Secretary or designee shall remand the matter to the ALJ for reconsideration in light of the additional evidence.
              (j) Ex parte communications. The prohibitions of ex parte communications in § 26.33 shall apply to contacts with the Secretary or designee.
              (k) Relief. The Secretary or designee may affirm, modify, reduce, reverse, compromise, remand, or settle any relief granted in the initial decision. The Secretary or designee shall consider, and include in any final determination, such factors as may be set forth in applicable statutes or regulations.
              (l) Decision—(1) Generally. Where a Secretarial appeal has been timely made, the Secretary, or designee, shall issue a written determination within 30 days after receipt of the brief in opposition, if any, and shall serve it upon the parties to the hearing. The Secretary, or designee, may extend the time in which a written determination must be issued by an additional 60 days for good cause shown in a written justification issued to the parties. The written decision of the Secretary shall be the final agency action. If the Secretary, or designee, does not act upon the appeal of an initial decision within 90 days of service of the appeal, then the initial determination shall be the final agency action.
              (2) Exception for cases brought under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act. Where a Secretarial appeal has been timely made in a case brought under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act, the Secretary, or designee, shall issue a written determination within 30 days after receipt of appeal and shall serve it upon the parties to the hearing. The written decision of the Secretary shall be the final agency action. If the Secretary, or designee, does not act upon the appeal of an initial decision within 30 days of service of the appeal, the initial decision shall become final and the Respondent will be served with a statement describing the right to seek judicial review, if any.
            
            
              § 26.53
              Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
              In order to fulfill the requirement of exhausting administrative remedies, a party must seek Secretarial review under § 26.52 prior to seeking judicial review of any initial decision issued under subpart B of this part.
            
            
              § 26.54
              Judicial review.
              Judicial review shall be available in accordance with applicable statutory procedures and the procedures of the appropriate federal court.
            
            
              § 26.55
              Collection of civil penalties and assessments.
              Collection of civil penalties and assessments shall be in accordance with applicable statutory provisions.
            
            
              § 26.56
              Right to administrative offset.

              The amount of any penalty or assessment that has become final under § 26.50 or § 26.52, or for which a judgment has been entered after action under § 26.54 or § 26.55, or agreed upon in a compromise or settlement among the parties, may be collected by administrative offset under 31 U.S.C. 3716 or other applicable law. In Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act matters, an administrative offset may not be collected against a refund of an overpayment of federal taxes then or later owing by the United States to the Respondent.
              
            
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 27
        PART 27—NONJUDICIAL FORECLOSURE OF MULTIFAMILY AND SINGLE FAMILY MORTGAGES
        
          
            Subpart A—Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Multifamily Mortgages
            Sec.
            27.1
            Purpose.
            27.2
            Scope and applicability.
            27.3
            Definitions.
            27.5
            Prerequisites to foreclosure.
            27.10
            Designation of a foreclosure commissioner.
            27.15
            Notice of default and foreclosure sale.
            27.20
            Conditions of foreclosure sale.
            27.25
            Termination or adjournment of foreclosure sale.
            27.30
            Conduct of the sale.
            27.35
            Foreclosure costs.
            27.40
            Disposition of sale proceeds.
            27.45
            Transfer of title and possession.
            27.50
            Management and disposition by the Secretary.
          
          
            Subpart B—Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Single Family Mortgages
            27.100
            Purpose, scope and applicability.
            27.101
            Definitions.
            27.102
            Designation of foreclosure commissioner and substitute commissioner.
            27.103
            Notice of default and foreclosure sale.
            27.105
            Service of Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale.
            27.107
            Presale reinstatement.
            27.109
            Conduct of sale.
            27.111
            Adjournment or cancellation of sale.
            27.113
            Foreclosure costs.
            27.115
            Disposition of sales proceeds.
            27.117
            Transfer of title and possession.
            27.119
            Redemption rights.
            27.121
            Record of foreclosure and sale.
            27.123
            Deficiency judgment.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          12 U.S.C. 1715b, 3701-3717, 3751-3768; 42 U.S.C. 1452b, 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 48548, Sept. 13, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Multifamily Mortgages
          
            § 27.1
            Purpose.
            The purpose of this subpart is to implement requirements for the administration of the Multifamily Mortgage Foreclosure Act of 1981 (the Act) (12 U.S.C. 3701-3717), that clarify, or are in addition to, the requirements contained in the Act, which are not republished here and must be consulted in conjunction with the requirements of this subpart. The Act creates a uniform Federal remedy for foreclosure of multifamily mortgages. Under a delegation of authority published on February 5, 1982 (47 FR 5468), the Secretary has delegated to the HUD General Counsel his powers under the Act to appoint a foreclosure commissioner or commissioners and to substitute therefor, to fix the compensation of commissioners, and to promulgate implementing regulations.
          
          
            § 27.2
            Scope and applicability.
            (a) Under the Act and this subpart, the Secretary may foreclose on any defaulted Secretary-held multifamily mortgage encumbering real estate in any State. The Secretary may use the provisions of these regulations to foreclose on any multifamily mortgage regardless of when the mortgage was executed.
            (b) The Secretary may, at the Secretary's option, use other procedures to foreclose defaulted multifamily mortgages, including judicial foreclosure in Federal court and nonjudicial foreclosure under State law. This subpart applies only to foreclosure procedures authorized by the Act and not to any other foreclosure procedures the Secretary may use.
          
          
            § 27.3
            Definitions.
            The definitions contained in the Act (at 12 U.S.C. 3702) shall apply to this subpart, in addition to and as further clarified by the following definitions. As used in this subpart:
            
              General Counsel means the General Counsel of the Department of Housing and Urban Development;
            
              Multifamily mortgage does not include a mortgage covering a property on which there is located a one- to four-family residence, except when the one- to four-family residence is subject to a mortgage pursuant to section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C. 1701q), or section 811 (42 U.S.C. 8013) of the National Affordable Housing Act. The definition of multifamily mortgage also includes a mortgage taken by the Secretary in connection with the previous sale of the project by the Secretary (purchase money mortgage).
          
          
            
            § 27.5
            Prerequisites to foreclosure.
            Before commencement of a foreclosure under the Act and this subpart, HUD will provide to the mortgagor an opportunity informally to present reasons why the mortgage should not be foreclosed. Such opportunity may be provided before or after the designation of the foreclosure commissioner but before service of the notice of default and foreclosure.
          
          
            § 27.10
            Designation of a foreclosure commissioner.
            (a) When the Secretary determines that a multifamily mortgage should be foreclosed under the Act and this subpart, the General Counsel will select and designate one or more foreclosure commissioners to conduct the foreclosure and sale. The method of selection and determination of the qualifications of the foreclosure commissioner shall be at the discretion of the General Counsel, and the execution of a designation pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section shall be conclusive evidence that the commissioner selected has been determined to be qualified by the General Counsel.
            (b) After selection of a foreclosure commissioner, the General Counsel shall designate the commissioner in writing to conduct the foreclosure and sale of the particular multifamily mortgage. The written designation shall be duly acknowledged and shall state the name and business or residential address of the commissioner and any other information the General Counsel deems necessary. The designation shall be effective upon execution by the General Counsel or his designate. Upon receipt of the designation, the commissioner shall demonstrate acceptance by signing the designation and returning a signed copy to the General Counsel.
            (c) The General Counsel may at any time, with or without cause, designate a substitute commissioner to replace a previously designated commissioner. Designation of a substitute commissioner shall be in writing and shall contain the same information and be made effective in the same manner as the designation of the original commissioner. Upon designation of a substitute commissioner, the substitute commissioner shall serve a copy of the written notice of designation upon the persons listed at sections 369(1) (A) through (C) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3708(1) (A) through (C)) either by mail, in accordance with section 369(1) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3708(1)), except that the time limitations in that section will not apply, or by any other manner which in the substitute commissioner's discretion is conducive to giving timely notice of substitution.
          
          
            § 27.15
            Notice of default and foreclosure sale.
            (a) Within 45 days after accepting his or her designation to act as commissioner, the commissioner shall commence the foreclosure by serving a Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale.
            (b) The Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale shall contain the following information:
            (1) The Notice shall state that all deposits and the balance of the purchase price shall be paid by certified or cashier's check. The Notice shall state that no deposit will be required of the Secretary when the Secretary bids at the foreclosure sale.
            (2) Any terms and conditions to which the purchaser at the foreclosure sale must agree under § 27.20. The Notice need not describe at length each and every pertinent term and condition, including any required use agreements and deed covenants, if it describes these terms and conditions in a general way and if it states that the precise terms will be available from the commissioner upon request.
            (c) The Notice need not be mailed to mortgagors who have been released from all obligations under the mortgage.
            (d) In deciding which newspaper or newspapers to select as general circulation newspapers for purposes of publication of the required notice, the commissioner need not select the newspaper with the largest circulation.

            (e) In addition to Notice posting requirements included in the Act, the Notice shall also be posted in the project office and in such other appropriate conspicuous places as the commissioner deems appropriate for providing notice to all tenants. Posting shall not be required if the commissioner in his or her discretion finds that the act of posting is likely to lead to a breach of the peace or may result in the increased risk of vandalism or damage to the property. Any such finding will be made in writing. Entry on the premises by the commissioner for the purpose of posting shall be privileged as against all other persons.
            (f) When service of the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale is made by mail, the commissioner shall at the same time and in the same manner serve a copy of the instrument by which the General Counsel, under § 27.10(b), has designated him or her to act as commissioner.
            (g) At least 7 days before the foreclosure sale, the commissioner will record both the instrument designating him or her to act as commissioner and the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale in the same office or offices in which the mortgage was recorded.
          
          
            § 27.20
            Conditions of foreclosure sale.
            (a) The requirements of section 367(b)(2)(A) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3706(b)(2)(A)) apply if a majority of the residential units in a property subject to foreclosure sale pursuant to the Act and this subpart are occupied by residential tenants either on the date of the foreclosure sale or on the date on which the General Counsel designates the foreclosure commissioner.
            (b) Terms which the Secretary may find appropriate to require pursuant to section 367(b) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3706(b)), and such other provisions of law as may be applicable, may include provisions relating to use and ownership of the project property, tenant admission standards and procedures, rent schedules and increases, and project operation and maintenance. In determining terms which may be appropriate to require, the Secretary shall consider:
            (1) The history of the project, including the purposes of the program under which the mortgage insurance or assistance was provided, and any other program of HUD under which the project was developed or otherwise assisted and the probable causes of project failure resulting in its default;
            (2) A financial analysis of the project, including an appraisal of the fair market value of the property for its highest and best use;
            (3) A physical analysis of the project, including the condition of the structure and grounds, the need for rehabilitation or repairs, and the estimated costs of any such rehabilitation or repairs;
            (4) The income levels of the occupants of the project;
            (5) Characteristics, including rental levels, of comparable housing in the area, with particular reference to whether current conditions and discernible trends in the area fairly indicate a likelihood that, for the foreseeable future after foreclosure and sale, the project will continue to provide rental or cooperative housing and market rentals obtainable in the project will be affordable by low- or moderate-income persons;
            (6) The availability of or need for rental housing for low- and moderate-income persons in the area, including actions being taken or projected to be taken to address such needs and the impact of such actions on the project;
            (7) An assessment of the number of occupants who might be displaced as a result of the manner of disposition;
            (8) The eligibility of the occupants of the property for rental assistance under any program administered by HUD and the availability of funding for such assistance if necessary in order that the units occupied by such occupants will remain available to and affordable by such persons, or if necessary in order to assure the financial feasibility of the project after foreclosure and sale subject to the terms to be required by the Secretary; and
            (9) Such other factors relating to the project as the Secretary shall consider appropriate.

            (c) Terms which the Secretary may require to be agreed to by the purchaser pursuant to section 367(b) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3706(b)) shall generally not be more restrictive, or binding for a longer duration, than the terms by which the mortgagor was bound prior to the foreclosure. For example: If the mortgage being foreclosed was held by the Secretary under section 312 of the Housing Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 1452b), any terms required by the Secretary pursuant to this section shall be in effect no longer than five years after the completion of the rehabilitation work funded by the section 312 loan. No terms shall be required pursuant to this section if the foreclosure sale occurs more than five years after the completion of such rehabilitation work (signified by the due date for commencement of amortization payments in the section 312 loan note).
            (d) The limitation contained in paragraph (c) of this section applies only to such terms as the Secretary may require the purchaser to agree to, as a condition and term of the sale, under paragraph (a) of this section. Nothing contained in paragraph (c) of this section shall prevent the Secretary and the purchaser from entering into a subsidy agreement under any program administered by the Secretary containing terms binding upon either party which are longer in duration than would be permitted to be required by paragraph (c) of this section.
            (e) Any terms required by the Secretary to be agreed to by the purchaser as a condition and term of sale under this section and section 367(b) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3706(b)) shall be embodied in a use agreement to be executed by the Secretary and the purchaser. Such terms also may be included, or referred to, in appropriate covenants contained in the deed to be delivered by the foreclosure commissioner under § 27.45. Terms required by the Secretary pursuant to this section shall be stated or described in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale under § 27.15.
            (f) The defaulting mortgagor, or any principal, successor, affiliate, or assignee thereof, on the multifamily mortgage being foreclosed, shall not be eligible to bid on, or otherwise acquire, the property being foreclosed by the Department under this subpart or any other provision of law. A “principal” and an “affiliate” are defined as provided at 24 CFR 24.105.
            [61 FR 48548, Sept. 13, 1996, as amended at 66 FR 35847, July 9, 2001]
          
          
            § 27.25
            Termination or adjournment of foreclosure sale.
            (a) Before withdrawing the security property from foreclosure under section 369A(a) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3709(a)), the commissioner shall notify the Secretary of the proposed withdrawal by telephone or telegram and shall provide the Secretary with a written statement of the reasons for the proposed withdrawal along with all documents submitted by the mortgagor in support of the proposed withdrawal. Upon receipt of this statement, the Secretary shall have 10 days within which to demonstrate orally or in writing why the security property should not be withdrawn from foreclosure. The Secretary shall provide the mortgagor with a copy of any statement prepared by the Secretary in opposition to the proposed withdrawal at the same time the statement is submitted to the commissioner. If the Secretary receives the commissioner's written statement less than 10 days before the scheduled foreclosure sale, the sale shall automatically be postponed for 14 days. Under these circumstances, notice of the rescheduled sale shall be served as described in section 369B(c) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3710(c)).
            (b) The commissioner may not withdraw the security property from foreclosure under section 369A(a) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3709(a)) more than once unless the Secretary consents in writing to such withdrawal.
            (c) The commissioner shall, in the case of a sale adjourned to a later date, mail a copy of the revised Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale to the Secretary at least seven days before the date to which the sale has been adjourned.
            (d) If upon application by the mortgagor, the commissioner refuses to withdraw the property from foreclosure under section 369A(a) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3709(a)), the commissioner shall provide the mortgagor and the Secretary with a written statement of the reasons for the refusal.
          
          
            § 27.30
            Conduct of the sale.

            (a) The commissioner shall accept written one-price sealed bids from any party including the Secretary so long as those bids conform to the requirements described in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale. The commissioner shall announce the name of each such bidder and the amount of the bid. The commissioner shall accept oral bids from any party, including parties who submitted one-price sealed bids, if those oral bids conform to the requirements described in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale. The commissioner will announce the amount of the high bid and the name of the successful bidder before the close of the sale.
            (b) Relatives of the commissioner who may not bid at the foreclosure sale include parents, siblings, spouses and children. Related business entities which may not bid include entities or concerns whose relationship with the commissioner at the time the commissioner is designated is such that, directly or indirectly, one concern or individual formulates, directs, or controls the other concern; or has the power to formulate, direct, or control the other concern; or has the responsibility and authority either to prevent in the first instance, or promptly to correct, the offensive conduct of the other concern. Business concerns are also affiliates of each other when a third party is similarly situated with respect to both concerns.
            (c) If the commissioner employs an auctioneer to conduct the foreclosure sale, the auctioneer must be a licensed auctioneer, an officer of State or local government, or any other person who commonly conducts foreclosure sales in the area in which the security property is located.
          
          
            § 27.35
            Foreclosure costs.
            Pursuant to section 369C(5) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3711(5)), a commission to the foreclosure commissioner for the conduct of the foreclosure will be paid in an amount to be determined by the General Counsel. A commission may be allowed to the commissioner notwithstanding termination of the sale or appointment of a substitute commissioner before the sale takes place.
          
          
            § 27.40
            Disposition of sale proceeds.
            (a) The priority of the Secretary's lien shall be determined by the Federal first-in-time first-in-right rule. State laws affording priority to liens recorded after the mortgage are preempted.
            (b) If there is more than one party holding a lien or assessment payable from sales proceeds, the claim of each party holding the same kind of lien or assessment will be given the relative priority to which it would be entitled under the law of the State in which the security property is located.
            (c) The commissioner will keep such records as will permit the Secretary to verify the costs claimed under section 369C of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3711), and otherwise to audit the commissioner's disposition of the sale proceeds.
          
          
            § 27.45
            Transfer of title and possession.
            (a) If the Secretary is the successful bidder, the foreclosure commissioner shall issue a deed to the Secretary upon receipt of the amount needed to pay the costs listed in sections 369D (1) through (3) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3712(1) through (3)). If the Secretary is not the successful bidder, the foreclosure commissioner shall issue a deed to the purchaser upon receipt of the entire purchase price and execution by the Secretary and the purchaser of any use agreement referred to in § 27.20(e). Any covenants reflecting terms required by § 27.20 shall be contained in the commissioner's deed.
            (b) Subject to any terms required to be agreed to by § 27.20, any commercial tenant and any residential tenant remaining in possession after the expiration of his or her lease or after the passage of one year, whichever event occurs first, shall be deemed a tenant at sufferance and may be evicted in accordance with applicable State or local law.
          
          
            § 27.50
            Management and disposition by the Secretary.
            When the Secretary is the purchaser of the security property, the Secretary shall manage and dispose of it in accordance with section 203 of the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978, as amended, 12 U.S.C. 1701z-11, and in accordance with 24 CFR part 290.
          
        
        
          
          Subpart B—Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Single Family Mortgages
          
            § 27.100
            Purpose, scope and applicability.
            (a) Purpose. The purpose of this subpart is to implement requirements for the administration of the Single Family Mortgage Foreclosure Act of 1994 (the Statute), 12 U.S.C. 3751-3768, that clarify, or are in addition to, the requirements contained in the Statute, which are not republished here and must be consulted in conjunction with the requirements of this subpart.
            (b) Scope. The Secretary may foreclose on any defaulted single family mortgage described in the Statute regardless of when the mortgage was executed.
            (c) Applicability. The Secretary may, at the Secretary's option, use other procedures to foreclose defaulted single family mortgages, including judicial foreclosure in State or Federal Court, and nonjudicial foreclosures under State law or any other Federal law. This subpart applies only to foreclosure procedures authorized by the Statute and not to any other foreclosure procedures the Secretary may use.
          
          
            § 27.101
            Definitions.
            The definitions contained in the Statute (at 12 U.S.C. 3752) shall apply to this subpart, in addition to and as further clarified by the following definitions. As used in this subpart:
            
              County means a political subdivision of a State or Territory of the United States, created to aid in the administration of State law for the purpose of local self government, and includes a parish or any other equivalent subdivision.
            
              Mortgage is as defined in the Statute except that the reference to property as “(real, personal or mixed)” means “any property (real or mixed real and personal).”
            
              Mortgage agreement is as defined in the Statute, and also means any other similar instrument or instruments creating the security interest in the real estate for the repayment of the note or debt instrument.
            
              Mortgagor is as defined in the Statute, except that the reference to “trustee” means “trustor.”
            
              Record; Recorded means to enter or entered in public land record systems established under State statutes for the purpose of imparting constructive notice to purchasers of real property for value and without knowledge, and includes “register” and “registered” in the instance of registered land, and “file” and its variants in the context of entering documents in public land records.
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, acting by and through any authorized designee exclusive of the foreclosure commissioner.
            
              Security Property is as defined in the statute except that the reference to property as “(real, personal or mixed)” means “any property (real or mixed real and personal).”
          
          
            § 27.102
            Designation of foreclosure commissioner and substitute commissioner.
            (a) The Secretary may designate foreclosure commissioners, including substitute commissioners, as set forth in the Statute.
            (b) The method of selection and determination of the qualifications of the foreclosure commissioner shall be at the discretion of the Secretary. The execution of a designation pursuant to this section shall be conclusive evidence that the commissioner selected has been determined to be qualified by the Secretary. The designation is effective upon execution.
          
          
            § 27.103
            Notice of default and foreclosure sale.
            (a) The foreclosure commissioner shall commence the foreclosure under the procedures set forth in the Statute.
            (b) The Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale (Notice) shall include, in addition to the provisions as required by the Statute:
            (1) The foreclosure commissioner's telephone number;
            (2) A description of the security property sufficient to identify the property to be sold;
            (3) The date the mortgage was recorded;
            
            (4) Identification of the failure to make payment, including the entire amount delinquent as of a date specified, a statement generally describing the other costs that must be paid if the mortgage is to be reinstated, the due date of the earliest principal installment payment remaining wholly unpaid as of the date on which the notice is issued upon which the foreclosure is based, or a description of any other default or defaults upon which foreclosure is based, and the acceleration of the secured indebtedness; and
            (5) The bidding and payment requirements for the foreclosure sale, including the time and method of payment of the balance of the foreclosure purchase price, that all deposits and the balance of the purchase price shall be paid by certified or cashier's check, and that no deposit will be required of the Secretary when the Secretary bids at the foreclosure sale.
          
          
            § 27.105
            Service of Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale.
            (a) The Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale shall be served in accordance with the provisions of the Statute. When notice is sent by mail, multiple mailings are not required to be sent to any party with multiple capacities, e.g., an original mortgagor who is the security property owner and lives in one of the units. The date of the receipt for the postage paid for the mailing may serve as proof of the date of mailing of the notice.
            (b) Notice need not be mailed to any mortgagors who have been released from all obligations under the mortgage.
          
          
            § 27.107
            Presale reinstatement.
            (a) The foreclosure commissioner shall withdraw the security property from foreclosure and cancel the foreclosure sale only in accordance with the provisions of the Statute and as more fully provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section in regard to presale reinstatements.
            (b) To obtain a presale reinstatement in cases involving a monetary default, there must be tendered to the foreclosure commissioner before public auction is completed all amounts which would be due under the mortgage agreement if payments under the mortgage had not been accelerated and all costs of foreclosure incurred for which payment from the proceeds of foreclosure is provided in the Statute, and the foreclosure commissioner must find that there are no nonmonetary defaults; provided, however, that the Secretary may refuse to cancel a foreclosure sale pursuant to this subparagraph if the current mortgagor or owner of record has, on one or more previous occasions, caused a foreclosure of the mortgage, commenced pursuant to the Statute and this subpart or otherwise, to be canceled by curing a default.
            (c) To obtain a presale reinstatement in cases involving a nonmonetary default:
            (1) The foreclosure commissioner, upon application of the mortgagor before the date of foreclosure sale, must find that all nonmonetary defaults are cured and that there are no monetary defaults; and
            (2) There must be tendered to the foreclosure commissioner before public auction is completed all amounts due under the mortgage agreement (excluding all amounts which would be due under the mortgage agreement if the mortgage payments had been accelerated), including all amounts of expenditures secured by the mortgage and all costs of foreclosure incurred for which payment would be made from the proceeds of foreclosure as provided in the Statute.

            (d) Before withdrawing the security property from foreclosure, the foreclosure commissioner shall notify the Secretary of the proposed withdrawal by telephone or other telecommunication device and shall also provide the Secretary with a written statement of the reasons for the proposed withdrawal along with all documents submitted by the mortgagor in support of the proposed withdrawal. Upon receipt of this statement, the Secretary shall have ten (10) days in which to demonstrate why the security property should not be withdrawn from foreclosure, and if the Secretary makes this demonstration, the property shall not be withdrawn from foreclosure. The Secretary shall provide the mortgagor with a copy of any statement prepared by the Secretary in opposition to the proposed withdrawal at the same time the statement is submitted to the foreclosure commissioner. If the Secretary receives the foreclosure commissioner's written statement less than 10 days before the scheduled foreclosure sale, the sale shall automatically be adjourned for 14 days, during which time it may be cancelled. Notice of the re-scheduled sale, if any, shall be served as described in § 27.111.
          
          
            § 27.109
            Conduct of sale.
            (a) The foreclosure sale shall be conducted in a manner and at a time and place as identified in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale and in accordance with the provisions of the Statute.
            (b) In addition to bids made in person at the sale, the foreclosure commissioner shall accept written one-price sealed bids from any party, including the Secretary, for entry by announcement at the sale so long as those bids conform to the requirements described in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale. The foreclosure commissioner shall announce the name of each such bidder and the amount of the bid. The commissioner shall accept oral bids from any party, including parties who submitted one-price sealed bids, if those oral bids conform to the requirements in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale. Before the close of the sale the commissioner shall announce the amount of the high bid and the name of the successful bidder. If the successful bidder fails to comply with the terms of the sale, the HUD Field Office representative will provide instructions to the commissioner about offering the property to the second highest bidder, or having a new sale, or other instruction at the discretion of the HUD representative.
            (c) Prohibited participants. Relatives of the foreclosure commissioner who may not bid include parents, siblings, spouses and children. A related business entity that may not bid or whose employees may not bid is one whose relationship (at the time the foreclosure commissioner is designated and during the term of service as foreclosure commissioner) with the entity of the foreclosure commissioner is such that, directly or indirectly, one entity formulates, directs, or controls the other entity; or has the power to formulate, direct, or control the other entity; or has the responsibility and authority to prevent, or promptly to correct, the offensive conduct of the other entity.
            (d) Auctioneers. If the commissioner employs an auctioneer to conduct the foreclosure sale, the auctioneer must be a licensed auctioneer, an officer of State or local government, or any other person who commonly conducts foreclosure sales in the area in which the security property is located.
          
          
            § 27.111
            Adjournment or cancellation of sale.
            (a) The foreclosure commissioner may, before or at the time of the foreclosure sale, adjourn or cancel the foreclosure sale in accordance with the provisions of the Statute. The publication of the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale, revised pursuant to the Statute, may be made on any of three separate days before the revised date of foreclosure sale. If there is no newspaper of general circulation that would permit publication on any of three separate days before the revised date of foreclosure sale, the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale must be posted, not less than nine days before the date to which the sale has been adjourned, at the courthouse of any county or counties in which the property is located, and at the place where the sale is to be held. The commissioner must also, in the case of a sale adjourned to a later date, mail a copy of the revised Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale to the Secretary at least seven days before the date to which the sale has been adjourned.
            (b) When a substitute commissioner is designated by the Secretary to replace a previously designated foreclosure commissioner, the sale shall continue without prejudice unless the substitute commissioner finds, in that commissioner's sole discretion, that continuation of the foreclosure sale will unfairly affect the interests of the mortgagor. Any such finding shall be in writing. If the substitute commissioner makes such a finding, the substitute commissioner shall cancel or adjourn the sale.
          
          
            
            § 27.113
            Foreclosure costs.
            A commission may be allowed to the foreclosure commissioner notwithstanding termination of the sale or appointment of a substitute commissioner before the sale takes place.
          
          
            § 27.115
            Disposition of sales proceeds.
            The foreclosure commissioner will keep such records as will permit the Secretary to verify the costs claimed, and otherwise to enable the Secretary to audit the foreclosure commissioner's disposition of the sale proceeds.
          
          
            § 27.117
            Transfer of title and possession.
            (a) If the Secretary is the successful bidder, the foreclosure commissioner shall issue a deed to the Secretary upon receipt of the amount needed to pay the costs of tax liens and prior liens, as set forth in 12 U.S.C. 3762(a)(2) and (a)(3). If the Secretary is not the successful bidder, the foreclosure commissioner shall issue a deed to the purchaser or purchasers upon receipt of the entire purchase price in accordance with the terms of the sale as provided in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale.
            (b) The register of deeds or other appropriate official in the county where the property is located shall, upon tendering of the customary recording fees, accept all instruments pertaining to the foreclosure which are submitted by the foreclosure commissioner for recordation. The instruments to be accepted shall include, but not be limited to, the foreclosure commissioner's deed. If the foreclosure commissioner elects to include the recitations required under the Statute (12 U.S.C. 3764) in an affidavit or an addendum to the deed, the affidavit or addendum shall be accepted along with the deed for recordation. The Clerk of the Court or other appropriate official shall cancel all liens as requested by the foreclosure commissioner.
          
          
            § 27.119
            Redemption rights.
            Only for purposes of redemption rights under the Statute, a foreclosure shall be considered completed upon the date and at the time of the foreclosure sale.
          
          
            § 27.121
            Record of foreclosure and sale.
            The statements regarding the foreclosed mortgage required to establish a sufficient record shall include the date the mortgage was recorded. The statements regarding the service of the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale shall include the names and addresses of the persons to whom the Notice was mailed and the date on which the Notice was mailed, the name of the newspaper in which the Notice was published and the dates of publication, and the date on which service by posting, if required, was accomplished.
          
          
            § 27.123
            Deficiency judgment.
            If the price at which the security property is sold at the foreclosure sale is less than the unpaid balance of the debt secured by such property after disposition of sale proceeds in accordance with the order of priority provided under the Statute, the Secretary may refer the matter to the Attorney General who may commence an action or actions against any and all debtors to recover the deficiency, unless such an action is specifically prohibited by the mortgage.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 28
        PART 28—IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM FRAUD CIVIL REMEDIES ACT OF 1986
        
          Sec.
          28.1
          Purpose.
          28.5
          Definitions.
          28.10
          Basis for civil penalties and assessments.
          28.15
          Investigation.
          28.20
          Request for approval by the Department of Justice.
          28.25
          Complaint.
          28.30
          Response.
          28.35
          Statute of limitations.
          28.40
          Hearings.
          28.45
          Settlements.
        
        
          Authority:
          28 U.S.C. 2461 note; 31 U.S.C. 3801-3812; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 50213, Sept. 24, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 28.1
          Purpose.
          This part:

          (a) Establishes administrative procedures for imposing civil penalties and assessments against persons who make, submit, or present, or cause to be made, submitted, or presented, false, fictitious, or fraudulent claims or written statements to Federal authorities or to their agents; and
          (b) Specifies the hearing and appeal rights of persons subject to allegations of liability for such penalties and assessments. Hearings under this part shall be conducted in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act pursuant to part 26, subpart B, of this chapter.
          [61 FR 50213, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 76831, Dec. 17, 2008]
        
        
          § 28.5
          Definitions.
          (a) The terms ALJ and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
          (b) The terms Claim, Knows or has reason to know, Person, Reviewing Official, and Statement have the same meanings as defined in 31 U.S.C. 3801.
          (c) Ability to pay is determined based on an assessment of the respondent's resources available both presently and prospectively from which the Department could ultimately recover the total award, which may be predicted based on historical evidence.
          (d) Benefit means anything of value, including, but not limited to, any advantage, preference, privilege, license, permit, favorable decision, ruling, status, or loan insurance or guarantee.
          (e) Respondent means any person alleged to be liable for a civil penalty or assessment under § 28.25.
          (f) The reasonable prospect of collecting an appropriate amount of penalties and assessments is determined based on a generalized assessment made by a Reviewing Official based on the limited information available in the Report of Investigation for purposes of determining whether the allocation of HUD's resources to any particular action is appropriate. This assessment is not the same as the assessment made when determining ability to pay, nor is the reasonable prospect of collecting a factor to be considered in determining the amount of any penalty or assessment in any particular case.
          (g) Report of Investigation means a report containing the findings and conclusions of a Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act investigation by the Inspector General or his or her designee, as described in § 28.15.
          [73 FR 76831, Dec. 17, 2008]
        
        
          § 28.10
          Basis for civil penalties and assessments.
          (a) Claims. (1) A civil penalty of not more than $11,181 may be imposed upon any person who makes, presents, or submits, or causes to be made, presented, or submitted, a claim that the person knows or has reason to know:
          (i) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent;
          (ii) Includes or is supported by a written statement which asserts a material fact which is false, fictitious, or fraudulent;
          (iii) Includes or is supported by any written statement that:
          (A) Omits a material fact;
          (B) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent as a result of the omission; and
          (C) Is a statement in which the person making, presenting, or submitting such statement has a duty to include such material fact; or
          (iv) Is for payment for the provision of property or services which the person has not provided as claimed.
          (2) Each voucher, invoice, claim form, or other individual request or demand for property, services, or money constitutes a separate claim.
          (3) A claim shall be considered made to HUD, to a recipient, or to a party when the claim actually is made to an agent, fiscal intermediary, or other entity, including any State or political subdivision of a State, acting for or on behalf of HUD, the recipient, or the party.
          (4) Each claim for property, services, or money is subject to a civil penalty without regard to whether the property, services, or money actually is delivered or paid.
          (5) Liability under this part shall not lie if the amount of money or value of property or services claimed exceeds $150,000 as to each claim that a person submits. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, a group of claims submitted simultaneously as part of a single transaction shall be considered a single claim.

          (6) If the Government has made any payment, transferred property, or provided services on a claim, then the Government may assess a person found liable up to twice the amount of the claim or portion of the claim that is determined to be in violation of paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
          (b) Statements. (1) A civil penalty of not more than $11,181 may be imposed upon any person who makes, presents, or submits, or causes to be made, presented, or submitted, a written statement that:
          (i) The person knows or has reason to know:
          (A) Asserts a material fact which is false, fictitious, or fraudulent; or
          (B)(1) Omits a material fact; and
          (2) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent as a result of such omission;
          (ii) In the case of a statement described in (b)(1)(A)(ii) of this section, is a statement in which the person making, presenting, or submitting such statement has a duty to include such material fact; and
          (iii) Contains or is accompanied by an express certification or affirmation of the truthfulness and accuracy of the contents of the statement.
          (2) Each written representation, certification, or affirmation constitutes a separate statement.
          (3) A statement shall be considered made to HUD when the statement is actually made to an agent, fiscal intermediary, or other entity, including any State or political subdivision of a State, acting for or on behalf of HUD.
          (c) Limit on liability. If the claim or statement relates to low-income housing benefits or housing benefits for the elderly or handicapped, then a person may be held liable only if he or she has made or caused to be made the claim or statement in the course of applying for such benefits, with respect to his or her eligibility, or family's eligibility, to receive such benefits. For purposes of paragraph (c) of this section, “housing benefits” means any instance wherein funds administered by the Secretary directly or indirectly permit low-income families or elderly or handicapped persons to reside in housing that otherwise would not be available to them.
          (d) Specific intent. No proof of specific intent to defraud is required to establish liability under this section.
          (e) Joint and several liability. A civil penalty or assessment may be imposed jointly and severally if more than one person is determined to be liable.
          [61 FR 50213, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 12787, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 73 FR 76831, Dec. 17, 2008; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
          
            Effective Date Note:
            At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 28.10 was amended by revising the introductory text of paragraphs (a)(1) and (b)(1), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
            
              
                § 28.10
                Basis for civil penalties and assessments.
                (a) Claims. (1) A civil penalty of not more than $11,463 may be imposed upon any person who makes, presents, or submits, or causes to be made, presented, or submitted, a claim that the person knows or has reason to know:
                
                (b) Statements. (1) A civil penalty of not more than $11,463 may be imposed upon any person who makes, presents, or submits, or causes to be made, presented, or submitted, a written statement that:
                
              
            
          
        
        
          § 28.15
          Investigation.
          (a) General. HUD may initiate a Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act (31 U.S.C. 3801) case against a respondent only upon an investigation by the Inspector General or his or her designee.
          (b) Subpoena. Pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3804(a), the Inspector General or designee may require by subpoena the production of records and other documents. The subpoena shall state the authority under which it is issued, identify the records sought, and name the person designated to receive the records. The recipient of the subpoena shall provide a certification that the documents sought have been produced, that the documents are not available and the reasons they are not available, or that the documents, suitably identified, have been withheld based upon the assertion of an identified privilege.
          (c) Investigation report. If the Inspector General or designee concludes that an action under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act may be warranted, her or she shall submit a report containing the findings and conclusions of the investigation to the General Counsel or his or her designee.
          (d) The Inspector General may refer allegations directly to the Department of Justice for suit under the False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 3730) or for other civil relief, or may postpone submitting a report to the General Counsel to avoid interference with a criminal investigation or prosecution. The Inspector General shall report violations of criminal law to the Attorney General.
        
        
          § 28.20
          Request for approval by the Department of Justice.
          (a) If the General Counsel or designee determines that the Report of Investigation supports an action under this part, he or she must submit a written request to the Department of Justice for approval to issue a complaint under § 28.25.
          (b) The request shall include a description of the claims or statements at issue; the evidence supporting the allegations; an estimate of the amount of money or the value of property, services, or other benefits requested or demanded in violation of § 28.10; any exculpatory or mitigating circumstances that may relate to the claims or statements; and a statement that there is a reasonable prospect of collecting an appropriate amount of penalties and assessments.
          [73 FR 76831, Dec. 17, 2008]
        
        
          § 28.25
          Complaint.
          (a) General. Upon obtaining approval from the Department of Justice, the General Counsel or designee may issue a complaint to the respondent. The complaint shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, or shall be delivered through such other means by which delivery may be confirmed. The complaint shall also be filed simultaneously with the Office of Administrative Law Judges in accordance with § 26.30(a) of this chapter.
          (b) Complaint. The complaint shall include:
          (1) The allegations of liability against the respondent, including the statutory basis for liability, the claims or statements at issue, and the reasons why liability arises from those claims or statements;
          (2) A statement that the required approval to issue the complaint was received from the Department of Justice as required by 24 CFR 28.20;
          (3) The amount of penalties and assessments for which the respondent may be held liable;
          (4) A statement that the respondent may request a hearing by submitting a written response to the complaint;
          (5) The addresses to which a response must be sent in accordance with § 26.38 of this title; and
          (6) A statement that failure to submit an answer within 30 days of receipt of the complaint may result in the imposition of the maximum amount of penalties and assessments sought without right of appeal.
          (c) Parts 26 and 28. A copy of this part 28 and part 26, subpart B of this chapter, shall be included with the complaint.
          (d) Obligation to preserve documents. Upon receipt of the complaint, the respondent is required to preserve and maintain all documents and data, including electronically stored data, within their possession or control that may relate to the allegations in the complaint. The Department shall also preserve such documents or data upon the issuance of the complaint.
          [73 FR 76832, Dec. 17, 2008]
        
        
          § 28.30
          Response.
          (a) The respondent may file a written response to the complaint, in accordance with § 26.30 of this title, within 30 days of service of the complaint. The response shall be deemed to be a request for a hearing. The response must include the admission or denial of each allegation of liability made in the complaint; any defense on which the respondent intends to rely; any reasons why the penalties and assessments should be less than the amount set forth in the complaint; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person who will act as the respondent's representative, if any.
          (b) Failure to respond. If no response is submitted, HUD may file a motion for default judgment in accordance with § 26.41 of this chapter.
          [73 FR 76832, Dec. 17, 2008]
        
        
          
          § 28.35
          Statute of limitations.
          The statute of limitations for commencing hearings under this part shall be tolled:
          (a) If the hearing is commenced in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3803(d)(2)(B) within 6 years after the date on which the claim or statement is made; or
          (b) If the parties agree to such tolling.
          [73 FR 76832, Dec. 17, 2008]
        
        
          § 28.40
          Hearings.
          (a) General. Hearings under this part shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures in part 26, subpart B, of this chapter, governing actions in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act.
          (b) Factors to consider in determining amount of penalties and assessments. In determining an appropriate amount of civil penalties and assessments, the ALJ and, upon appeal, the Secretary or designee, shall consider and state in his or her opinion any mitigating or aggravating circumstances. Because of the intangible costs of fraud, the expense of investigating fraudulent conduct, and the need for deterrence, ordinarily twice the amount of the claim as alleged by the government, and a significant civil penalty, should be imposed. The amount of penalties and assessments imposed shall be based on the ALJ's and the Secretary's or designee's consideration of evidence in support of one or more of the following factors:
          (1) The number of false, fictitious, or fraudulent claims or statements;
          (2) The time period over which such claims or statements were made;
          (3) The degree of the respondent's culpability with respect to the misconduct;
          (4) The amount of money or the value of the property, services, or benefit falsely claimed;
          (5) The value of the Government's actual loss as a result of the misconduct, including foreseeable consequential damages and the cost of investigation;
          (6) The relationship of the civil penalties to the amount of the Government's loss;
          (7) The potential or actual impact of the misconduct upon national defense, public health or safety, or public confidence in the management of Government programs and operations, including particularly the impact on the intended beneficiaries of such programs;
          (8) Whether the respondent has engaged in a pattern of the same or similar misconduct;
          (9) Whether the respondent attempted to conceal the misconduct;
          (10) The degree to which the respondent has involved others in the misconduct or in concealing it;
          (11) If the misconduct of employees or agents is imputed to the respondent, the extent to which the respondent's practices fostered or attempted to preclude the misconduct;
          (12) Whether the respondent cooperated in or obstructed an investigation of the misconduct;
          (13) Whether the respondent assisted in identifying and prosecuting other wrongdoers;
          (14) The complexity of the program or transaction, and the degree of the respondent's sophistication with respect to it, including the extent of the respondent's prior participation in the program or in similar transactions;
          (15) Whether the respondent has been found, in any criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding, to have engaged in similar misconduct or to have dealt dishonestly with the Government of the United States or of a State, directly or indirectly;
          (16) The need to deter the respondent and others from engaging in the same or similar misconduct; and
          (17) The respondent's ability to pay, and
          (18) Any other factors that in any given case may mitigate or aggravate the seriousness of the false claim or statement.
          (c) Stays ordered by the Department of Justice. If at any time the Attorney General of the United States or an Assistant Attorney General designated by the Attorney General notifies the Secretary in writing that continuation of HUD's case may adversely affect any pending or potential criminal or civil action related to the claim or statement at issue, the ALJ or the Secretary shall stay the process immediately. The case may be resumed only upon receipt of the written authorization of the Attorney General.
          [61 FR 50213, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 76832, Dec. 17, 2008]
        
        
          § 28.45
          Settlements.
          (a) HUD and the respondent may enter into a settlement agreement at any time prior to the issuing of a notice of final determination under § 26.50 of this title.
          (b) Failure of the respondent to comply with a settlement agreement shall be sufficient cause for resuming an action under this part, or for any other judicial or administrative action.
        
      
      
        Pt. 30
        PART 30—CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES: CERTAIN PROHIBITED CONDUCT
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            30.1
            Purpose and scope.
            30.5
            Effective dates.
            30.10
            Definitions.
            30.15
            Application of other remedies.
          
          
            Subpart B—Violations
            30.20
            Ethical violations by HUD employees.
            30.25
            Violations by applicants for assistance.
            30.30
            Urban Homestead violations.
            30.35
            Mortgagees and lenders.
            30.36
            Dealers or sponsored third-party originators.
            30.40
            Loan guarantees for Indian housing.
            30.45
            Multifamily and section 202 or 811 mortgagors.
            30.50
            GNMA issuers and custodians.
            30.55
            Interstate Land Sales violations.
            30.60
            Dealers or sponsored third-party originators.
            30.65
            Failure to disclose lead-based paint hazards.
            30.68
            Section 8 owners.
            30.69
            SAFE Mortgage Licensing violations.
          
          
            Subpart C—Procedures
            30.70
            Prepenalty notice.
            30.75
            Response to prepenalty notice.
            30.80
            Factors in determining amount of civil money penalty.
            30.85
            Complaint.
            30.90
            Response to the complaint.
            30.95
            Hearings.
            30.100
            Settlement of a civil money penalty action.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          12 U.S.C. 1701q-1, 1703, 1723i, 1735f-14, and 1735f-15; 15 U.S.C. 1717a; 28 U.S.C. 1 note and 2461 note; 42 U.S.C. 1437z-1 and 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 30.1
            Purpose and scope.
            Unless provided for elsewhere in this title or under separate authority, this part implements HUD's civil money penalty provisions. The procedural rules for hearings under this part are those applicable to hearings in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, as set forth in 24 CFR part 26.
            [74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009]
          
          
            § 30.5
            Effective dates.
            (a) Under § 30.20, a civil money penalty may be imposed for violations occurring on or after May 22, 1991.
            (b) Under §§ 30.25, 30.35, 30.45, 30.50, 30.55, and 30.60, a civil money penalty may be imposed for any violations that occur on or after December 15, 1989.
            (c) Under § 30.40, concerning loan guarantees for Indian housing, a civil money penalty may be imposed for violations occurring on or after October 28, 1992.
            (d) Under § 30.65, a civil money penalty may be imposed for violations occurring on or after the following dates:
            (1) September 6, 1996, for owners of more than four residential dwellings; or
            (2) December 6, 1996, for owners of one to four residential dwellings.
            (e) Under § 30.68, a civil money penalty may be imposed for violations, or for those parts of continuing violations, occurring on or after January 7, 2002.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 66 FR 63441, Dec. 6, 2001; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017]
          
          
            § 30.10
            Definitions.

            Since this part is primarily procedural, terms not defined in this section shall have the meanings given them in relevant program regulations. Comprehensive definitions are in 24 CFR part 4 (HUD Reform Act). The terms ALJ, Department, HUD, and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
            
              Ability to pay. Determined based on an assessment of the respondent's resources available both presently and prospectively from which the Department could ultimately recover the total award, which may be predicted based on historical evidence.
            
              Agent. Any person, including an officer, director, partner, or trustee, who acts on behalf of another person.
            
              Dealer. A seller, contractor or supplier of goods or services having a direct or indirect financial interest in the transaction between the borrower and the lender, and who assists the borrower in preparing the credit application or otherwise assists the borrower in obtaining the loan from the lender.
            
              Knowing or Knowingly. Having actual knowledge of or acting with deliberate ignorance of or reckless disregard for the prohibitions under subpart B of this part or under 24 CFR part 4. For purposes of §§ 30.35 and 30.36, knowing or knowingly is defined at 12 U.S.C. 1735f-14(g).
            
              Material or Materially. Having the natural tendency or potential to influence, or when considering the totality of the circumstances, in some significant respect or to some significant degree.
            
              Person. An individual, corporation, company, association, authority, firm, partnership, society, State, local government or agency thereof, or any other organization or group of people.
            
              Respondent. A person against whom a civil money penalty action is initiated.
            
              Sponsored third-party originator. A sponsored third-party originator as defined at § 202.8 of this title.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009; 77 FR 51468, Aug. 24, 2012; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017]
          
          
            § 30.15
            Application of other remedies.
            A civil money penalty may be imposed in addition to other administrative sanctions or any other civil remedy or criminal penalty.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Violations
          
            § 30.20
            Ethical violations by HUD employees.
            (a) General. The General Counsel, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against HUD employees who improperly disclose information pursuant to section 103 of the HUD Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3537a(c)) and 24 CFR part 4, subpart B.
            (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty is $19,639 for each violation.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.20 was amended by revising paragraph (b), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.20
                  Ethical violations by HUD employees.
                  
                  (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty is $20,134 for each violation.
                
              
            
          
          
            § 30.25
            Violations by applicants for assistance.
            (a) General. The General Counsel, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against applicants for assistance, as defined in 24 CFR part 4, subpart A, who knowingly and materially violate the provisions of subsections (b) or (c) of section 102 of the HUD Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3545).
            (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty is $19,639 for each violation.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.25 was amended by revising paragraph (b), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.25
                  Violations by applicants for assistance.
                  
                  (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty is $20,134 for each violation.
                
              
            
          
          
            § 30.35
            Mortgagees and lenders.
            (a) General. The Mortgagee Review Board may initiate a civil money penalty action against any mortgagee or lender who knowingly and materially:

            (1) Violates the provisions listed in 12 U.S.C. 1735f-14(b);
            
            (2) Fails to comply with the requirements of § 201.27(a) of this title regarding approval and supervision of dealers;
            (3) Approves a dealer that has been suspended, debarred, or otherwise denied participation in HUD's programs;
            (4) Makes a payment that is prohibited under § 202.5(l).
            (5) Fails to remit, or timely remit, mortgage insurance premiums, loan insurance charges, or late charges or interest penalties;
            (6) Permits loan documents for an FHA insured loan to be signed in blank by its agents or any other party to the loan transaction unless expressly approved by the Secretary;
            (7) Fails to follow the mortgage assignment procedures set forth in § 203.664 of this title or in §§ 207.255 through 207.258b of this title.
            (8) Fails to timely submit documents that are complete and accurate in connection with a conveyance of a property or a claim for insurance benefits, in accordance with §§ 203.365, 203.366, or 203.368, or a claim for insurance benefits in accordance with § 206.127 of this title;
            (9) Fails to:
            (i) Process requests for formal release of liability under an FHA insured mortgage;
            (ii) Obtain a credit report, issued not more than 90 days prior to approval of a person as a borrower, as to the person's creditworthiness to assume an FHA insured mortgage;
            (iii) Timely submit proper notification of a change in mortgagor or mortgagee as required by § 203.431 of this title;
            (iv) Timely submit proper notification of mortgage insurance termination as required by § 203.318 of this title;
            (v) Timely submit proper notification of a change in mortgage servicing as required by § 203.502 of this title; or
            (vi) Report all delinquent mortgages to HUD, as required by § 203.330 of this title;
            (10) Fails to service FHA insured mortgages, in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR parts 201, 203, 206, and 235;
            (11) Fails to fund loans that it originated, or otherwise misuses loan proceeds;
            (12) Fails to comply with the conditions relating to the assignment or pledge of mortgages;

            (13) Fails to comply with the provisions of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (12 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.), the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691 et seq.), or the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.);
            (14) Fails to engage in loss mitigation as provided in § 203.605 of this title.
            (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
            (c)(1) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $9,819 for each violation, up to a limit of $1,963,870 for all violations committed during any one-year period.  Each violation shall constitute a separate violation as to each mortgage or loan application.
            (2) Maximum penalty for failing to engage in loss mitigation. The penalty for a violation of paragraph (a)(14) of this section shall be three times the amount of the total mortgage insurance benefits claimed by the mortgagee with respect to any mortgage for which the mortgagee failed to engage in such loss mitigation actions.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 9742, Feb. 26, 1998; 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 70 FR 21578, Apr. 26, 2005; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009; 74 FR 14725, Apr. 1, 2009; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 82 FR 7117, Jan. 19, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.35 was amended by revising the first sentence in paragraph (c)(1), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.35
                  Mortgagees and lenders.
                  
                  (c)(1) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $10,067 for each violation, up to a limit of $2,013,399 for all violations committed during any one-year period. * * *
                  
                
              
            
          
          
            § 30.36
            Other participants in FHA programs.
            (a) General. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner (or his/her designee) may initiate a civil money penalty action against any principal, officer, or employee of a mortgagee or lender, or other participants in either a mortgage insured under the National Housing Act or any loan that is covered by a contract of insurance under title I of the National Housing Act, or a provider of assistance to the borrower in connection with any such mortgage or loan, including:
            (1) Sellers;
            (2) Borrowers;
            (3) Closing agents;
            (4) Title companies;
            (5) Real estate agents;
            (6) Mortgage brokers;
            (7) Appraisers;
            (8) Sponsored third-party originators;
            (9) Dealers;
            (10) Consultants;
            (11) Contractors;
            (12) Subcontractors; and
            (13) Inspectors.
            (b) Knowing and material violations. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner or his/her designee may impose a civil penalty on any person or entity identified in paragraph (a) of this section who knowingly and materially:

            (1) Submits false information to the Secretary in connection with any mortgage insured under the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), or any loan that is covered by a contract of insurance under title I of the National Housing Act;
            (2) Falsely certifies to the Secretary or submits a false certification by another person or entity to the Secretary in connection with any mortgage insured under the National Housing Act or any loan that is covered by a contract of insurance under title I of the National Housing Act; or
            (3) Is a loan dealer and fails to submit to the Secretary information which is required by regulations or directives in connection with any loan that is covered by a contract of insurance under title I of the National Housing Act.
            (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $9,819 for each violation, up to a limit of $1,963,870 for all violations committed during any one-year period. Each violation shall constitute a separate violation as to each mortgage or loan application.
            [65 FR 9087, Feb. 23, 2000, as amended at 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 77 FR 51468, Aug. 24, 2012; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.36 was amended by revising the first sentence in paragraph (c), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.36
                  Other participants in FHA programs.
                  
                  (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $10,067 for each violation, up to a limit of $2,013,399 for all violations committed during any one-year period. * * *
                
              
            
          
          
            § 30.40
            Loan guarantees for Indian housing.
            (a) General. The Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing (or his/her designee) may initiate a civil money penalty action against any mortgagee or holder of a guarantee certificate who knowingly and materially violates the provisions of 12 U.S.C. 1715z-13a(g)(2) concerning loan guarantees for Indian housing.
            (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
            (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $9,819 for each violation, up to a limit of $1,963,870 for all violations committed during any one-year period. Each violation shall constitute a separate violation as to each mortgage or loan application.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 65 FR 9087, Feb. 23, 2000; 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 28.10 was amended by revising the first sentence in paragraph (c), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.40
                  Loan guarantees for Indian housing.
                  
                  (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $10,067 for each violation, up to a limit of $2,013,399 for all violations committed during any one-year period. * * *
                
              
            
          
          
            
            § 30.45
            Multifamily and section 202 or 811 mortgagors.
            (a) Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section only:
            (1) Agent employed to manage the property that has an identity of interest and identity of interest agent. An entity:
            (i) That has management responsibility for a project;
            (ii) In which the ownership entity, including its general partner or partners (if applicable) and its officers or directors (if applicable), has an ownership interest; and
            (iii) Over which the ownership entity exerts effective control.
            (2) Effective control. The ability to direct, alter, supervise, or otherwise influence the actions, policies, decisions, duties, employment, or personnel of the management agent.
            (3) Entity. An individual corporation; company; association; partnership; authority; firm; society; trust; state, local government or agency thereof; or any other organization or group of people.
            (4) Multifamily property. Property that includes 5 or more living units and that has a mortgage insured, co-insured, or held pursuant to the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1702 et seq.).
            (5) Ownership interest. Any direct or indirect interest in the stock, partnership interests, beneficial interests (for a trust) or other medium of equity participation. An indirect interest includes equity participation in any entity that holds a management interest (e.g. general partner, managing member of an LLC, majority stockholder, trustee) or minimum equity interest (e.g., a 25% or more limited partner, 10% or more stockholder) in the ownership entity of the management agent.
            (6) Section 202 or 811 property. Property that includes 5 or more living units and that has a mortgage held pursuant to a direct loan or capital advances under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C. 1701q) or capital advances under section 811 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 8013).
            (b) Violation of agreement—(1) General. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against a mortgagor of a section 202 or 811 property or a mortgagor, general partner of a partnership mortgagor, or any officer or director of a corporate mortgagor of a multifamily property who:
            (i) Has agreed in writing, as a condition of a transfer of physical assets, a flexible subsidy loan, a capital improvement loan, a modification of the mortgage terms, or a workout agreement, to use nonproject income to make cash contributions for payments due under the note and mortgage, for payments to the reserve for replacements, to restore the project to good physical condition, or to pay other project liabilities; and
            (ii) Knowingly and materially fails to comply with any of the commitments listed in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.
            (2) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation under paragraph (b) of this section is the amount of loss that the Secretary would experience at a foreclosure sale, or a sale after foreclosure, of the property involved.
            (c) Other violations. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against any of the following who knowingly and materially take any of the actions listed in 12 U.S.C. 1735f-15(c)(1)(B):
            (1) Any mortgagor of a multifamily property;
            (2) Any general partner of a partnership mortgagor of such property;
            (3) Any officer or director of a corporate mortgagor;
            (4) Any agent employed to manage the property that has an identity of interest with the mortgagor, with the general partner of a partnership mortgagor, or with any officer or director of a corporate mortgagor of such property; or
            (5) Any member of a limited liability company that is the mortgagor of such property or is the general partner of a limited partnership mortgagor or is a partner of a general partnership mortgagor.
            (d) Acceptable management. For purposes of this rule, management acceptable to the Secretary under 12 U.S.C. 1735f-15(c)(1)(B)(xiv) shall include:
            
            (1) Fiscal management in accordance with HUD regulations and requirements;
            (2) Handling of vacancies and tenanting in accordance with HUD regulations and requirements;
            (3) Handling of rent collection in accordance with HUD regulations and requirements;
            (4) Maintenance in accordance with HUD regulations and requirements;
            (5) Compliance with HUD regulations and requirements on tenant organization; and
            (6) Any other matters that pertain to proper management in accordance with HUD regulations and requirements.
            (e) Civil money penalty. A consistent pattern of violations of HUD program requirements, or a single violation that causes serious injury to the public or tenants, can be a basis for an action to assess a civil money penalty.
            (f) Section 202 or 811 projects. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against any mortgagor of a section 202 or 811 property who knowingly and materially takes any of the actions listed in 12 U.S.C. 1701q-1(c)(1).
            (g) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation under paragraphs (c) and (f) of this section is $48,114.
            (h) Payment of penalty. No payment of a civil money penalty levied under this section shall be payable out of project income.
            (i) Exceptions. The Secretary may not impose penalties under this section for a violation, if a material cause of the violation is the failure of the Secretary, an agent of the Secretary, or a public housing agency to comply with an existing agreement.
            (g) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation under paragraphs (c) and (f) of this section is $49,096.
            [66 FR 63441, Dec. 6, 2001, as amended at 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.45 was amended by revising paragraph (g), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.45
                  Multifamily and section 202 or 811 mortgagors.
                  
                  (g) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation under paragraphs (c) and (f) of this section is $50,334.
                  
                
              
            
          
          
            § 30.50
            GNMA issuers and custodians.
            (a) General. The President of GNMA, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against a GNMA issuer or custodian that knowingly and materially violates any provision of 12 U.S.C. 1723i(b), title III of the National Housing Act, or any implementing regulation, handbook, guaranty agreement, or contractual agreement, or participant letter issued by GNMA, or fails to comply with the terms of a settlement agreement with GNMA.
            (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
            (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $9,819 for each violation, up to a limit of $1,963,870 during any one-year period. Each violation shall constitute a separate violation with respect to each pool of mortgages.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.50 was amended by revising the first sentence in paragraph (c), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.50
                  GNMA issuers and custodians.
                  
                  (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $10,067 for each violation, up to a limit of $2,013,399 during any one-year period. * * *
                
              
            
          
          
            
            § 30.60
            Dealers or sponsored third-party originators.
            (a) General. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against any dealer or sponsored third-party originator that violates section 2(b)(7) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1703). Such violations include, but are not limited to:
            (1) Falsifying information on an application for dealer approval or reapproval submitted to a lender;
            (2) Falsifying statements on a HUD credit application, improvement contract, note, security instrument, completion certificate, or other loan document;
            (3) Failing to sign a credit application if the dealer or sponsored third-party originator assisted the borrower in completing the application;
            (4) Falsely certifying to a lender that the loan proceeds have been or will be spent on eligible improvements;
            (5) Falsely certifying to a lender that the property improvements have been completed;
            (6) Falsely certifying that a borrower has not been given or promised any cash payment, rebate, cash bonus, or anything of more than nominal value as an inducement to enter into a loan transaction;
            (7) Making a false representation to a lender with respect to the creditworthiness of a borrower or the eligibility of the improvements for which a loan is sought.
            (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
            (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $9,819 for each violation, up to a limit for any particular person of $1,963,870 during any one-year period.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 77 FR 51467, Aug. 24, 2012; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.60 was amended by revising paragraph (c), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.60
                  Dealers or sponsored third-party originators.
                  
                  (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $10,067 for each violation, up to a limit for any particular person of $2,013,399 during any one-year period.
                
              
            
          
          
            § 30.65
            Failure to disclose lead-based paint hazards.
            (a) General. The Director of the Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against any person who knowingly violates 42 U.S.C. 4852d.
            (b) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $17,395 for each violation.
            [65 FR 50593, Aug. 18, 2000, as amended at 76 FR 36851, June 22, 2011; 79 FR 35042, June 19, 2014; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24524, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9453, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.65 was amended by revising paragraph (b), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.65
                  Failure to disclose lead-based paint hazards.
                  
                  (b) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $17,834 for each violation
                
              
            
          
          
            § 30.68
            Section 8 owners.
            (a) Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section only:
            
              Agent employed to manage the property that has an identity of interest and identity of interest agent. An entity:
            (1) That has management responsibility for a project;
            (2) In which the ownership entity, including its general partner or partners (if applicable), has an ownership interest; and
            (3) Over which the ownership entity exerts effective control.
            
              Effective control. The ability to direct, alter, supervise, or otherwise influence the actions, policies, decisions, duties, employment, or personnel of the management agent.
            
              Entity. An individual corporation; company; association; partnership; authority; firm; society; trust; state, local government or agency thereof; or any other organization or group of people.
            
              Ownership interest. Any direct or indirect interest in the stock, partnership interests, beneficial interests (for a trust) or other medium of equity participation. An indirect interest includes equity participation in any entity that holds a management interest (e.g. general partner, managing member of an LLC, majority stockholder, trustee) or minimum equity interest (e.g., a 25% or more limited partner, 10% or more stockholder) in the ownership entity of the management agent.
            (b) General. The Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, or his or her designee, or the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty against any owner, any general partner of a partnership owner, or any agent employed to manage the property that has an identity of interest with the owner or the general partner of a partnership owner of a property receiving project-based assistance under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f) for a knowing and material breach of a housing assistance payments contract. Examples of covered violations include, but are not limited to, the following:
            (1) Failure to provide decent, safe, and sanitary housing pursuant to section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 and 24 CFR 5.703; or
            (2) Knowing or willful submission of false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or requests for housing assistance payments to the Secretary or to any department or agency of the United States.
            (c) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation under this section is $38,159.
            (d) Payment of penalty. No payment of a civil money penalty levied under this section shall be payable out of project income.
            (e) Exceptions. The Secretary may not impose penalties under this section for a violation, if a material cause of the violation is the failure of the Secretary, an agent of the Secretary, or a public housing agency to comply with an existing agreement.
            [66 FR 63442, Dec. 6, 2001, as amended at 74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009; 78 FR 4059, Jan. 18, 2013; 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24525, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9454, Mar. 15, 2019, § 30.68 was amended by revising paragraph (c), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 30.68
                  Section 8 owners.
                  
                  (c) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation under this section is $39,121.
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Procedures
          
            § 30.70
            Prepenalty notice.
            (a) Prior to determining whether to issue a complaint under § 30.85, the official designated in subpart B of this part, or his or her designee (or the chairperson of the Mortgagee Review Board, or his or her designee, in actions under § 30.35), shall issue a written notice to the respondent. This prepenalty notice shall include the following:
            (1) That HUD is considering seeking a civil money penalty;
            (2) The specific violations alleged;
            (3) The maximum civil money penalty that may be imposed;
            (4) The opportunity to reply in writing to the designated program official within 30 days after receipt of the notice;
            (5) That failure to respond within the 30-day period may result in issuance of a complaint under § 30.85 without consideration of any information that the respondent may wish to provide; and
            (6) That if a complaint is issued under § 30.85, the respondent may request a hearing before an administrative law judge in accordance with § 30.95.
            (b) Obligation to preserve documents. Upon receipt of the prepenalty notice, the respondent is required to preserve and maintain all documents or data, including electronically stored data, within his or her possession or control that may relate to the violations alleged in the prepenalty notice. The Department shall also preserve such documents or data upon the issuance of the prepenalty notice.
            [74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009]
          
          
            § 30.75
            Response to prepenalty notice.
            (a) The response shall be in a format prescribed in the prepenalty notice. The response shall address the factors set forth in § 30.80 and include any arguments opposing the imposition of a civil money penalty that the respondent may wish to present.
            (b) In any case where respondent seeks to raise ability to pay as an affirmative defense or argument in mitigation, the respondent shall provide documentary evidence as part of its response.
            [74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009]
          
          
            § 30.80
            Factors in determining amount of civil money penalty.
            After determining that a respondent has committed a violation as described in subpart B of this part that subjects the respondent to liability under this part, the officials designated in subpart B of this part shall consider the following factors to determine the amount of penalty to seek against a respondent, if any:
            (a) The gravity of the offense;
            (b) Any history of prior offenses;
            (c) The ability to pay the penalty, which ability shall be presumed unless specifically raised as an affirmative defense or mitigating factor by the respondent;
            (d) The injury to the public;
            (e) Any benefits received by the violator;
            (f) The extent of potential benefit to other persons;
            (g) Deterrence of future violations;
            (h) The degree of the violator's culpability; and
            (i) Such other matters as justice may require.
            (j) In addition to the above factors, with respect to violations under §§ 30.45, 30.55, 30.60, and 30.68, the Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, or his or her designee, or the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, or his or her designee, shall also consider:
            (1) Any injury to tenants; and/or
            (2) Any injury to lot owners.
            (k) HUD may consider the factors listed in paragraphs (a) through (k) of this section to determine the appropriateness of imposing a penalty under § 30.35(c)(2); however, HUD cannot change the amount of the penalty under § 30.35(c)(2).
            [74 FR 2751, Jan. 15, 2009, as amended at 82 FR 24525, May 30, 2017]
          
          
            § 30.85
            Complaint.
            (a) General. Upon the expiration of the period for the respondent to submit a response to the prepenalty notice, the official designated in subpart B of this part, or his or her designee (or the Mortgagee Review Board in actions under § 30.35) shall determine whether to seek a civil money penalty. Such determination shall be based upon a review of the prepenalty notice, the response, if any, and the factors listed at § 30.80. A determination by the Mortgagee Review Board to seek a civil money penalty shall be by a majority vote of the Board.
            (b) If a determination is made to seek a civil money penalty, government counsel shall issue a complaint to the respondent on behalf of the officials listed at subpart B of this part or the Mortgagee Review Board for violations under § 30.35. The complaint shall be served upon respondent and simultaneously filed with the Office of Administrative Law Judges, and shall state the following:
            (1) The factual basis for the decision to seek a penalty;
            (2) The applicable civil money penalty statute;
            (3) The amount of penalty sought;
            (4) The right to submit a response in writing, within 15 days of receipt of the complaint, requesting a hearing on any material fact in the complaint, or on the appropriateness of the penalty sought;
            (5) The address to which a response must be sent;

            (6) That the failure to submit a response may result in the imposition of the penalty in the amount sought.
            
            (c) A copy of this part and of 24 CFR part 26, subpart B, shall be included with the complaint.
            (d) Service of the complaint. The complaint shall be served on the respondent by first class mail, personal delivery, or other means.
            (e) Before taking an action under §§ 30.35 for violation of 12 U.S.C. § 1735f-14(b)(1)(D) or (F), 30.36, or 30.50 for violation of 12 U.S.C. 1723i(b)(1)(G) or (I), the Secretary shall inform the Attorney General of the United States, which may be accomplished by providing a copy of the complaint. The Secretary shall include in the body of the complaint a statement confirming that this action was taken.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 2752, Jan. 15, 2009]
          
          
            § 30.90
            Response to the complaint.
            (a) Request for a hearing. If the respondent desires a hearing before an administrative law judge, the respondent shall submit a request for a hearing to HUD and the Office of Administrative Law Judges no later than 15 days following receipt of the complaint, as required by statute. This mandated period cannot be extended.
            (b) Answer. In any case in which the respondent has requested a hearing, the respondent shall serve upon HUD and file with the Office of Administrative Law Judges a written answer to the complaint within 30 days of receipt of the complaint, unless such time is extended by the administrative law judge for good cause. The answer shall include the admission or denial of each allegation of liability made in the complaint; any defense on which the respondent intends to rely; any reasons why the civil money penalty should be less than the amount sought in the complaint, based on the factors listed at § 30.80; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person who will act as the respondent's representative, if any.
            (c) Filing with the administrative law judges. HUD shall file the complaint and response with the Docket Clerk, Office of Administrative Law Judges, in accordance with § 26.38 of this chapter. If no response is submitted, then HUD may file a motion for default judgment, together with a copy of the complaint, in accordance with § 26.41 of this title.
            [61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 2752, Jan. 15, 2009; 74 FR 7313, Feb. 17, 2009; 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009; 78 FR 4060, Jan. 18, 2013]
          
          
            § 30.95
            Hearings.
            Hearings under this part shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures applicable to hearings in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, set forth in 24 CFR part 26.
            [74 FR 2752, Jan. 15, 2009]
          
          
            § 30.100
            Settlement of a civil money penalty action.
            The officials listed at subpart B of this part, or their designees (or the Mortgagee Review Board, or designee, for violations under § 30.35), are authorized to enter into settlement agreements resolving civil money penalty actions that may be brought under part 30.
            [74 FR 2752, Jan. 15, 2009]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 35
        PART 35—LEAD-BASED PAINT POISONING PREVENTION IN CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
        
          
            Subpart A—Disclosure of Known Lead-Based Paint Hazards Upon Sale or Lease of Residential Property
            Sec.
            35.80 
            Purpose.
            35.82 
            Scope and applicability.
            35.84 
            Effective dates.
            35.86 
            Definitions.
            35.88 
            Disclosure requirements for sellers and lessors.
            35.90 
            Opportunity to conduct an evaluation.
            35.92 
            Certification and acknowledgment of disclosure.
            35.94 
            Agent responsibilities.
            35.96 
            Enforcement.
            35.98 
            Impact on State and local requirements.
          
          
            Subpart B—General Lead-Based Paint Requirements and Definitions for All Programs
            35.100
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.105
            [Reserved]
            35.106
            Information collection requirements.
            35.110
            Definitions.
            35.115
            Exemptions.
            35.120
            Options.
            
            35.125
            Notice of evaluation and hazard reduction activities.
            35.130
            Lead hazard information pamphlet.
            35.135
            Use of paint containing lead.
            35.140
            Prohibited methods of paint removal.
            35.145
            Compliance with Federal laws and authorities.
            35.150
            Compliance with other State, tribal, and local laws.
            35.155
            Minimum requirements.
            35.160
            Waivers.
            35.165
            Prior evaluation or hazard reduction.
            35.170
            Noncompliance with the requirements of subparts B through R.
            35.175
            Records.
          
          
            Subpart C—Disposition of Residential Property Owned by a Federal Agency Other Than HUD
            35.200
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.205
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.210
            Disposition of residential property constructed before 1960.
            35.215
            Disposition of residential property constructed after 1959 and before 1978.
          
          
            Subpart D—Project-Based Assistance Provided by a Federal Agency Other Than HUD
            35.300
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.305
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.310
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.315
            Risk assessments.
            35.320
            Hazard reduction.
            35.325
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
          
          
            Subpart E [Reserved]
          
          
            Subpart F—HUD-Owned Single Family Property
            35.500
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.505
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.510
            Required procedures.
          
          
            Subpart G—Multifamily Mortgage Insurance
            35.600
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.605
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.610
            Exemption.
            35.615
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.620
            Multifamily insured property constructed before 1960.
            35.625
            Multifamily Insured Property constructed after 1959 and before 1978.
            35.630
            Conversions and Major Rehabilitations.
          
          
            Subpart H—Project-Based Assistance
            35.700
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.705
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.710
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.715
            Multifamily properties receiving more than $5,000 per unit.
            35.720
            Multifamily properties receiving up to $5,000 per unit, and single-family properties.
            35.725
            Section 8 rent adjustments.
            35.730
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
          
          
            Subpart I—HUD-Owned and Mortgagee-in-Possession Multifamily Property.
            35.800
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.805
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.810
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.815
            Evaluation.
            35.820
            Interim controls.
            35.825
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation.
            35.830
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
          
          
            Subpart J—Rehabilitation
            35.900
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.905
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.910
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.915
            Calculating Federal rehabilitation assistance.
            35.920
            [Reserved]
            35.925
            Examples of determining applicable requirements.
            35.930
            Evaluation and hazard reduction requirements.
            35.935
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities.
            35.940
            Special requirements for insular areas.
          
          
            Subpart K—Acquisition, Leasing, Support Services, or Operation.
            35.1000
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.1005
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.1010
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.1015
            Visual assessment, paint stabilization, and maintenance.
            35.1020
            Funding for evaluation and hazard reduction.
          
          
            Subpart L—Public Housing Programs
            35.1100
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.1105
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.1110
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.1115
            Evaluation.
            35.1120
            Hazard reduction.
            
            35.1125
            Evaluation and hazard reduction before acquisition and development.
            35.1130
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
            35.1135
            Eligible costs.
            35.1140
            Insurance coverage.
          
          
            Subpart M—Tenant-Based Rental Assistance
            35.1200
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.1205
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.1210
            Notices and pamphlet.
            35.1215
            Activities at initial and periodic inspections.
            35.1220
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities.
            35.1225
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
          
          
            Subparts N-Q [Reserved]
          
          
            Subpart R—Methods and Standards for Lead-Based Paint Hazard Evaluation and Hazard Reduction Activities.
            35.1300
            Purpose and applicability.
            35.1305
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            35.1310
            References.
            35.1315
            Collection and laboratory analysis of samples.
            35.1320
            Lead-based paint inspections, paint testing, risk assessments, lead-hazard screens, and reevaluations.
            35.1325
            Abatement.
            35.1330
            Interim controls.
            35.1335
            Standard treatments.
            35.1340
            Clearance.
            35.1345
            Occupant protection and worksite preparation.
            35.1350
            Safe work practices.
            35.1355
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation activities.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 4821, and 4851.
        
        
          Subpart A—Disclosure of Known Lead-Based Paint and/or Lead-Based Paint Hazards Upon Sale or Lease of Residential Property
          
            Source:
            61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, unless otherwise noted. Redesignated at 64 FR 50201, Sept. 15, 1999.
          
          
            § 35.80
            Purpose.
            This subpart implements the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 4852d, which impose certain requirements on the sale or lease of target housing. Under this subpart, a seller or lessor of target housing shall disclose to the purchaser or lessee the presence of any known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards; provide available records and reports; provide the purchaser or lessee with a lead hazard information pamphlet; give purchasers a 10-day opportunity to conduct a risk assessment or inspection; and attach specific disclosure and warning language to the sales or leasing contract before the purchaser or lessee is obligated under a contract to purchase or lease target housing.
          
          
            § 35.82
            Scope and applicability.
            This subpart applies to all transactions to sell or lease target housing, including subleases, with the exception of the following:
            (a) Sales of target housing at foreclosure.
            (b) Leases of target housing that have been found to be lead-based paint free by an inspector certified under the Federal certification program or under a federally accredited State or tribal certification program. Until a Federal certification program or federally accredited State certification program is in place within the State, inspectors shall be considered qualified to conduct an inspection for this purpose if they have received certification under any existing State or tribal inspector certification program. The lessor has the option of using the results of additional test(s) by a certified inspector to confirm or refute a prior finding.
            (c) Short-term leases of 100 days or less, where no lease renewal or extension can occur.
            (d) Renewals of existing leases in target housing in which the lessor has previously disclosed all information required under § 35.88 and where no new information described in § 35.88 has come into the possession of the lessor. For the purposes of this paragraph, renewal shall include both renegotiation of existing lease terms and/or ratification of a new lease.
          
          
            § 35.84
            Effective dates.
            The requirements in this subpart take effect in the following manner:

            (a) For owners of more than four residential dwellings, the requirements shall take effect on September 6, 1996.
            
            (b) For owners of one to four residential dwellings, the requirements shall take effect on December 6, 1996.
          
          
            § 35.86
            Definitions.
            The following definitions apply to this subpart.
            
              The Act means the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992, 42 U.S.C. 4852d.
            
              Agent means any party who enters into a contract with a seller or lessor, including any party who enters into a contract with a representative of the seller or lessor, for the purpose of selling or leasing target housing. This term does not apply to purchasers or any purchaser's representative who receives all compensation from the purchaser.
            
              Available means in the possession of or reasonably obtainable by the seller or lessor at the time of the disclosure.
            
              Common area means a portion of a building generally accessible to all residents/users including, but not limited to, hallways, stairways, laundry and recreational rooms, playgrounds, community centers, and boundary fences.
            
              Contract for the purchase and sale of residential real property means any contract or agreement in which one party agrees to purchase an interest in real property on which there is situated one or more residential dwellings used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part, as the home or residence of one or more persons.
            
              EPA means the Environmental Protection Agency.
            
              Evaluation means a risk assessment and/or inspection.
            
              Foreclosure means any of the various methods, statutory or otherwise, known in different jurisdictions, of enforcing payment of a debt, by the taking and selling of real property.
            
              Housing for the elderly means retirement communities or similar types of housing reserved for households composed of one or more persons 62 years of age or more at the time of initial occupancy.
            
              Inspection means:
            (1) A surface-by-surface investigation to determine the presence of lead-based paint as provided in section 302(c) of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning and Prevention Act [42 U.S.C. 4822], and
            (2) The provision of a report explaining the results of the investigation.
            
              Lead-based paint means paint or other surface coatings that contain lead equal to or in excess of 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or 0.5 percent by weight.
            
              Lead-based paint free housing means target housing that has been found to be free of paint or other surface coatings that contain lead equal to or in excess of 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or 0.5 percent by weight.
            
              Lead-based paint hazard means any condition that causes exposure to lead from lead-contaminated dust, lead-contaminated soil, or lead-contaminated paint that is deteriorated or present in accessible surfaces, friction surfaces, or impact surfaces that would result in adverse human health effects as established by the appropriate Federal agency.
            
              Lessee means any entity that enters into an agreement to lease, rent, or sublease target housing, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, government agencies, housing agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit organizations.
            
              Lessor means any entity that offers target housing for lease, rent, or sublease, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, government agencies, housing agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit organizations.
            
              Owner means any entity that has legal title to target housing, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, government agencies, housing agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit organizations, except where a mortgagee holds legal title to property serving as collateral for a mortgage loan, in which case the owner would be the mortgagor.
            
              Purchaser means an entity that enters into an agreement to purchase an interest in target housing, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, government agencies, housing agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit organizations.
            
              Reduction means measures designed to reduce or eliminate human exposure to lead-based paint hazards through methods including interim controls and abatement.
            
              Residential dwelling means:
            (1) A single-family dwelling, including attached structures such as porches and stoops; or
            (2) A single-family dwelling unit in a structure that contains more than one separate residential dwelling unit, and in which each such unit is used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part, as the residence of one or more persons.
            
              Risk assessment means an on-site investigation to determine and report the existence, nature, severity, and location of lead-based paint hazards in residential dwellings, including:
            (1) Information gathering regarding the age and history of the housing and occupancy by children under age 6;
            (2) Visual inspection;
            (3) Limited wipe sampling or other environmental sampling techniques;
            (4) Other activity as may be appropriate; and
            (5) Provision of a report explaining the results of the investigation.
            
              Seller means any entity that transfers legal title to target housing, in whole or in part, in return for consideration, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, government agencies, housing agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit organizations. The term “seller” also includes:
            (1) An entity that transfers shares in a cooperatively owned project, in return for consideration; and
            (2) An entity that transfers its interest in a leasehold, in jurisdictions or circumstances where it is legally permissible to separate the fee title from the title to the improvement, in return for consideration.
            
              Target housing means any housing constructed prior to 1978, except housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities (unless any child who is less than 6 years of age resides or is expected to reside in such housing) or any 0-bedroom dwelling.
            
              TSCA means the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. 2601.
            
              0-bedroom dwelling means any residential dwelling in which the living area is not separated from the sleeping area. The term includes efficiencies, studio apartments, dormitory housing, military barracks, and rentals of individual rooms in residential dwellings.
          
          
            § 35.88
            Disclosure requirements for sellers and lessors.
            (a) The following activities shall be completed before the purchaser or lessee is obligated under any contract to purchase or lease target housing that is not otherwise an exempt transaction pursuant to § 35.82. Nothing in this section implies a positive obligation on the seller or lessor to conduct any evaluation or reduction activities.

            (1) The seller or lessor shall provide the purchaser or lessee with an EPA-approved lead hazard information pamphlet. Such pamphlets include the EPA document entitled Protect Your Family From Lead in Your Home (EPA −747-K-94-001) or an equivalent pamphlet that has been approved for use in that State by EPA.
            (2) The seller or lessor shall disclose to the purchaser or lessee the presence of any known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing being sold or leased. The seller or lessor shall also disclose any additional information available concerning the known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination that lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist, the location of the lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, and the condition of the painted surfaces.
            (3) The seller or lessor shall disclose to each agent the presence of any known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing being sold or leased and the existence of any available records or reports pertaining to lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards. The seller or lessor shall also disclose any additional information available concerning the known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination that lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist, the location of the lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, and the condition of the painted surfaces.

            (4) The seller or lessor shall provide the purchaser or lessee with any records or reports available to the seller or lessor pertaining to lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing being sold or leased. This requirement includes records and reports regarding common areas. This requirement also includes records and reports regarding other residential dwellings in multifamily target housing, provided that such information is part of an evaluation or reduction of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing as a whole.
            (b) If any of the disclosure activities identified in paragraph (a) of this section occurs after the purchaser or lessee has provided an offer to purchase or lease the housing, the seller or lessor shall complete the required disclosure activities prior to accepting the purchaser's or lessee's offer and allow the purchaser or lessee an opportunity to review the information and possibly amend the offer.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2070-0151)
            [61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]
          
          
            § 35.90
            Opportunity to conduct an evaluation.
            (a) Before a purchaser is obligated under any contract to purchase target housing, the seller shall permit the purchaser a 10-day period (unless the parties mutually agree, in writing, upon a different period of time) to conduct a risk assessment or inspection for the presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards.
            (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, a purchaser may waive the opportunity to conduct the risk assessment or inspection by so indicating in writing.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2070-0151)
            [61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]
          
          
            § 35.92
            Certification and acknowledgment of disclosure.
            (a) Seller requirements. Each contract to sell target housing shall include an attachment containing the following elements, in the language of the contract (e.g., English, Spanish):

            (1) A Lead Warning Statement consisting of the following language:
            
            
              Every purchaser of any interest in residential real property on which a residential dwelling was built prior to 1978 is notified that such property may present exposure to lead from lead-based paint that may place young children at risk of developing lead poisoning. Lead poisoning in young children may produce permanent neurological damage, including learning disabilities, reduced intelligence quotient, behavioral problems, and impaired memory. Lead poisoning also poses a particular risk to pregnant women. The seller of any interest in residential real property is required to provide the buyer with any information on lead-based paint hazards from risk assessments or inspections in the seller's possession and notify the buyer of any known lead-based paint hazards. A risk assessment or inspection for possible lead-based paint hazards is recommended prior to purchase.
            
            
            (2) A statement by the seller disclosing the presence of known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing being sold or indicating no knowledge of the presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards. The seller shall also provide any additional information available concerning the known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination that lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist, the location of the lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, and the condition of the painted surfaces.
            (3) A list of any records or reports available to the seller pertaining to lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the housing that have been provided to the purchaser. If no such records or reports are available, the seller shall so indicate.
            (4) A statement by the purchaser affirming receipt of the information set out in paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section and the lead hazard information pamphlet required under section 15 U.S.C. 2696.
            (5) A statement by the purchaser that he/she has either:
            (i) Received the opportunity to conduct the risk assessment or inspection required by § 35.90(a); or
            (ii) Waived the opportunity.
            
            (6) When any agent is involved in the transaction to sell target housing on behalf of the seller, a statement that:
            (i) The agent has informed the seller of the seller's obligations under 42 U.S.C. 4852d; and
            (ii) The agent is aware of his/her duty to ensure compliance with the requirements of this subpart.
            (7) The signatures of the sellers, agents, and purchasers, certifying to the accuracy of their statements, to the best of their knowledge, along with the dates of signature.
            (b) Lessor requirements. Each contract to lease target housing shall include, as an attachment or within the contract, the following elements, in the language of the contract (e.g., English, Spanish):

            (1) A Lead Warning Statement with the following language:
            
            
              Housing built before 1978 may contain lead-based paint. Lead from paint, paint chips, and dust can pose health hazards if not managed properly. Lead exposure is especially harmful to young children and pregnant women. Before renting pre-1978 housing, lessors must disclose the presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the dwelling. Lessees must also receive a federally approved pamphlet on lead poisoning prevention.
            
            
            (2) A statement by the lessor disclosing the presence of known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing being leased or indicating no knowledge of the presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards. The lessor shall also disclose any additional information available concerning the known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination that lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist in the housing, the location of the lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, and the condition of the painted surfaces.
            (3) A list of any records or reports available to the lessor pertaining to lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the housing that have been provided to the lessee. If no such records or reports are available, the lessor shall so indicate.
            (4) A statement by the lessee affirming receipt of the information set out in paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section and the lead hazard information pamphlet required under 15 U.S.C. 2696.
            (5) When any agent is involved in the transaction to lease target housing on behalf of the lessor, a statement that:
            (i) The agent has informed the lessor of the lessor's obligations under 42 U.S.C. 4852d; and
            (ii) The agent is aware of his/her duty to ensure compliance with the requirements of this subpart.
            (6) The signatures of the lessors, agents, and lessees certifying to the accuracy of their statements to the best of their knowledge, along with the dates of signature.
            (c) Retention of certification and acknowledgment information. (1) The seller, and any agent, shall retain a copy of the completed attachment required under paragraph (a) of this section for no less than 3 years from the completion date of the sale. The lessor, and any agent, shall retain a copy of the completed attachment or lease contract containing the information required under paragraph (b) of this section for no less than 3 years from the commencement of the leasing period.
            (2) This recordkeeping requirement is not intended to place any limitations on civil suits under the Act, or to otherwise affect a lessee's or purchaser's rights under the civil penalty provisions of 42 U.S.C. 4852d(b)(3).
            (d) The seller, lessor, or agent shall not be responsible for the failure of a purchaser's or lessee's legal representative (where such representative receives all compensation from the purchaser or lessee) to transmit disclosure materials to the purchaser or lessee, provided that all required parties have completed and signed the necessary certification and acknowledgment language required under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2070-0151)
            [61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]
          
          
            § 35.94
            Agent responsibilities.

            (a) Each agent shall ensure compliance with all requirements of this subpart. To ensure compliance, the agent shall:
            
            (1) Inform the seller or lessor of his/her obligations under §§ 35.88, 35.90, and 35.92.
            (2) Ensure that the seller or lessor has performed all activities required under §§ 35.88, 35.90, and 35.92, or personally ensure compliance with the requirements of §§ 35.88, 35.90, and 35.92.
            (b) If the agent has complied with paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the agent shall not be liable for the failure to disclose to a purchaser or lessee the presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards known by a seller or lessor but not disclosed to the agent.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2070-0151)
            [61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]
          
          
            § 35.96
            Enforcement.
            (a) Any person who knowingly fails to comply with any provision of this subpart shall be subject to civil monetary penalties in accordance with the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 3545 and 24 CFR part 30.
            (b) The Secretary is authorized to take such action as may be necessary to enjoin any violation of this subpart in the appropriate Federal district court.
            (c) Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this subpart shall be jointly and severally liable to the purchaser or lessee in an amount equal to 3 times the amount of damages incurred by such individual.
            (d) In any civil action brought for damages pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 4852d(b)(3), the appropriate court may award court costs to the party commencing such action, together with reasonable attorney fees and any expert witness fees, if that party prevails.
            (e) Failure or refusal to comply with §§ 35.88 (disclosure requirements for sellers and lessors), § 35.90 (opportunity to conduct an evaluation), § 35.92 (certification and acknowledgment of disclosure), or § 35.94 (agent responsibilities) is a violation of 42 U.S.C. 4852d(b)(5) and of TSCA section 409 (15 U.S.C. 2689).
            (f) Violators may be subject to civil and criminal sanctions pursuant to TSCA section 16 (15 U.S.C. 2615) for each violation. For purposes of enforcing this subpart, the penalty for each violation applicable under 15 U.S.C. 2615 shall be not more than $10,000.
          
          
            § 35.98
            Impact on State and local requirements.
            Nothing in this subpart shall relieve a seller, lessor, or agent from any responsibility for compliance with State or local laws, ordinances, codes, or regulations governing notice or disclosure of known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards. Neither HUD nor EPA assumes any responsibility for ensuring compliance with such State or local requirements.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—General Lead-Based Paint Requirements and Definitions for All Programs.
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50202, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.100
            Purpose and applicability.
            (a) Purpose. The requirements of subparts B through R of this part are promulgated to implement the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4821 et seq.), and the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 4851 et seq.).
            (b) Applicability—(1) This subpart. This subpart applies to all target housing that is federally owned and target housing receiving Federal assistance to which subparts C, D, F through M, and R of this part apply, except where indicated.
            (2) Other subparts—(i) General. Subparts C, D, and F through M of this part each set forth requirements for a specific type of Federal housing activity or assistance, such as multifamily mortgage insurance, project-based rental assistance, rehabilitation, or tenant-based rental assistance. Subpart R of this part provides standards and methods for activities required in subparts B, C, D, and F through M of this part.
            (ii) Application to programs. Most HUD housing programs are covered by only one subpart of this part, but some programs can be used for more than one type of assistance and therefore are covered by more than one subpart of this part. A current list of programs covered by each subpart of this part is available on the internet at www.hud.gov, or by mail from the National Lead Information Center at 1-800-424-LEAD. Examples of flexible programs that can provide more than one type of assistance are the HOME Investment Partnerships program, the Community Development Block Grant program, and the Indian Housing Block Grant Program. Grantees, participating jurisdictions, Indian tribes and other entities administering such flexible programs must decide which subpart applies to the type of assistance being provided to a particular dwelling unit or residential property.
            (iii) Application to dwelling units. In some cases, more than one type of assistance may be provided to the same dwelling unit. In such cases, the subpart or section with the most protective initial hazard reduction requirements applies. Paragraph (c) of this section provides a table that lists the subparts and sections of this part in order from the most protective to the least protective. (This list is based only on the requirements for initial hazard reduction. The summary of requirements on this list is not a complete list of requirements. It is necessary to refer to the applicable subparts and sections to determine all applicable requirements.)
            (iv) Example. A multifamily building has 100 dwelling units and was built in 1965. The property is financed with HUD multifamily mortgage insurance. This building is covered by subpart G of this part (see § 35.625—Multifamily mortgage insurance for properties constructed after 1959), which is at protectiveness level 5 in the table set forth in paragraph (c) of this section. In the same building, however, 50 of the 100 dwelling units are receiving project-based assistance, and the average annual assistance per assisted unit is $5,500. Those 50 units, and common areas servicing those units, are covered by the requirements of subpart H of this part (see § 35.715—Project-based assistance for multifamily properties receiving more than $5,000 per unit), which are at protectiveness level 3. Therefore, because level 3 is a higher level of protectiveness than level 5, the units receiving project-based assistance, and common areas servicing those units, must comply at level 3, while the rest of the building can be operated at level 5. The owner may choose to operate the entire building at level 3 for simplicity.
            (c) Table One. The following table lists the subparts and sections of this part applying to HUD programs in order from most protective to least protective hazard reduction requirements. The summary of hazard reduction requirements in this table is not complete. Readers must refer to relevant subpart for complete requirements.
            
              
                Level of protection
                Subpart, section, and type of assistance
                Hazard reductionrequirements
                
              
              
                1
                Subpart L, Public housing. Subpart G, § 35.630, Multifamily mortgage insurance for conversions and major rehabilitations
                Full abatement of lead-based paint.
              
              
                2
                Subpart J, § 35.930(d), Properties receiving more than $25,000 per unit in rehabilitation assistance
                Abatement of lead-based paint hazards.
              
              
                3
                Subpart G, § 35.620, Multifamily mortgage insurance for properties constructed before 1960, other than conversions and major rehabilitations. Subpart H, § 35.715, Project-based assistance for multifamily properties receiving more than $5,000 per unit. Subpart I, HUD-owned multifamily property. Subpart J, § 35.930(c), Properties receiving more than $5,000 and up to $25,000 per unit in rehabilitation assistance
                Interim controls.
              
              
                4
                Subpart F, HUD-owned single family properties. Subpart H, § 35.720, Project-based rental assistance for multifamily properties receiving up to $5,000 per unit and single family properties. Subpart K, Acquisition, leasing, support services, or operation. Subpart M, Tenant-based rental assistance
                Paint stabilization.
              
              
                5
                Subpart G, § 35.625, Multifamily mortgage insurance for properties constructed after 1959
                Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance.
              
              
                6
                Subpart J, § 35.930(b), Properties receiving up to and including $5,000 in rehabilitation assistance
                Safe work practices during rehabilitation.
              
            
          
          
            
            § 35.105
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 35.106
            Information collection requirements.
            The information collection requirements contained in this part have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in accordance with the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 2501-3520), and have been assigned OMB control number 2539-0009. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the collection displays a valid control number.
          
          
            § 35.110
            Definitions.
            
              Abatement means any set of measures designed to permanently eliminate lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards (see definition of “permanent”). Abatement includes:
            (1) The removal of lead-based paint and dust-lead hazards, the permanent enclosure or encapsulation of lead-based paint, the replacement of components or fixtures painted with lead-based paint, and the removal or permanent covering of soil-lead hazards; and
            (2) All preparation, cleanup, disposal, and post abatement clearance testing activities associated with such measures.
            
              Act means the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 4822 et seq.
            
            
              Bare soil means soil or sand not covered by grass, sod, other live ground covers, wood chips, gravel, artificial turf, or similar covering.
            
              Certified means certified to perform such activities as risk assessment, lead-based paint inspection, abatement supervision, or renovation, either by a State or Indian tribe with a lead-based paint certification program authorized by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in accordance with 40 CFR part 745, subpart Q, or by the EPA, in accordance with 40 CFR part 745, subparts E or L.
            
              Chewable surface means an interior or exterior surface painted with lead-based paint that a young child can mouth or chew. A chewable surface is the same as an “accessible surface” as defined in 42 U.S.C. 4851b(2)). Hard metal substrates and other materials that cannot be dented by the bite of a young child are not considered chewable.
            
              Clearance examination means an activity conducted following lead-based paint hazard reduction activities to determine that the hazard reduction activities are complete and that no soil-lead hazards or settled dust-lead hazards, as defined in this part, exist in the dwelling unit or worksite. The clearance process includes a visual assessment and collection and analysis of environmental samples. Dust-lead standards for clearance are found at § 35.1320.
            
              Common area means a portion of a residential property that is available for use by occupants of more than one dwelling unit. Such an area may include, but is not limited to, hallways, stairways, laundry and recreational rooms, playgrounds, community centers, on-site day care facilities, garages and boundary fences.
            
              Component means an architectural element of a dwelling unit or common area identified by type and location, such as a bedroom wall, an exterior window sill, a baseboard in a living room, a kitchen floor, an interior window sill in a bathroom, a porch floor, stair treads in a common stairwell, or an exterior wall.
            
              Composite sample means a collection of more than one sample of the same medium (e.g., dust, soil or paint) from the same type of surface (e.g., floor, interior window sill, or window trough), such that multiple samples can be analyzed as a single sample.
            
              Containment means the physical measures taken to ensure that dust and debris created or released during lead-based paint hazard reduction are not spread, blown or tracked from inside to outside of the worksite.
            
              Designated party means a Federal agency, grantee, subrecipient, participating jurisdiction, housing agency, Indian Tribe, tribally designated housing entity (TDHE), sponsor, or property owner responsible for complying with applicable requirements.
            
              Deteriorated paint means any interior or exterior paint or other coating that is peeling, chipping, chalking or cracking, or any paint or coating located on an interior or exterior surface or fixture that is otherwise damaged or separated from the substrate.
            
              Dry sanding means sanding without moisture and includes both hand and machine sanding.
            Dust-lead hazard means surface dust that contains a dust-lead loading (area concentration of lead) equal to or exceeding the levels promulgated by the EPA at 40 CFR 745.65 or, if such levels are not in effect, the standards for dust-lead hazards in § 35.1320.
            
              Dwelling unit means a:
            (1) Single-family dwelling, including attached structures such as porches and stoops; or
            (2) Housing unit in a structure that contains more than 1 separate housing unit, and in which each such unit is used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part, as the home or separate living quarters of 1 or more persons.
            
              Elevated blood lead level means a confirmed concentration of lead in whole blood of a child under age 6 equal to or greater than the concentration in the most recent guidance published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) on recommending that an environmental intervention be conducted. (When HHS changes the value, HUD will publish a notice in the Federal Register, with the opportunity for public comment, on its intent to apply the changed value to this part, and, after considering comments, publish a notice on its applying the changed value to this part.)
            
              Encapsulation means the application of a covering or coating that acts as a barrier between the lead-based paint and the environment and that relies for its durability on adhesion between the encapsulant and the painted surface, and on the integrity of the existing bonds between paint layers and between the paint and the substrate. Encapsulation may be used as a method of abatement if it is designed and performed so as to be permanent (see definition of “permanent”).
            
              Enclosure means the use of rigid, durable construction materials that are mechanically fastened to the substrate in order to act as a barrier between lead-based paint and the environment. Enclosure may be used as a method of abatement if it is designed to be permanent (see definition of “permanent”).
            
              Environmental investigation means the process of determining the source of lead exposure for a child under age 6 with an elevated blood lead level, consisting of administration of a questionnaire, comprehensive environmental sampling, case management, and other measures, in accordance with chapter 16 of the HUD Guidelines for the Evaluation and Control of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Housing (“Guidelines”).
            
              Evaluation means a risk assessment, a lead hazard screen, a lead-based paint inspection, paint testing, or a combination of these to determine the presence of lead-based paint hazards or lead-based paint, or an environmental investigation.
            
              Expected to reside means there is actual knowledge that a child will reside in a dwelling unit reserved or designated exclusively for the elderly or reserved or designated exclusively for persons with disabilities. If a resident woman is known to be pregnant, there is actual knowledge that a child will reside in the dwelling unit.
            
              Federal agency means the United States or any executive department, independent establishment, administrative agency and instrumentality of the United States, including a corporation in which all or a substantial amount of the stock is beneficially owned by the United States or by any of these entities. The term “Federal agency” includes, but is not limited to, Rural Housing Service (formerly Rural Housing and Community Development Service that was formerly Farmer's Home Administration), Resolution Trust Corporation, General Services Administration, Department of Defense, Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of the Interior, and Department of Transportation.
            
              Federally owned property means residential property owned or managed by a Federal agency, or for which a Federal agency is a trustee or conservator.
            
              Firm commitment means a valid commitment issued by HUD or the Federal Housing Commissioner setting forth the terms and conditions upon which a mortgage will be insured or guaranteed.
            
              Friction surface means an interior or exterior surface that is subject to abrasion or friction, including, but not limited to, certain window, floor, and stair surfaces.
            
              g means gram, mg means milligram (thousandth of a gram), and µg means microgram (millionth of a gram).
            
              Grantee means any state or local government, Indian Tribe, IHBG recipient, insular area or nonprofit organization that has been designated by HUD to administer Federal housing assistance under a program covered by subparts J and K of this part, except the HOME program.
            
              Hard costs of rehabilitation means:
            (1) Costs to correct substandard conditions or to meet applicable local rehabilitation standards;
            (2) Costs to make essential improvements, including energy-related repairs, and those necessary to permit use by persons with disabilities; and costs to repair or replace major housing systems in danger of failure; and
            (3) Costs of non-essential improvements, including additions and alterations to an existing structure; but
            (4) Hard costs do not include administrative costs (e.g., overhead for administering a rehabilitation program, processing fees, etc.).
            
              Hazard reduction means measures designed to reduce or eliminate human exposure to lead-based paint hazards through methods including interim controls or abatement or a combination of the two.
            
              HEPA vacuum means a vacuum cleaner device with an included high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter through which the contaminated air flows, operated in accordance with the instructions of its manufacturer. A HEPA filter is one that captures at least 99.97 percent of airborne particles of at least 0.3 micrometers in diameter.
            
              Housing for the elderly means retirement communities or similar types of housing reserved for households composed of one or more persons 62 years of age or more, or other age if recognized as elderly by a specific Federal housing assistance program.
            
              Housing receiving Federal assistance means housing which is covered by an application for HUD mortgage insurance, receives housing assistance payments under a program administered by HUD, or otherwise receives more than $5,000 in project-based assistance under a Federal housing program administered by an agency other than HUD.
            
              HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              HUD-owned property means residential property owned or managed by HUD, or for which HUD is a trustee or conservator.
            
              Impact surface means an interior or exterior surface that is subject to damage by repeated sudden force, such as certain parts of door frames.
            
              Indian Housing Block Grant (IHBG) recipient means a tribe or a tribally designated housing entity (TDHE) receiving IHBG funds.
            
              Indian tribe means a tribe as defined in the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4101 et seq.)
            
              Inspection (See Lead-based paint inspection).
            
              Insular areas means Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands and American Samoa.
            
              Interim controls means a set of measures designed to reduce temporarily human exposure or likely exposure to lead-based paint hazards. Interim controls include, but are not limited to, repairs, painting, temporary containment, specialized cleaning, clearance, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities, and the establishment and operation of management and resident education programs.
            
              Interior window sill means the portion of the horizontal window ledge that protrudes into the interior of the room, adjacent to the window sash when the window is closed. The interior window sill is sometimes referred to as the window stool.
            
              Lead-based paint means paint or other surface coatings that contain lead equal to or exceeding 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or 0.5 percent by weight or 5,000 parts per million (ppm) by weight.
            
              Lead-based paint hazard means any condition that causes exposure to lead from dust-lead hazards, soil-lead hazards, or lead-based paint that is deteriorated or present in chewable surfaces, friction surfaces, or impact surfaces, and that would result in adverse human health effects.
            
              Lead-based paint inspection means a surface-by-surface investigation to determine the presence of lead-based paint and the provision of a report explaining the results of the investigation.
            
              Lead hazard screen means a limited risk assessment activity that involves paint testing and dust sampling and analysis as described in 40 CFR 745.227(c) and soil sampling and analysis as described in 40 CFR 745.227(d).
            
              Mortgagee means a lender of a mortgage loan.
            
              Mortgagor means a borrower of a mortgage loan.
            
              Multifamily property means a residential property containing five or more dwelling units.
            
              Occupant means a person who inhabits a dwelling unit.
            
              Owner means a person, firm, corporation, nonprofit organization, partnership, government, guardian, conservator, receiver, trustee, executor, or other judicial officer, or other entity which, alone or with others, owns, holds, or controls the freehold or leasehold title or part of the title to property, with or without actually possessing it. The definition includes a vendee who possesses the title, but does not include a mortgagee or an owner of a reversionary interest under a ground rent lease.
            
              Paint stabilization means repairing any physical defect in the substrate of a painted surface that is causing paint deterioration, removing loose paint and other material from the surface to be treated, and applying a new protective coating or paint.
            
              Paint testing means the process of determining, by a certified lead-based paint inspector or risk assessor, the presence or the absence of lead-based paint on deteriorated paint surfaces or painted surfaces to be disturbed or replaced.
            
              Paint removal means a method of abatement that permanently eliminates lead-based paint from surfaces.
            
              Painted surface to be disturbed means a paint surface that is to be scraped, sanded, cut, penetrated or otherwise affected by rehabilitation work in a manner that could potentially create a lead-based paint hazard by generating dust, fumes, or paint chips.
            
              Participating jurisdiction means any State or local government that has been designated by HUD to administer a HOME program grant.
            
              Permanent means an expected design life of at least 20 years.
            
              Play area means an area of frequent soil contact by children of less than 6 years of age, as indicated by the presence of play equipment (e.g. sandboxes, swing sets, sliding boards, etc.) or toys or other children's possessions, observations of play patterns, or information provided by parents, residents or property owners.
            
              Project-based rental assistance means Federal rental assistance that is tied to a residential property with a specific location and remains with that particular location throughout the term of the assistance.
            
              Public health department means a State, tribal, county or municipal public health department or the Indian Health Service.
            
              Public housing development means a residential property assisted under the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.), but not including housing assisted under section 8 of the 1937 Act.
            
              Reevaluation means a visual assessment of painted surfaces and limited dust and soil sampling conducted periodically following lead-based paint hazard reduction where lead-based paint is still present.
            
              Rehabilitation means the improvement of an existing structure through alterations, incidental additions or enhancements. Rehabilitation includes repairs necessary to correct the results of deferred maintenance, the replacement of principal fixtures and components, improvements to increase the efficient use of energy, and installation of security devices.
            
              Replacement means a strategy of abatement that entails the removal of building components that have surfaces coated with lead-based paint and the installation of new components free of lead-based paint.
            
              Residential property means a dwelling unit, common areas, building exterior surfaces, and any surrounding land, including outbuildings, fences and play equipment affixed to the land, belonging to an owner and available for use by residents, but not including land used for agricultural, commercial, industrial or other non-residential purposes, and not including paint on the pavement of parking lots, garages, or roadways.
            
              Risk assessment means:
            (1) An on-site investigation to determine the existence, nature, severity, and location of lead-based paint hazards; and
            (2) The provision of a report by the individual or firm conducting the risk assessment explaining the results of the investigation and options for reducing lead-based paint hazards.
            
              Single family property means a residential property containing one through four dwelling units.
            
              Single room occupancy (SRO) housing means housing consisting of zero-bedroom dwelling units that may contain food preparation or sanitary facilities or both (see Zero-bedroom dwelling).
            
              Soil-lead hazard means bare soil on residential property that contains lead equal to or exceeding levels promulgated by the EPA at 40 CFR 745.65 or, if such levels are not in effect, the standards for soil-lead hazards in § 35.1320.
            
              Sponsor means mortgagor (borrower).
            
              Subrecipient means any nonprofit organization selected by the grantee or participating jurisdiction to administer all or a portion of the Federal rehabilitation assistance or other non-rehabilitation assistance, or any such organization selected by a subrecipient of the grantee or participating jurisdiction. An owner or developer receiving Federal rehabilitation assistance or other assistance for a residential property is not considered a subrecipient for the purposes of carrying out that project.
            
              Standard treatments means a series of hazard reduction measures designed to reduce all lead-based paint hazards in a dwelling unit without the benefit of a risk assessment or other evaluation.
            
              Substrate means the material directly beneath the painted surface out of which the components are constructed, including wood, drywall, plaster, concrete, brick or metal.
            
              Target housing means any housing constructed prior to 1978, except housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities (unless a child of less than 6 years of age resides or is expected to reside in such housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities) or any zero-bedroom dwelling. In the case of jurisdictions which banned the sale or use of lead-based paint prior to 1978, HUD may designate an earlier date.
            
              Tenant means the individual named as the lessee in a lease, rental agreement or occupancy agreement for a dwelling unit.
            A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for the purposes of this part. Visual assessment means looking for, as applicable:
            (1) Deteriorated paint;
            (2) Visible surface dust, debris, and residue as part of a risk assessment or clearance examination; or
            (3) The completion or failure of a hazard reduction measure.
            
              Wet sanding or wet scraping means a process of removing loose paint in which the painted surface to be sanded or scraped is kept wet to minimize the dispersal of paint chips and airborne dust.
            
              Window trough means the area between the interior window sill (stool) and the storm window frame. If there is no storm window, the window trough is the area that receives both the upper and lower window sashes when they are both lowered.
            
              Worksite means an interior or exterior area where lead-based paint hazard reduction activity takes place. There may be more than one worksite in a dwelling unit or at a residential property.
            
              Zero-bedroom dwelling means any residential dwelling in which the living areas are not separated from the sleeping area. The term includes efficiencies, studio apartments, dormitory or single room occupancy housing, military barracks, and rentals of individual rooms in residential dwellings (see Single room occupancy (SRO)).
            [64 FR 50202, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34271, June 21, 2004; 69 FR 40474, July 2, 2004; 82 FR 4166, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.115
            Exemptions.
            (a) Subparts B through R of this part do not apply to the following:
            (1) A residential property for which construction was completed on or after January 1, 1978, or, in the case of jurisdictions which banned the sale or residential use of lead-containing paint prior to 1978, an earlier date as HUD may designate (see § 35.160).
            (2) A zero-bedroom dwelling unit, including a single room occupancy (SRO) dwelling unit.
            (3) Housing for the elderly, or a residential property designated exclusively for persons with disabilities; except this exemption shall not apply if a child less than age 6 resides or is expected to reside in the dwelling unit (see definitions of “housing for the elderly” and “expected to reside” in § 35.110).
            (4) Residential property found not to have lead-based paint by a lead-based paint inspection conducted in accordance with § 35.1320(a) (for more information regarding inspection procedures consult the 1997 edition of Chapter 7 of the HUD Guidelines). Results of additional test(s) by a certified lead-based paint inspector may be used to confirm or refute a prior finding.
            (5) Residential property in which all lead-based paint has been identified, removed, and clearance has been achieved in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(b)(e) before September 15, 2000, or in accordance with §§ 35.1320, 35.1325 and 35.1340 on or after September 15, 2000. This exemption does not apply to residential property where enclosure or encapsulation has been used as a method of abatement.
            (6) An unoccupied dwelling unit or residential property that is to be demolished, provided the dwelling unit or property will remain unoccupied until demolition.
            (7) A property or part of a property that is not used and will not be used for human residential habitation, except that spaces such as entryways, hallways, corridors, passageways or stairways serving both residential and nonresidential uses in a mixed-use property shall not be exempt.
            (8) Any rehabilitation that does not disturb a painted surface.
            (9) For emergency actions immediately necessary to safeguard against imminent danger to human life, health or safety, or to protect property from further structural damage (such as when a property has been damaged by a natural disaster, fire, or structural collapse), occupants shall be protected from exposure to lead in dust and debris generated by such emergency actions to the extent practicable, and the requirements of subparts B through R of this part shall not apply. This exemption applies only to repairs necessary to respond to the emergency. The requirements of subparts B through R of this part shall apply to any work undertaken subsequent to, or above and beyond, such emergency actions.
            (10) If a Federal law enforcement agency has seized a residential property and owns the property for less than 270 days, §§ 35.210 and 35.215 shall not apply to the property.
            (11) The requirements of subpart K of this part do not apply if the assistance being provided is emergency rental assistance or foreclosure prevention assistance, provided that this exemption shall expire for a dwelling unit no later than 100 days after the initial payment or assistance.
            (12) Performance of an evaluation or lead-based paint hazard reduction or lead-based paint abatement on an exterior painted surface as required under this part may be delayed for a reasonable time during a period when weather conditions are unsuitable for conventional construction activities.

            (13) Where abatement of lead-based paint hazards or lead-based paint is required by this part and the property is listed or has been determined to be eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or contributing to a National Register Historic District, the designated party may, if requested by the State Historic Preservation Office, conduct interim controls in accordance with § 35.1330 instead of abatement. If interim controls are conducted, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation shall be conducted as required by the applicable subpart of this part in accordance with § 35.1355.
            (b) For the purposes of subpart C of this part, each Federal agency other than HUD will determine whether appropriations are sufficient to implement this rule. If appropriations are not sufficient, subpart C of this part shall not apply to that Federal agency. If appropriations are sufficient, subpart C of this part shall apply.
          
          
            § 35.120
            Options.
            (a) Standard treatments. Where interim controls are required by this part, the designated party has the option to presume that lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards or both are present throughout the residential property. In such a case, evaluation is not required. Standard treatments shall then be conducted in accordance with § 35.1335 on all applicable surfaces, including soil. Standard treatments are completed only when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.
            (b) Abatement. Where abatement is required by this part, the designated party may presume that lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards or both are present throughout the residential property. In such a case, evaluation is not required. Abatement shall then be conducted on all applicable surfaces, including soil, in accordance with § 35.1325, and completed when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340. This option is not available in public housing, where inspection is required.
            (c) Lead hazard screen. Where a risk assessment is required, the designated party may choose first to conduct a lead hazard screen in accordance with § 35.1320(b). If the results of the lead hazard screen indicate the need for a full risk assessment (e.g., if the environmental measurements exceed levels established for lead hazard screens in § 35.1320(b)(2)), a complete risk assessment shall be conducted. Environmental samples collected for the lead hazard screen may be used in the risk assessment. If the results of the lead hazard screen do not indicate the need for a follow-up risk assessment, a risk assessment is not required.
            (d) Paint testing. Where paint stabilization or interim controls of deteriorated paint surfaces are required by this rule, the designated party has the option to conduct paint testing of all surfaces with non-intact paint. If paint testing indicates the absence of lead-based paint on a specific surface, paint stabilization or interim controls are not required on that surface.
          
          
            § 35.125
            Notice of evaluation and hazard reduction activities.
            The following activities shall be conducted if notice is required by subparts D and F through M of this part.
            (a) Notice of evaluation or presumption. When evaluation is undertaken and lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards are found to be present, or if a presumption is made that lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards are present in accordance with the options described in § 35.120, the designated party shall provide a notice to occupants within 15 calendar days of the date when the designated party receives the report or makes the presumption. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for the purposes of this part. If only a visual assessment alone is required by this part, and no evaluation is performed, a notice of evaluation or presumption is not required.
            (1) The notice of the evaluation shall include:
            (i) A summary of the nature, dates, scope, and results of the evaluation;
            (ii) A contact name, address and telephone number for more information, and to obtain access to the actual evaluation report; and
            (iii) The date of the notice.
            (2) The notice of presumption shall include:
            (i) The nature and scope of the presumption;
            (ii) A contact name, address and telephone number for more information; and
            (iii) The date of the notice.
            (b) Notice of hazard reduction activity. When hazard reduction activities are undertaken, each designated party shall:
            
            (1) Provide a notice to occupants not more than 15 calendar days after the hazard reduction activities (including paint stabilization) have been completed. Notice of hazard reduction shall include, but not be limited to:
            (i) A summary of the nature, dates, scope, and results (including clearance) of the hazard reduction activities;
            (ii) A contact name, address, and telephone number for more information;
            (iii) Available information on the location of any remaining lead-based paint in the rooms, spaces, or areas where hazard reduction activities were conducted, on a surface-by-surface basis; and
            (iv) The date of the notice.
            (2) Update the notice, based on reevaluation of the residential property and as any additional hazard reduction work is conducted.
            (3) Provision of a notice of hazard reduction is not required if a clearance examination is not required.
            (c) Availability of notices of evaluation, presumption, and hazard reduction activities. (1) The notices of evaluation, presumption, and hazard reduction shall be of a size and type that is easily read by occupants.
            (2) To the extent practicable, each notice shall be made available, upon request, in a format accessible to persons with disabilities (e.g., Braille, large type, computer disk, audio tape).
            (3) Each notice shall be provided in the occupants' primary language or in the language of the occupants' contract or lease.
            (4) The designated party shall provide each notice to the occupants by:
            (i) Posting and maintaining it in centrally located common areas and distributing it to any dwelling unit if necessary because the head of household is a person with a known disability; or
            (ii) Distributing it to each occupied dwelling unit affected by the evaluation, presumption, or hazard reduction activity or serviced by common areas in which an evaluation, presumption or hazard reduction has taken place.
            (iii) However, for the protection of the privacy of the child and the child's family or guardians, no notice of environmental investigation shall be posted to any centrally located common area.
            [64 FR 50202, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34271, June 21, 2004; 82 FR 4167, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.130
            Lead hazard information pamphlet.
            If provision of a lead hazard information pamphlet is required in subparts D and F through M of this part, the designated party shall provide to each occupied dwelling unit to which subparts D and F through M of this part apply, the lead hazard information pamphlet developed by EPA, HUD and the Consumer Product Safety Commission pursuant to section 406 of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2686), or an EPA-approved alternative; except that the designated party need not provide a lead hazard information pamphlet if the designated party can demonstrate that the pamphlet has already been provided in accordance with the lead-based paint notification and disclosure requirements at § 35.88(a)(1), or 40 CFR 745.107(a)(1) or in accordance with the requirements for hazard education before renovation at 40 CFR part 745, subpart E.
          
          
            § 35.135
            Use of paint containing lead.
            (a) New use prohibition. The use of paint containing more than 0.06 percent dry weight of lead on any interior or exterior surface in federally owned housing or housing receiving Federal assistance is prohibited. As appropriate, each Federal agency shall include the prohibition in contracts, grants, cooperative agreements, insurance agreements, guaranty agreements, trust agreements, or other similar documents.
            (b) Pre-1978 prohibition. In the case of a jurisdiction which banned the sale or residential use of lead-containing paint before 1978, HUD may designate an earlier date for certain provisions of subparts D and F through M of this part.
          
          
            § 35.140
            Prohibited methods of paint removal.
            The following methods shall not be used to remove paint that is, or may be, lead-based paint:
            (a) Open flame burning or torching.
            
            (b) Machine sanding or grinding without a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) local exhaust control.
            (c) Abrasive blasting or sandblasting without HEPA local exhaust control.
            (d) Heat guns operating above 1100 degrees Fahrenheit or charring the paint.
            (e) Dry sanding or dry scraping, except dry scraping in conjunction with heat guns or within 1.0 ft. (0.30 m.) of electrical outlets, or when treating defective paint spots totaling no more than 2 sq. ft. (0.2 sq. m.) in any one interior room or space, or totaling no more than 20 sq. ft. (2.0 sq. m.) on exterior surfaces.
            (f) Paint stripping in a poorly ventilated space using a volatile stripper that is a hazardous substance in accordance with regulations of the Consumer Product Safety Commission at 16 CFR 1500.3, and/or a hazardous chemical in accordance with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations at 29 CFR 1910.1200 or 1926.59, as applicable to the work.
          
          
            § 35.145
            Compliance with Federal laws and authorities.

            All lead-based paint activities, including waste disposal, performed under this part shall be performed in accordance with applicable Federal laws and authorities. For example, such activities are subject to the applicable environmental review requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act, Title IV (15 U.S.C. 2860 et seq.), and other environmental laws and authorities (see, e.g., laws and authorities listed in § 50.4 of this title).
          
          
            § 35.150
            Compliance with other State, tribal, and local laws.
            (a) HUD responsibility. If HUD determines that a State, tribal or local law, ordinance, code or regulation provides for evaluation or hazard reduction in a manner that provides a comparable level of protection from the hazards of lead-based paint poisoning to that provided by the requirements of subparts B, C, D, F through M and R of this part and that adherence to the requirements of subparts B, C, D, F through M, and R of this part, would be duplicative or otherwise cause inefficiencies, HUD may modify or waive some or all of the requirements of the subparts in a manner that will promote efficiency while ensuring a comparable level of protection.
            (b) Participant responsibility. Nothing in this part is intended to relieve any participant in a program covered by this subpart of any responsibility for compliance with State, tribal or local laws, ordinances, codes or regulations governing evaluation and hazard reduction. If a State, tribal or local law, ordinance, code or regulation defines lead-based paint differently than the Federal definition, the more protective definition (i.e., the lower level) shall be followed in that State, tribal or local jurisdiction.
          
          
            § 35.155
            Minimum requirements.
            (a) Nothing in subparts B, C, D, F through M, and R of this part is intended to preclude a designated party or owner from conducting additional evaluation or hazard reduction measures beyond the minimum requirements established for each program in this regulation. For example, if the applicable subpart requires visual assessment, the designated party may choose to perform a risk assessment in accordance with § 35.1320. Similarly, if the applicable subpart requires interim controls, a designated party or owner may choose to implement abatement in accordance with § 35.1325.
            (b) To the extent that assistance from any of the programs covered by subparts B, C, D, and F through M of this part is used in conjunction with other HUD program assistance, the most protective requirements prevail.
            [64 FR 50202, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 82 FR 4167, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.160
            Waivers.
            In accordance with § 5.110 of this title, on a case-by-case basis and upon determination of good cause, HUD may, subject to statutory limitations, waive any provision of subparts B, C, D, F through M, and R of this part.
          
          
            § 35.165
            Prior evaluation or hazard reduction.

            If an evaluation or hazard reduction was conducted at a residential property or dwelling unit before the property or dwelling unit became subject to the requirements of subparts B, C, D, F through M, and R of this part, such an evaluation, hazard reduction or abatement meets the requirements of subparts B, C, D, F through M, and R of this part and need not be repeated under the following conditions:
            (a) Lead-based paint inspection. (1) A lead-based paint inspection conducted before March 1, 2000, meets the requirements of this part if:
            (i) At the time of the inspection the lead-based paint inspector was approved by a State or Indian tribe to perform lead-based paint inspections. It is not necessary that the State or tribal approval program had EPA authorization at the time of the inspection.
            (ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section, the inspection was conducted and accepted as valid by a housing agency in fulfillment of the lead-based paint inspection requirement of the public and Indian housing program.
            (2) A lead-based paint inspection conducted on or after March 1, 2000, must have been conducted by a certified lead-based paint inspector.
            (b) Risk assessment. (1) A risk assessment must be no more than 12 months old to be considered current.
            (2) A risk assessment conducted before March 1, 2000, meets the requirements of this part if, at the time of the risk assessment, the risk assessor was approved by a state or Indian Tribe to perform risk assessments. It is not necessary that the state or tribal approval program had EPA authorization at the time of the risk assessment.
            (3) A risk assessment conducted on or after March 1, 2000, must have been conducted by a certified risk assessor.
            (4) Paragraph (b) of this section does not apply in a case where a risk assessment is required in response to the identification of a child with an elevated blood lead level. In such a case, the requirements in the applicable subpart for responding to a child with an elevated blood lead level shall apply.
            (c) Interim controls. If a residential property is under a program of interim controls and ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation activities established pursuant to a risk assessment conducted in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, the interim controls that have been conducted meet the requirements of this part if clearance was achieved after such controls were implemented. In such a case, the program of interim controls and ongoing activities shall be continued in accordance with the requirements of this part.
            (d) Abatement. (1) An abatement conducted before March 1, 2000, meets the requirements of this part if:
            (i) At the time of the abatement the abatement supervisor was approved by a State or Indian tribe to perform lead-based paint abatement. It is not necessary that the State or tribal approval program had EPA authorization at the time of the abatement.
            (ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section, it was conducted and accepted by a housing agency in fulfillment of the lead-based paint abatement requirement of the public housing program or by an Indian housing authority (as formerly defined under the U.S. Housing Act of 1937) in fulfillment of the lead-based paint requirement of the Indian housing program formerly funded under the U.S. Housing Act of 1937.
            (2) An abatement conducted on or after March 1, 2000, must have been conducted under the supervision of a certified lead-based paint abatement supervisor.
            [64 FR 50202, Sept. 15, 1999; 65 FR 3387, Jan. 21, 2000, as amended at 69 FR 34272, June 21, 2004; 82 FR 4167, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.170
            Noncompliance with the requirements of subparts B through R of this part.
            (a) Monitoring and enforcement. A designated party who fails to comply with any requirement of subparts B, C, D, F through M, and R of this part shall be subject to the sanctions available under the relevant Federal housing assistance or ownership program and may be subject to other penalties authorized by law.

            (b) A property owner who informs a potential purchaser or occupant of lead-based paint or possible lead-based paint hazards in a residential property or dwelling unit, in accordance with subpart A of this part, is not relieved of the requirements to evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards in accordance with subparts B through R of this part as applicable.
          
          
            § 35.175
            Records.
            The designated party, as specified in subparts C, D, and F through M of this part, shall keep a copy of each notice, evaluation, and clearance or abatement report required by subparts C, D, and F through M of this part for at least three years. Those records applicable to a portion of a residential property for which ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and/or reevaluation activities are required shall be kept and made available for the Department's review, until at least three years after such activities are no longer required.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Disposition of Residential Property Owned by a Federal Agency Other Than HUD
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50208, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.200
            Purpose and applicability.
            The purpose of this subpart C is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards prior to the sale of a residential property that is owned by a Federal agency other than HUD. The requirements of this subpart apply to any residential property offered for sale on or after September 15, 2000.
          
          
            § 35.205
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.210
            Disposition of residential property constructed before 1960.
            (a) Evaluation. The Federal agency shall conduct a risk assessment and a lead-based paint inspection in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227 before the closing of the sale.
            (b) Abatement of lead-based paint hazards. The risk assessment used for the identification of hazards to be abated shall have been performed no more than 12 months before the beginning of the abatement. The Federal agency shall abate all identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227. Abatement is completed when clearance is achieved in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227. Where abatement of lead-based paint hazards is not completed before the closing of the sale, the Federal agency shall be responsible for assuring that abatement is carried out by the purchaser before occupancy of the property as target housing and in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227.
          
          
            § 35.215
            Disposition of residential property constructed after 1959 and before 1978.
            The Federal agency shall conduct a risk assessment and a lead-based paint inspection in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227. Evaluation shall be completed before closing of the sale according to a schedule determined by the Federal agency. The results of the risk assessment and lead-based paint inspection shall be made available to prospective purchasers as required in subpart A of this part.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Project-Based Assistance Provided by a Federal Agency Other Than HUD
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50209, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.300
            Purpose and applicability.
            The purpose of this subpart D is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in a residential property that receives more than $5,000 annually per project in project-based assistance on or after September 15, 2000, under a program administered by a Federal agency other than HUD.
          
          
            § 35.305
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.310
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notice. A notice of evaluation or hazard reduction shall be provided to the occupants in accordance with § 35.125.
            
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The owner shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
          
          
            § 35.315
            Risk assessment.
            Each owner shall complete a risk assessment in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(d). Each risk assessment shall be completed in accordance with the schedule established by the Federal agency.
          
          
            § 35.320
            Hazard reduction.
            Each owner shall conduct interim controls consistent with the findings of the risk assessment report. Hazard reduction shall be conducted in accordance with subpart R of this part.
          
          
            § 35.325
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
            (a) If a child less than 6 years of age living in a federally assisted dwelling unit has an elevated blood lead level, the owner shall immediately conduct an environmental investigation. Interim controls of identified lead-based paint hazards shall be conducted in accordance with § 35.1330.
            (b) Other assisted dwelling units in the property. (1) If the environmental investigation conducted under paragraph (a) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the owner shall conduct a risk assessment for other assisted dwelling units covered by this subpart in which a child under age 6 resides or is expected to reside on the date interim controls are complete, and for the common areas servicing those units. The risk assessments shall be conducted within 30 calendar days after receipt of the environmental investigation report on the index unit if there are 20 or fewer such units, or 60 calendar days for risk assessments if there are more than 20 such units. If the risk assessment identifies lead-based paint hazards, the owner shall control identified hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330 in those units and common areas within 30 calendar days, or within 90 calendar days if more than 20 units have lead-based paint hazards such that the control work would disturb painted surfaces that total more than the de minimis threshold of § 35.1350(d).
            (2) The requirements for other assisted dwelling units covered by paragraph (b)(1) of this section do not apply if:
            (i) The owner both conducted a risk assessment of the other assisted dwelling units covered by paragraph (b)(1), and the common areas servicing those units, and conducted reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330 between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the owner received the notification of the elevated blood lead level; or
            (ii) The owner provides the Federal agency documentation of compliance with evaluation, notification, lead disclosure, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance, and lead-based paint management requirements under this part throughout the 12 months preceding the date the owner received the environmental investigation report.
            (c) Interim controls are complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.
            (d) The Federal agency shall establish a timetable for completing, and providing documentation to the agency on the environmental investigation, risk assessments, and lead-based paint hazard reduction when a child is identified as having an elevated blood lead level.
            [82 FR 4167, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
        
        
          Subpart E [Reserved]
        
        
          Subpart F—HUD-Owned Single Family Property
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50209, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.500
            Purpose and applicability.
            The purpose of this subpart F is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in HUD-owned single family properties that have been built before 1978 and are sold with mortgages insured under a program administered by HUD. The requirements of this subpart apply to any such residential properties offered for sale on or after September 15, 2000.
          
          
            
            § 35.505
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.510
            Required procedures.
            (a) The following activities shall be conducted for all properties to which this subpart is applicable:
            (1) A visual assessment of all painted surfaces in order to identify deteriorated paint;
            (2) Paint stabilization of all deteriorated paint in accordance with § 35.1330(a) and (b); and
            (3) Clearance in accordance with § 35.1340.
            (b) Occupancy shall not be permitted until all required paint stabilization is complete and clearance is achieved.
            (c) If paint stabilization and clearance are not completed before the closing of the sale, the Department shall assure that paint stabilization and clearance are carried out pursuant to subpart R of this part by the purchaser before occupancy.
          
        
        
          Subpart G—Multifamily Mortgage Insurance
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50209, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.600
            Purpose and applicability.
            The purpose of this subpart G is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in a multifamily residential property for which HUD is the owner of the mortgage or the owner receives mortgage insurance, under a program administered by HUD.
          
          
            § 35.605
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.610
            Exemption.
            An application for insurance in connection with a refinancing transaction where an appraisal is not required under the applicable procedures established by HUD is excluded from the coverage of this subpart.
          
          
            § 35.615
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notice. If evaluation or hazard reduction is undertaken, the sponsor shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for the purposes of this part.
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The sponsor shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
            [64 FR 50209, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34272, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.620
            Multifamily insured property constructed before 1960.
            Except as provided in § 35.630, the following requirements apply to multifamily insured property constructed before 1960:
            (a) Risk assessment. Before the issuance of a firm commitment the sponsor shall conduct a risk assessment in accordance with § 35.1320(b).
            (b) Interim controls. (1) The sponsor shall conduct interim controls in accordance with § 35.1330 to treat the lead-based paint hazards identified in the risk assessment. Interim controls are considered completed when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.
            (2) The sponsor shall complete interim controls before the issuance of the firm commitment or interim controls may be made a condition of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) firm commitment, with sufficient repair or rehabilitation funds escrowed at initial endorsement of the FHA insured loan.
            (c) Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities. Before the issuance of the firm commitment, the sponsor shall agree to incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance into regular building operations and maintenance activities in accordance with § 35.1355(a).
          
          
            § 35.625
            Multifamily insured property constructed after 1959 and before 1978.

            Except as provided in § 35.630, before the issuance of the firm commitment, the sponsor shall agree to incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance practices into regular building operations, in accordance with § 35.1355(a).
          
          
            § 35.630
            Conversions and major rehabilitations.
            The procedures and requirements of this section apply when a nonresidential property constructed before 1978 is to be converted to residential use, or a residential property constructed before 1978 is to undergo rehabilitation that is estimated to cost more than 50 percent of the estimated replacement cost after rehabilitation.
            (a) Lead-based paint inspection. Before issuance of a firm FHA commitment, the sponsor shall conduct a lead-based paint inspection in accordance with § 35.1320(a).
            (b) Abatement. Prior to occupancy, the sponsor shall conduct abatement of all lead-based paint on the property in accordance with § 35.1325. Whenever practicable, abatement shall be achieved through the methods of paint removal or component replacement. If paint removal or component replacement are not practicable, that is if such methods would damage substrate material considered architecturally significant, permanent encapsulation or enclosure may be used as methods of abatement. Abatement is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340. If encapsulation or enclosure is used, the sponsor shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance into regular building operations maintenance activities in accordance with § 35.1355.
            (c) Historic properties. Section 35.115(a)(13) applies to this section.
          
        
        
          Subpart H—Project-Based Assistance
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50210, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.700
            Purpose and applicability.
            (a) This subpart H establishes procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in residential properties receiving project-based assistance under a HUD program. The requirements of this subpart apply only to the assisted dwelling units in a covered property and any common areas servicing those dwelling units. This subpart does not apply to housing receiving rehabilitation assistance or to public housing, which are covered by subparts J and M of this part, respectively.

            (b) For the purposes of competitively awarded grants under the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Program (HOPWA), the Supportive Housing Program (42 U.S.C. 11381-11389) and the Shelter Plus Care Program project-based rental assistance and sponsor-based rental assistance components (42 U.S.C. 11402-11407), the requirements of this subpart shall apply to grants awarded pursuant to Notices of Funding Availability published on or after October 1, 1999. For the purposes of formula grants awarded under the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Program (HOPWA) (42 U.S.C. 12901 et seq.), the requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities for which program funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000.
          
          
            § 35.705
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.710
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notice. If evaluation or hazard reduction is undertaken, each owner shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for the purposes of this part.
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The owner shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
            [64 FR 50210, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34272, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.715
            Multifamily properties receiving more than $5,000 per unit.
            The requirements of this section shall apply to a multifamily residential property that is receiving an average of more than $5,000 per assisted dwelling unit annually in project-based assistance.
            (a) Risk assessment. Each owner shall complete a risk assessment in accordance with § 35.1320(b). A risk assessment is considered complete when the owner receives the risk assessment report. Until the owner conducts a risk assessment as required by this section, the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section shall apply. After the risk assessment has been conducted the requirements of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section shall apply. Each risk assessment shall be completed no later than the following schedule or a schedule otherwise determined by HUD:
            (1) Risk assessments shall be completed on or before September 17, 2001, in a multifamily residential property constructed before 1960.
            (2) Risk assessments shall be completed on or before September 15, 2003, in a multifamily residential property constructed after 1959 and before 1978.
            (b) Interim controls. Each owner shall conduct interim controls in accordance with § 35.1330 to treat the lead-based paint hazards identified in the risk assessment. Interim controls are considered completed when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340. Interim controls shall be completed no later than the following schedule:
            (1) In units occupied by families with children of less than 6 years of age and in common areas servicing those units, interim controls shall be completed no later than 90 days after the completion of the risk assessment. In units in which a child of less than 6 years of age moves in after the completion of the risk assessment, interim controls shall be completed no later than 90 days after the move-in.
            (2) In all other dwelling units, common areas, and the remaining portions of the residential property, interim controls shall be completed no later than 12 months after completion of the risk assessment for those units.
            (c) Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation activities. Effective immediately after completion of the risk assessment required in § 35.715(a), the owner shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation into the regular building operations in accordance with § 35.1355, unless all lead-based paint has been removed. If the reevaluation identifies new lead-based paint hazards, the owner shall conduct interim controls in accordance with § 35.1330.
            (d) Transitional requirements—(1) Effective date. The requirements of this paragraph shall apply effective September 15, 2000, and continuing until the applicable date specified in § 35.715(a) (1) or (2) or until the owner conducts a risk assessment, whichever is first.
            (2) Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this paragraph are found in subpart B of this part.
            (3) Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance. The owner shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities into regular building operations, in accordance with § 35.1355(a), except that clearance is not required.
            (e) Child with an elevated blood lead level. If a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit covered by this paragraph has an elevated blood lead level, the owner shall comply with the requirements of § 35.730.
            [64 FR 50210, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 82 FR 4167, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.720
            Multifamily properties receiving up to $5,000 per unit, and single family properties.
            Effective September 15, 2000, the requirements of this section shall apply to a multifamily residential property that is receiving an average of up to and including $5,000 per assisted dwelling unit annually in project-based assistance and to a single family residential property that is receiving project-based assistance through the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation program, the Project-Based Certificate program, or any other HUD program providing project-based assistance.
            (a) Activities at initial and periodic inspection—(1) Visual assessment. During the initial and periodic inspections, an inspector trained in visual assessment for deteriorated paint surfaces in accordance with procedures established by HUD shall conduct a visual assessment of all painted surfaces in order to identify any deteriorated paint.
            (2) Paint stabilization. The owner shall stabilize each deteriorated paint surface in accordance with § 35.1330(a) and § 35.1330(b) before occupancy of a vacant dwelling unit or, where a unit is occupied, within 30 days of notification of the results of the visual assessment. Paint stabilization is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.
            (3) Notice. The owner shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with §§ 35.125(b) (1) and (c) describing the results of the clearance examination.
            (b) Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities. The owner shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities into regular building operations in accordance with § 35.1355(a), unless all lead-based paint has been removed.
            (c) Child with an elevated blood lead level. If a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit covered by this section has an elevated blood lead level, the owner shall comply with the requirements of § 35.730.
            [64 FR 50210, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 82 FR 4167, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.725
            Section 8 Rent adjustments.
            HUD may, subject to the availability of appropriations for Section 8 contract amendments, on a project by project basis for projects receiving Section 8 project-based assistance, provide adjustments to the maximum monthly rents to cover the costs of evaluation for and reduction of lead-based paint hazards, as defined in section 1004 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.
          
          
            § 35.730
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
            (a) Environmental investigation. Within 15 calendar days after being notified by a public health department or other medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit to which this subpart applies has been identified as having an elevated blood lead level, the owner shall complete an environmental investigation of the dwelling unit in which the child lived at the time the blood was last sampled and of common areas servicing the dwelling unit. The requirements of this paragraph apply regardless of whether the child is or is not still living in the unit when the owner receives the notification of the elevated blood lead level. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply if the owner conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date when the owner received the notification of the elevated blood lead level. If the owner conducted a risk assessment of the unit and common areas servicing the unit during that period, the owner need not conduct another risk assessment there but shall conduct the elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment. If a public health department has already conducted an evaluation of the dwelling unit in regard to the child's elevated blood lead level case, the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply.
            (b) Verification. After receiving information from a person who is not a medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit covered by this subpart may have an elevated blood lead level, the owner shall immediately verify the information with the public health department or other medical health care provider. If the public health department or provider denies the request, such as because it does not have the capacity to verify that information, the owner shall send documentation of the denial to the HUD rental assistance program manager, who shall make an effort to verify the information. If the public health department or provider verifies that the child has an elevated blood lead level, such verification shall constitute notification, and the owner shall take the action required in paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
            (c) Lead-based paint hazard reduction. Within 30 calendar days after receiving the report of the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section or the evaluation from the public health department, the owner shall complete the reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330. Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the environmental investigation have been treated with interim controls or abatement or the public health department certifies that the lead-based paint hazard reduction is complete. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply if the owner, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the owner received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, already conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit and completed reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards. If the owner conducted a risk assessment of the unit and common areas servicing the unit during that period, the owner is not required to conduct another risk assessment there but shall conduct the elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment.
            (d) If an environmental investigation or lead-based paint hazard evaluation or reduction is undertaken, each owner shall provide notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125.
            (e) Reporting requirement. (1) The owner shall report the name and address of a child identified as having an elevated blood lead level to the public health department within 5 business days of being so notified by any other medical health care professional.
            (2) The owner shall also report each confirmed case of a child with an elevated blood lead level to the HUD field office and HUD Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes within 5 business days of being so notified.
            (3) The owner shall provide to the HUD field office documentation that the designated party has conducted the activities of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            (f) Other assisted dwelling units in the property. (1) If the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the owner shall, for other assisted dwelling units covered by this part in which a child under age 6 resides or is expected to reside on the date lead-based paint hazard reduction under paragraph (c) of this section is complete, and for the common areas servicing those units, conduct a risk assessment within 30 calendar days after receipt of the environmental investigation report if there are 20 or fewer such other units, or 60 calendar days if there are more than 20 such other units.
            (2) Control measures. If the risk assessment conducted under paragraph (f)(1) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the owner shall complete the reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330 in those units and common areas within 30 calendar days, or within 90 calendar days if more than 20 units have lead-based paint hazards such that the control work would disturb painted surfaces that total more than the de minimis threshold of § 35.1350(d). Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the risk assessment have been treated with interim controls or abatement.
            (3) The owner shall provide to the HUD field office documentation that the designated party has conducted the activities of paragraph (f)(1) and (f)(2) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            (4) The requirements of this paragraph (f) do not apply if:
            (i) The owner both conducted a risk assessment of the other assisted dwelling units covered by paragraph (f)(1) of this section and the common areas servicing those units, and conducted reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330 between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the owner received the notification of the elevated blood lead level; or
            (ii) The owner has documentation of compliance with evaluation, notification, lead disclosure, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance, and lead-based paint management requirements under this part throughout the 12 months preceding the date the owner received the environmental investigation report pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section; and

            (iii) In either case, the owner provides to the HUD field office documentation that it has conducted the activities of paragraphs (f)(4)(i) and (ii) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            [82 FR 4167, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
        
        
          Subpart I—HUD-Owned and Mortgagee-in-Possession Multifamily Property
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50211, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.800
            Purpose and applicability.
            The purpose of this subpart I is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in a HUD-owned multifamily residential property or a multifamily residential property for which HUD is identified as mortgagee-in-possession. The requirements of this subpart apply to any such property that is offered for sale or held or managed on or after September 15, 2000.
          
          
            § 35.805
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.810
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notices. When evaluation or hazard reduction is undertaken, the Department shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for the purposes of this part.
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. HUD shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
            [64 FR 50211, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34272, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.815
            Evaluation.
            HUD shall conduct a risk assessment and a lead-based paint inspection in accordance with § 35.1320(a) and (b). For properties to which this subpart applies on September 15, 2000, the lead-based paint inspection and risk assessment shall be conducted no later than December 15, 2000, or before publicly advertising the property for sale, whichever is sooner. For properties to which this subpart becomes applicable after September 15, 2000, the lead-based paint inspection and risk assessment shall be conducted no later than 90 days after this subpart becomes applicable or before publicly advertising the property for sale, whichever is sooner.
          
          
            § 35.820
            Interim controls.
            HUD shall conduct interim controls in accordance with § 35.1330 to treat the lead-based paint hazards identified in the evaluation conducted in accordance with § 35.815. Interim controls are considered completed when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340. Interim controls of all lead-based paint hazards shall be completed no later than the following schedule:
            (a) In units occupied by families with children of less than 6 years of age and in common areas servicing those units, interim controls shall be completed no later than 90 days after the completion of the risk assessment. In units in which a child of less than 6 years of age moves in after the completion of the risk assessment, interim controls shall be completed no later than 90 days after the move-in.
            (b) In all other dwelling units, common areas, and the remaining portions of the residential property, interim controls shall be completed no later than 12 months after completion of the risk assessment for those units.
            (c) If conveyance of the title by HUD at a sale of a HUD-owned property or a foreclosure sale caused by HUD when HUD is mortgagee-in-possession occurs before the schedule in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, HUD shall complete interim controls before conveyance or foreclosure, or HUD shall be responsible for assuring that interim controls are carried out by the purchaser. If interim controls are made a condition of sale, such controls shall be completed according to the following schedule:

            (1) In units occupied by families with children of less than 6 years of age and in common areas servicing those units, interim controls shall be completed no later than 90 days after the date of the closing of the sale. In units in which a child of less than 6 years of age moves in after the closing of the sale, interim controls shall be completed no later than 90 days after the move-in.
            
            (2) In all other dwelling units, in common areas servicing those units, and in the remaining portions of the residential property, interim controls shall be completed no later than 180 days after the closing of the sale.
          
          
            § 35.825
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation.
            HUD shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation, in accordance with § 35.1355, into regular building operations if HUD retains ownership of the residential property for more than 12 months.
          
          
            § 35.830
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
            (a) Environmental investigation. Within 15 calendar days after being notified by a public health department or other medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit owned by HUD (or where HUD is mortgagee-in-possession) has been identified as having an elevated blood lead level, HUD shall complete an environmental investigation of the dwelling unit in which the child lived at the time the blood was last sampled and of common areas servicing the dwelling unit. The requirements of this paragraph apply regardless of whether the child is or is not still living in the unit when HUD receives the notification of the elevated blood lead level. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply if HUD conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date when HUD received the notification of the elevated blood lead level. If HUD conducted a risk assessment of the unit and common areas servicing the unit during that period, HUD is not required to conduct another risk assessment there but it shall conduct the elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment. If a public health department has already conducted an evaluation of the dwelling unit in regard to the child's elevated blood lead level case, the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply.
            (b) Verification. After receiving information from a person who is not a medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit covered by this subpart may have an elevated blood lead level, HUD shall immediately verify the information with the public health department or other medical health care provider. If the public health department or provider denies the request, such as because it does not have the capacity to verify that information, the HUD Realty Specialist assigned to that property shall send documentation of the denial to the HUD Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes, which shall make an effort to verify the information. If the public health department or provider verifies that the child has an elevated blood lead level, such verification shall constitute notification, and HUD shall take the action required in paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
            (c) Lead-based paint hazard reduction. Within 30 calendar days after receiving the report of the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section or the evaluation from the public health department, HUD shall complete the reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330. Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the environmental investigation have been treated with interim controls or abatement or the public health department certifies that the lead-based paint hazard reduction is complete. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply if HUD, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date HUD received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, already conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit and completed reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards. If HUD conducted a risk assessment of the unit and common areas servicing the unit during that period, it is not required to conduct another risk assessment there but it shall conduct the elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment.
            (d) Notice. If lead-based paint hazard evaluation or reduction is undertaken, each owner shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125.
            (e) Reporting requirement. (1) HUD shall report the name and address of a child identified as having an elevated blood lead level to the public health department within 5 business days of being so notified by any other medical health care professional.
            (2) HUD shall also report each confirmed case of a child with an elevated blood lead level to the HUD Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes within 5 business days of being so notified.
            (3) HUD shall provide to the HUD Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes documentation that it has conducted the activities of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            (f) Other assisted dwelling units in the property. (1) If the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, HUD shall, for other assisted dwelling units covered by this part in which a child under age 6 resides or is expected to reside on the date lead-based paint hazard reduction under paragraph (c) of this section, and the common areas servicing those units, is complete, conduct a risk assessment in accordance with § 35.815 within 30 calendar days after receipt of the environmental investigation report if there are 20 or fewer such other units, or 60 calendar days if there are more than 20 such other units.
            (2) If the risk assessment conducted under paragraph (f)(1) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, HUD shall complete the reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330 in those units and common areas within 30 calendar days, or within 90 calendar days if more than 20 units have lead-based paint hazards such that the control work would disturb painted surfaces that total more than the de minimis threshold of § 35.1350(d). Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the risk assessment have been treated with interim controls or abatement.
            (3) The requirements of this paragraph (f) do not apply if:
            (i) HUD, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date HUD received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, both conducted a risk assessment in the other assisted dwelling units covered by paragraph (f)(1) of this section and the common areas servicing those units, and conducted interim controls of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.820; or
            (ii) HUD has documentation of compliance with evaluation, notification, lead disclosure, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance, and lead-based paint management requirements under this part throughout the 12 months preceding the date HUD received the environmental investigation report pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section.
            (4) HUD shall provide to the HUD Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes documentation that it has conducted the activities of paragraph (f)(1) through (2) of this section, or that it has complied with the requirements in paragraph (f)(3) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            (g) Closing. If the closing of a sale is scheduled during the period when HUD is responding to a case of a child with an elevated blood lead level, HUD may arrange for the completion of the procedures required by paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section by the purchaser within a reasonable period of time.
            (h) Extensions. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner or designee may consider and approve a request for an extension of deadlines established by this section for lead-based paint inspection, risk assessment, environmental investigation, lead-based paint hazard reduction, clearance, and reporting. Such a request may be considered, however, only during the first six months during which HUD is owner or mortgagee-in-possession of a multifamily property.
            [82 FR 4168, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
        
        
          Subpart J—Rehabilitation
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50212, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.900
            Purpose and applicability.
            (a) Purpose and applicability. (1) The purpose of this subpart J is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in a residential property that receives Federal rehabilitation assistance under a program administered by HUD. Rehabilitation assistance does not include project-based rental assistance, rehabilitation mortgage insurance or assistance to public housing.
            (2) The requirements of this subpart shall not apply to HOME funds which are committed to a specific project in accordance with § 92.2 of this title before September 15, 2000. Such projects shall be subject to the requirements of § 92.355 of this title that were in effect at the time of project commitment or the requirements of this subpart.

            (3) For the purposes of the Indian Housing Block Grant program and the CDBG Entitlement program, the requirements of this subpart shall apply to all residential rehabilitation activities (except those otherwise exempted) for which funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000. For the purposes of the State, HUD-Administered Small Cities, and Insular Areas CDBG programs, the requirements of this subpart shall apply to all covered activities (except those otherwise exempted) for which grant funding is awarded to the unit of local government by the State or HUD, as applicable, on or after September 15, 2000. For the purposes of the Emergency Shelter Grant Program (42 U.S.C. 11371-11378) and the formula grants awarded under the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Program (HOPWA) (42 U.S.C. 12901 et. seq.), the requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities for which program funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000.
            (4) For the purposes of competitively awarded grants under the HOPWA Program and the Supportive Housing Program (42 U.S.C. 11481-11389), the requirements of this subpart shall apply to grants awarded under Notices of Funding Availability published on or after September 15, 2000.
            (5) For the purposes of the Indian CDBG program (§ 1003.607 of this title), the requirements of this subpart shall not apply to funds whose notice of funding availability is announced or funding letter is sent before September 15, 2000. Such project grantees shall be subject to the regulations in effect at the time of announcement or funding letter.
            (b) The grantee or participating jurisdiction may assign to a subrecipient or other entity the responsibilities set forth in this subpart.
          
          
            § 35.905
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.910
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notices. In cases where evaluation or hazard reduction or both are undertaken as part of federally funded rehabilitation, the grantee or participating jurisdiction shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for the purposes of this part.
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The grantee or participating jurisdiction shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
            [69 FR 34272, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.915
            Calculating Federal rehabilitation assistance.
            (a) Applicability. This section applies to recipients of Federal rehabilitation assistance.
            (b) Rehabilitation assistance. (1) Lead-based paint requirements for rehabilitation fall into three categories that depend on the amount of Federal rehabilitation assistance provided. The three categories are:

            (i) Assistance of up to and including $5,000 per unit;
            
            (ii) Assistance of more than $5,000 per unit up to and including $25,000 per unit; and
            (iii) Assistance of more than $25,000 per unit.
            (2) For purposes of implementing §§ 35.930 and 35.935, the amount of rehabilitation assistance is the lesser of two amounts: the average Federal assistance per assisted dwelling unit and the average per unit hard costs of rehabilitation. Federal assistance includes all Federal funds assisting the project, regardless of the use of the funds. Federal funds being used for acquisition of the property are to be included as well as funds for construction, permits, fees, and other project costs. The hard costs of rehabilitation include all hard costs, regardless of source, except that the costs of lead-based paint hazard evaluation and hazard reduction activities are not to be included. Costs of site preparation, occupant protection, relocation, interim controls, abatement, clearance, and waste handling attributable to compliance with the requirements of this part are not to be included in the hard costs of rehabilitation. All other hard costs are to be included, regardless of whether the source of funds is Federal or non-Federal, public or private.
            (c) Calculating rehabilitation assistance in properties with both assisted and unassisted dwelling units. For a residential property that includes both federally assisted and non-assisted units, the rehabilitation costs and Federal assistance associated with non-assisted units are not included in the calculations of the average per unit hard costs of rehabilitation and the average Federal assistance per unit.

            (1) The average per unit hard costs of rehabilitation for the assisted units is calculated using the following formula:
            
            Per Unit Hard Costs of Rehabilitation $ = (a/c) + (b/d)
            
            
              Where:
              
              a = Rehabilitation hard costs for all assisted units (not including common areas and exterior surfaces)
              b = Rehabilitation hard costs for common areas and exterior painted surfaces
              c = Number of federally assisted units
              d = Total number of units
            
            

            (2) The average Federal assistance per assisted dwelling unit is calculated using the following formula:
            
            Per unit Federal assistance = e/c
            
            
              Where:
              
              e = Total Federal assistance for the project
              c = Number of federally assisted units
            
            [69 FR 34272, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.920
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 35.925
            Examples of determining applicable requirements.
            The following examples illustrate how to determine whether the requirements of §§ 35.930(b), (c), or (d) apply to a dwelling unit receiving Federal rehabilitation assistance (dollar amounts are on a per unit basis):
            (a) If the total amount of Federal assistance for a dwelling is $2,000, and the hard costs of rehabilitation are $10,000, the lead-based paint requirements would be those described in § 35.930(b), because Federal rehabilitation assistance is up to and including $5,000.
            (b) If the total amount of Federal assistance for a dwelling unit is $6,000, and the hard costs of rehabilitation are $2,000, the lead-based paint requirements would be those described in § 35.930(b). Although the total amount of Federal dollars is more than $5,000, only the $2,000 of that total can be applied to rehabilitation. Therefore, the Federal rehabilitation assistance is $2,000 which is not more than $5,000.
            (c) If the total amount of Federal assistance for a unit is $6,000, and the hard costs of rehabilitation are $6,000, the lead-based paint requirements are those described in § 35.930(c), because the amount of Federal rehabilitation assistance is more than $5,000 but not more than $25,000.

            (d) If eight dwelling units in a residential property receive Federal rehabilitation assistance [symbol c in § 35.915(c)(2)] out of a total of 10 dwelling units [d], the total Federal assistance for the rehabilitation project is $300,000 [e], the total hard costs of rehabilitation for the dwelling units are $160,000 [a], and the total hard costs of rehabilitation for the common areas and exterior surfaces are $20,000 [b], then the lead-based paint requirements would be those described in § 35.930(c), because the level of Federal rehabilitation assistance is $22,000, which is not greater than $25,000. This is calculated as follows: The total Federal assistance per assisted unit is $37,500 (e/c = $300,000/8), the per unit hard costs of rehabilitation is $22,000 (a/c + b/d = $160,000/8 + $20,000/10), and the level of Federal rehabilitation assistance is the lesser of $37,500 and $22,000.
            [64 FR 50212, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34272, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.930
            Evaluation and hazard reduction requirements.
            (a) Paint testing. The grantee or participating jurisdiction shall either perform paint testing on the painted surfaces to be disturbed or replaced during rehabilitation activities, or presume that all these painted surfaces are coated with lead-based paint.
            (b) Residential property receiving an average of up to and including $5,000 per unit in Federal rehabilitation assistance. Each grantee or participating jurisdiction shall:
            (1) Conduct paint testing or presume the presence of lead-based paint, in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section. If paint testing indicates that the painted surfaces are not coated with lead-based paint, safe work practices and clearance are not required.
            (2) Implement safe work practices during rehabilitation work in accordance with § 35.1350 and repair any paint that is disturbed.
            (3) After completion of any rehabilitation disturbing painted surfaces, perform a clearance examination of the worksite(s) in accordance with § 35.1340. Clearance is not required if rehabilitation did not disturb painted surfaces of a total area more than that set forth in § 35.1350(d).
            (c) Residential property receiving an average of more than $5,000 and up to and including $25,000 per unit in Federal rehabilitation assistance. Each grantee or participating jurisdiction shall:
            (1) Conduct paint testing or presume the presence of lead-based paint, in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.
            (2) Perform a risk assessment in the dwelling units receiving Federal assistance, in common areas servicing those units, and exterior painted surfaces, in accordance with § 35.1320(b), before rehabilitation begins.
            (3) Perform interim controls in accordance with § 35.1330 of all lead-based paint hazards identified pursuant to paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section.
            (4) Implement safe work practices during rehabilitation work in accordance with § 35.1350 and repair any paint that is disturbed and is known or presumed to be lead-based paint.
            (d) Residential property receiving an average of more than $25,000 per unit in Federal rehabilitation assistance. Each grantee or participating jurisdiction shall:
            (1) Conduct paint testing or presume the presence of lead-based paint in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.
            (2) Perform a risk assessment in the dwelling units receiving Federal assistance and in associated common areas and exterior painted surfaces in accordance with § 35.1320(b) before rehabilitation begins.

            (3) Abate all lead-based paint hazards identified by the paint testing or risk assessment conducted pursuant to paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section, in accordance with § 35.1325, except that interim controls are acceptable on exterior surfaces that are not disturbed by rehabilitation and on paint-lead hazards that have an area smaller than the de minimis limits of § 35.1350(d). If abatement of a paint-lead hazard is required, it is necessary to abate only the surface area with hazardous conditions.
            (4) Implement safe work practices during rehabilitation work in accordance with § 35.1350 and repair any paint that is disturbed and is known or presumed to be lead-based paint.
            [64 FR 50214, Sept. 15, 1999; 65 FR 3387, Jan. 21, 2000, as amended at 69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.935
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities.

            In the case of a rental property receiving Federal rehabilitation assistance under the HOME program, the grantee or participating jurisdiction shall require the property owner to incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities in regular building operations, in accordance with § 35.1355(a).
            [69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.940
            Special requirements for insular areas.
            If a dwelling unit receiving Federal assistance under a program covered by this subpart is located in an insular area, the requirements of this section shall apply and the requirements of § 35.930 shall not apply. All other sections of this subpart J shall apply. The insular area shall conduct the following activities for the dwelling unit, common areas servicing the dwelling unit, and the exterior surfaces of the building in which the dwelling unit is located:
            (a) Residential property receiving an average of up to and including $5,000 per unit in Federal rehabilitation assistance. (1) Implement safe work practices during rehabilitation work in accordance with § 35.1350 and repair any paint that is disturbed by rehabilitation.
            (2) After completion of any rehabilitation disturbing painted surfaces, perform a clearance examination of the worksite(s) in accordance with § 35.1340. Clearance shall be achieved before residents are allowed to occupy the worksite(s). Clearance is not required if rehabilitation did not disturb painted surfaces of a total area more than that set forth in § 35.1350(b).
            (b) Residential property receiving an average of more than $5,000 per unit in Federal rehabilitation assistance. (1) Before beginning rehabilitation, perform a visual assessment of all painted surfaces in order to identify deteriorated paint.
            (2) Perform paint stabilization of each deteriorated paint surface and each painted surface being disturbed by rehabilitation, in accordance with §§ 35.1330(a) and (b).
            (3) After completion of all paint stabilization, perform a clearance examination of the affected dwelling units and common areas in accordance with § 35.1340. Clearance shall be achieved before residents are allowed to occupy rooms or spaces in which paint stabilization has been performed.
          
        
        
          Subpart K—Acquisition, Leasing, Support Services, or Operation
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50214, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.1000
            Purpose and applicability.
            (a) The purpose of this subpart K is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in a residential property that receives Federal assistance under certain HUD programs for acquisition, leasing, support services, or operation. Acquisition, leasing, support services, and operation do not include mortgage insurance, sale of federally-owned housing, project-based or tenant-based rental assistance, rehabilitation assistance, or assistance to public housing. For requirements pertaining to those activities or types of assistance, see the applicable subpart of this part.
            (b) The grantee or participating jurisdiction may assign to a subrecipient or other entity the responsibilities set forth in this subpart.
            (c)(1) The requirements of this subpart shall not apply to HOME funds which are committed to a specific project in accordance with § 92.2 of this title before September 15, 2000. Such projects shall be subject to the requirements of § 92.355 of this title that were in effect at the time of project commitment, or the requirements of this subpart.

            (2) For purposes of the CDBG Entitlement program and the Indian Housing Block Grant program, the requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities (except those otherwise exempted) for which funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000. For the purposes of the State, HUD-Administered Small Cities, and Insular Areas CDBG programs, the requirements of this subpart shall apply to all covered activities (except those otherwise exempted) for which grant funding is awarded to the unit of local government by the State or HUD, as applicable, on or after September 15, 2000. For the purposes of the Emergency Shelter Grant Program (42 U.S.C. 11371-11378) and the formula grants awarded under the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Program (HOPWA) (42 U.S.C. 12901 et. seq.), the requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities for which program funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000.
            (3) For the purposes of competitively awarded grants under the HOPWA Program and the Supportive Housing Program (42 U.S.C. 11481-11389), the requirements of this subpart shall apply to grants awarded under Notices of Funding Availability published on or after September 15, 2000.
            (4) For the purposes of the Indian CDBG program (§ 1003.607 of this title), the requirements of this subpart shall not apply to funds whose notice of funding availability is announced or funding letter is sent before September 15, 2000. Such project grantees shall be subject to the regulations in effect at the time of announcement or funding letter.
            [64 FR 50213, Sept. 15, 1999; 65 FR 3387, Jan. 21, 2000]
          
          
            § 35.1005
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.1010
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notice. In cases where evaluation or hazard reduction, including paint stabilization, is undertaken, each grantee or participating jurisdiction shall provide a notice to residents in accordance with § 35.125. A visual assessment is not considered an evaluation for purposes of this part.
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The grantee or participating jurisdiction shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
          
          
            § 35.1015
            Visual assessment, paint stabilization, and maintenance.
            If a dwelling unit receives Federal assistance under a program covered by this subpart, each grantee or participating jurisdiction shall conduct the following activities for the dwelling unit, common areas servicing the dwelling unit, and the exterior surfaces of the building in which the dwelling unit is located:
            (a) A visual assessment of all painted surfaces in order to identify deteriorated paint;
            (b) Paint stabilization of each deteriorated paint surface, and clearance, in accordance with §§ 35.1330(a) and (b), before occupancy of a vacant dwelling unit or, where a unit is occupied, immediately after receipt of Federal assistance; and
            (c) The grantee or participating jurisdiction shall require the incorporation of ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities into regular building operations, in accordance with § 35.1355(a), if the dwelling unit has a continuing, active financial relationship with a Federal housing assistance program, except that mortgage insurance or loan guarantees are not considered to constitute an active programmatic relationship for the purposes of this part.
            (d) The grantee or participating jurisdiction shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with §§ 35.125(b)(1) and (c), describing the results of the clearance examination.
            [64 FR 50214, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.1020
            Funding for evaluation and hazard reduction.
            The grantee or participating jurisdiction shall determine whether the cost of evaluation and hazard reduction is to be borne by the owner/developer, the grantee or a combination of the owner/developer and the grantee, based on program requirements and local program design.
          
        
        
          Subpart L—Public Housing Programs
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50215, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.1100
            Purpose and applicability.

            The purpose of this subpart L is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in residential property assisted under the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.) but not including housing assisted under section 8 of the 1937 Act.
          
          
            
            § 35.1105
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.1110
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notice. In cases where evaluation or hazard reduction is undertaken, each public housing agency (PHA) shall provide a notice to residents in accordance with § 35.125. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for purposes of this part.
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The PHA shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
            [64 FR 50215, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.1115
            Evaluation.
            (a) A lead-based paint inspection shall be conducted in all public housing unless a lead-based paint inspection that meets the conditions of § 35.165(a) has already been completed. If a lead-based paint inspection was conducted by a lead-based paint inspector who was not certified, the PHA shall review the quality of the inspection, in accordance with quality control procedures established by HUD, to determine whether the lead-based paint inspection has been properly performed and the results are reliable. Lead-based paint inspections of all housing to which this subpart applies shall be completed no later than September 15, 2000. Revisions or augmentations of prior inspections found to be of insufficient quality shall be completed no later than September 17, 2001.
            (b) If a lead-based paint inspection has found the presence of lead-based paint, or if no lead-based paint inspection has been conducted, the PHA shall conduct a risk assessment according to the following schedule, unless a risk assessment that meets the conditions of § 35.165(b) has already been completed:
            (1) Risk assessments shall be completed on or before March 15, 2001, in a multifamily residential property constructed before 1960.
            (2) Risk assessments shall be completed on or before March 15, 2002, in a multifamily residential property constructed after 1959 and before 1978.
            (c) A PHA that advertises a construction contract (including architecture/engineering contracts) for bid or award or plans to start force account work shall not execute such contract until a lead-based paint inspection and, if required, a risk assessment, has taken place and any necessary abatement is included in the modernization budget, except for contracts solely for emergency work in accordance with § 35.115(a)(9).
            (d) The five-year funding request plan for CIAP and CGP shall be amended to include the schedule and funding for lead-based paint activities.
          
          
            § 35.1120
            Hazard reduction.
            (a) Each PHA shall, in accordance with § 35.1325, abate all lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards identified in the evaluations conducted pursuant to § 35.1115. The PHA shall abate lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 during the course of physical improvements conducted under the modernization.
            (b) In all housing where abatement of all lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards required in paragraph (a) of this section has not yet occurred, each PHA shall conduct interim controls, in accordance with § 35.1330, of the lead-based paint hazards identified in the most recent risk assessment.
            (1) Interim controls of dwelling units in which any child who is less than 6 years of age resides and common areas servicing those dwelling units shall be completed within 90 days of the evaluation under § 35.1330. If a unit becomes newly occupied by a family with a child of less than 6 years of age or such child moves into a unit, interim controls shall be completed within 90 days after the new occupancy or move-in if they have not already been completed.

            (2) Interim controls in dwelling units not occupied by families with one or more children of less than 6 years of age, common areas servicing those units, and the remaining portions of the residential property shall be completed no later than 12 months after completion of the evaluation conducted under § 35.1115.
            
            (c) The PHA shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation activities into regular building operations in accordance with § 35.1355. In accordance with § 35.115(a) (6) and (7), this requirement does not apply to a development or part thereof if it is to be demolished or disposed of in accordance with disposition requirements in part 970 of this title, provided the dwelling unit will remain unoccupied until demolition, or if it is not used and will not be used for human habitation.
          
          
            § 35.1125
            Evaluation and hazard reduction before acquisition and development.
            (a) For each residential property constructed before 1978 and proposed to be acquired for a family project (whether or not it will need rehabilitation) a lead-based paint inspection and risk assessment for lead-based paint hazards shall be conducted in accordance with § 35.1320.
            (b) If lead-based paint is found in a residential property to be acquired, the cost of evaluation and abatement shall be considered when making the cost comparison to justify new construction, as well as when meeting maximum total development cost limitations.
            (c) If lead-based paint is found, compliance with this subpart is required, and abatement of lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards shall be completed in accordance with § 35.1325 before occupancy.
          
          
            § 35.1130
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
            (a) Environmental investigation. Within 15 calendar days after being notified by a public health department or other medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit to which this subpart applies has been identified as having an elevated blood lead level, the PHA shall complete an environmental investigation of the dwelling unit in which the child lived at the time the blood was last sampled and of common areas servicing the dwelling unit. The environmental investigation is considered complete when the PHA receives the environmental investigation report. The requirements of this paragraph apply regardless of whether the child is or is not still living in the unit when the PHA receives the notification of the elevated blood lead level. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply if the PHA conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date when the PHA received the notification of the elevated blood lead level. If the PHA conducted a risk assessment of the unit and common areas servicing the unit during that period, the PHA need not conduct another risk assessment there but shall conduct the elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment. If a public health department has already conducted an evaluation of the dwelling unit in regard to the child's elevated blood lead level case, the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply.
            (b) Verification. After receiving information from a person who is not a medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit covered by this subpart may have an elevated blood lead level, the PHA shall immediately verify the information with the public health department or other medical health care provider. If that department or provider denies the request, such as because it does not have the capacity to verify that information, the PHA shall send documentation of the denial to its HUD field office, who shall make an effort to verify the information. If that department or provider verifies that the child has an elevated blood lead level, such verification shall constitute notification, and the housing agency shall take the action required in paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
            (c) Lead-based paint hazard reduction. Within 30 calendar days after receiving the report of the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section or the evaluation from the public health department, the PHA shall complete the reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330. Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the environmental investigation have been treated with interim controls or abatement or the local or State health department certifies that the lead-based paint hazard reduction is complete. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply if the PHA, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the PHA received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, already conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit and completed reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards. If the PHA conducted a risk assessment of the unit and common areas servicing the unit during that period, it is not required to conduct another risk assessment there but it shall conduct the elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment. If the PHA does not complete the lead-based paint hazard reduction required by this section, the dwelling unit is in violation of the standards of 24 CFR 965.601, which incorporates the uniform physical condition standards of § 5.703(f), including that it be free of lead-based paint hazards.
            (d) Notice of lead-based paint hazard evaluation and reduction. The PHA shall notify building residents of any lead-based paint hazard evaluation or reduction activities in accordance with § 35.125.
            (e) Reporting requirement. (1) The PHA shall report the name and address of a child identified as having an elevated blood lead level to the public health department within 5 business days of being so notified by any other medical health care professional.
            (2) The PHA shall report each confirmed case of a child with an elevated blood lead level to the HUD field office and the HUD Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes within 5 business days of being so notified.
            (3) The PHA shall provide to the HUD field office documentation that it has conducted the activities of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            (f) Other units in the property. (1) If the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the PHA shall conduct a risk assessment of other units of the building in which a child under age 6 resides or is expected to reside on the date lead-based paint hazard reduction under paragraph (c) of this section is complete, and the common areas servicing those units within 30 calendar days after receipt of the environmental investigation report if there are 20 or fewer such other units, or 60 calendar days if there are more such units.
            (2) If the risk assessment conducted under paragraph (f)(1) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the PHA shall control the hazards, in accordance with Sec. 35.1325 or § 35.1330, in those units and common areas within 30 calendar days, or within 90 calendar days if more than 20 units have lead-based paint hazards such that the control work would disturb painted surfaces that total more than the de minimis threshold of § 35.1350(d). Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the risk assessment have been treated with interim controls or abatement.
            (3) The PHA shall provide to the HUD field office documentation that it has conducted the activities of paragraphs (f)(1) and (2) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            (4) The requirements of this paragraph (f) of this section do not apply if:
            (i) The PHA, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the PHA received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, both conducted a risk assessment of the other assisted dwelling units covered by paragraph (f)(1) of this section and the common areas servicing those units, and conducted interim controls of identified hazards in accordance with § 35.1120(b); or

            (ii) If the PHA has documentation of compliance with evaluation, notification, lead disclosure, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance, and lead-based paint management requirements under this part throughout the 12 months preceding the date the PHA received the environmental investigation report pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section; and,
            (iii) In either case, the PHA provided the HUD field office, within 10 business days after receiving the notification of the elevated blood lead level, documentation that it has conducted the activities described in this paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
            [82 FR 4169, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.1135
            Eligible costs.
            A PHA may use financial assistance received under the modernization program (CIAP or CGP) for the notice, evaluation and reduction of lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 968.112 of this title. Eligible costs include:
            (a) Evaluation and insurance costs. Evaluation and hazard reduction activities, and costs for insurance coverage associated with these activities.
            (b) Planning costs. Planning costs are costs that are incurred before HUD approval of the CGP or CIAP application and that are related to developing the CIAP application or carrying out eligible modernization planning, such as planning for abatement, detailed design work, preparation of solicitations, and evaluation. Planning costs may be funded as a single work item. Planning costs shall not exceed 5 percent of the CIAP funds available to a HUD Field Office in a particular fiscal year.
            (c) Architectural/engineering and consultant fees. Eligible costs include fees for planning, identification of needs, detailed design work, preparation of construction and bid documents and other required documents, evaluation, planning and design for abatement, and inspection of work in progress.
            (d) Elevated blood lead level response costs. The PHA may use its operating reserves and, when necessary, may request reimbursement from the current fiscal year CIAP funds, or request the reprogramming of previously approved CIAP funds to cover the costs of evaluation and hazard reduction.
            [64 FR 50215, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 82 FR 4170, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.1140
            Insurance coverage.
            For the requirements concerning the obligation of a PHA to obtain reasonable insurance coverage with respect to the hazards associated with evaluation and hazard reduction activities, see § 965.215 of this title.
          
        
        
          Subpart M—Tenant-Based Rental Assistance
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.1200
            Purpose and applicability.
            (a) Purpose. The purpose of this subpart M is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in housing occupied by families receiving tenant-based rental assistance. Such assistance includes tenant-based rental assistance under the Section 8 certificate program, the Section 8 voucher program, the HOME program, the Shelter Plus Care program, the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program, and the Indian Housing Block Grant program. Tenant-based rental assistance means rental assistance that is not attached to the structure.
            (b) Applicability. (1) This subpart applies only to dwelling units occupied or to be occupied by families or households that have one or more children of less than 6 years of age, common areas servicing such dwelling units, and exterior painted surfaces associated with such dwelling units or common areas. Common areas servicing a dwelling unit include those areas through which residents pass to gain access to the unit and other areas frequented by resident children of less than 6 years of age, including on-site play areas and child care facilities.
            (2) For the purposes of the Section 8 tenant-based certificate program and the Section 8 voucher program:

            (i) The requirements of this subpart are applicable where an initial or periodic inspection occurs on or after September 15, 2000; and
            
            (ii) The PHA shall be the designated party.

            (3) For the purposes of formula grants awarded under the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Program (HOPWA) (42 U.S.C. 12901 et seq.):
            (i) The requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities for which program funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000; and
            (ii) The grantee shall be the designated party.
            (4) For the purposes of competitively awarded grants under the HOPWA Program and the Shelter Plus Care program (42 U.S.C. 11402-11407) tenant-based rental assistance component:
            (i) The requirements of this subpart shall apply to grants awarded pursuant to Notices of Funding Availability published on or after September 15, 2000; and
            (ii) The grantee shall be the designated party.
            (5) For the purposes of the HOME program:
            (i) The requirements of this subpart shall not apply to funds which are committed in accordance with § 92.2 of this title before September 15, 2000; and
            (ii) The participating jurisdiction shall be the designated party.
            (6) For the purposes of the Indian Housing Block Grant program:
            (i) The requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities for which funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000; and
            (ii) The IHBG recipient shall be the designated party.
            (7) The housing agency, grantee, participating jurisdiction, or IHBG recipient may assign to a subrecipient or other entity the responsibilities of the designated party in this subpart.
            [64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999; 65 FR 3387, Jan. 21, 2000]
          
          
            § 35.1205
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.1210
            Notices and pamphlet.
            (a) Notice. In cases where evaluation or paint stabilization is undertaken, the owner shall provide a notice to residents in accordance with § 35.125. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for purposes of this part.
            (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The owner shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
            [64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.1215
            Activities at initial and periodic inspection.
            (a) (1) During the initial and periodic inspections, an inspector acting on behalf of the designated party and trained in visual assessment for deteriorated paint surfaces in accordance with procedures established by HUD shall conduct a visual assessment of all painted surfaces in order to identify any deteriorated paint.
            (2) For tenant-based rental assistance provided under the HOME program, visual assessment shall be conducted as part of the initial and periodic inspections required under § 92.209(i) of this title.
            (b) The owner shall stabilize each deteriorated paint surface in accordance with §§ 35.1330(a) and (b) before commencement of assisted occupancy. If assisted occupancy has commenced prior to a periodic inspection, such paint stabilization must be completed within 30 days of notification of the owner of the results of the visual assessment. Paint stabilization is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340. If the owner does not complete the hazard reduction required by this section, the dwelling unit is in violation of Housing Quality Standards (HQS) until the hazard reduction is completed or the unit is no longer covered by this subpart because the unit is no longer under a housing assistance payment (HAP) contract with the housing agency. For the unit subsequently to come under a HAP contract with the housing agency for occupancy by a family with a child under age 6, paint stabilization must be completed, including clearance being achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.

            (c) The owner shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125(b)(1) and (c) describing the results of the clearance examination.
            
            (d) The designated party may grant the owner an extension of time to complete paint stabilization and clearance for reasonable cause, but such an extension shall not extend beyond 90 days after the date of notification to the owner of the results of the visual assessment.
            [64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004; 82 FR 4170, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.1220
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities.
            Notwithstanding the designation of the PHA, grantee, participating jurisdiction, or Indian Housing Block Grant (IHBG) recipient as the designated party for this subpart, the owner shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities into regular building operations in accordance with § 35.1355(a).
            [69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.1225
            Child with an elevated blood lead level.
            (a) Within 15 calendar days after being notified by a public health department or other medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit to which this subpart applies has been identified as having an elevated blood lead level, the designated party shall complete an environmental investigation of the dwelling unit in which the child lived at the time the blood was last sampled and of common areas servicing the dwelling unit. When the environmental investigation is complete, the designated party shall immediately provide the report of the environmental investigation to the owner of the dwelling unit. If the child identified as having an elevated blood lead level is no longer living in the unit when the designated party receives notification from the public health department or other medical health care provider, but another household receiving tenant-based rental assistance is living in the unit or is planning to live there, the requirements of this section apply just as they do if the child still lives in the unit. If a public health department has already conducted an evaluation of the dwelling unit in regard to the child's elevated blood lead level case, or the designated party conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date when the designated party received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply. If the designated party or the owner conducted a risk assessment of the unit and common areas servicing the unit during that period, the designated party need not conduct another risk assessment there but shall conduct the elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment.
            (b) Verification. After receiving information from a person who is not a medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living in a dwelling unit covered by this subpart may have an elevated blood lead level, the designated party shall immediately verify the information with the public health department or other medical health care provider. If the public health department or provider denies the request, such as because it does not have the capacity to verify that information, the designated party shall send documentation of the denial to the HUD rental assistance program manager, who shall make an effort to verify the information. If that department or provider verifies that the child has an elevated blood lead level, such verification shall constitute notification, and the designated party shall take the action required in paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
            (c) Lead-based paint hazard reduction. Within 30 calendar days after receiving the report of the environmental investigation from the designated party or the evaluation from the public health department, the owner shall complete the reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330. Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the environmental investigation have been treated with interim controls or abatement or the public health department certifies that the lead-based paint hazard reduction is complete. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply if the designated party or the owner, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the designated party received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, already conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing the unit and the owner completed reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards. If the owner does not complete the lead-based paint hazard reduction required by this section, the dwelling unit is in violation of the standards of 24 CFR 982.401.
            (d) Notice of lead-based paint hazard evaluation and reduction. The owner shall notify building residents of any lead-based paint hazard evaluation or reduction activities in accordance with § 35.125.
            (e) Reporting requirement. (1) The owner shall report the name and address of a child identified as having an elevated blood lead level to the public health department within 5 business days of being so notified by any other medical health care professional.
            (2) The owner shall also report each confirmed case of a child with an elevated blood lead level to the HUD field office and the HUD Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes within 5 business days of being so notified.
            (3) The owner shall provide to the HUD field office documentation that it has conducted the activities of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
            (f) Other assisted dwelling units in the property. (1) If the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the designated party or the owner shall, for other assisted dwelling units covered by this part in which a child under age 6 resides or is expected to reside on the date lead-based paint hazard reduction under paragraph (c) of this section is complete, and the common areas servicing those units, conduct a risk assessment in accordance with § 35.1320(b) within 30 calendar days after receipt of the environmental investigation report if there are 20 or fewer such units, or 60 calendar days if there are more such units.
            (2) If the risk assessment conducted under paragraph (f)(1) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the owner shall complete the reduction of the lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330 within 30 calendar days, or within 90 calendar days if more than 20 units have lead-based paint hazards such that the control work would disturb painted surfaces that total more than the de minimis threshold of § 35.1350(d). Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the risk assessment have been treated with interim controls or abatement.
            (3) The requirements of this paragraph (f) of this section do not apply if:
            (i) The designated party or the owner, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the owner received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, both conducted a risk assessment of the other assisted dwelling units covered by paragraph (f)(1) of this section and the common areas servicing those units, and the owner conducted interim controls of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1225(c); or
            (ii) The owner has documentation of compliance with evaluation, notification, lead disclosure, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance, and lead-based paint management requirements under this part throughout the 12 months preceding the date the owner received the environmental investigation report pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section; and,
            (iii) In either case, the owner provided the HUD field office, within 10 business days after receiving the notification of the elevated blood lead level, documentation that it has conducted the activities described in this paragraph (f)(3).
            (g) Data collection and record keeping responsibilities. At least quarterly, the designated party shall attempt to obtain from the public health department(s) with area(s) of jurisdiction similar to that of the designated party the names and/or addresses of children of less than 6 years of age with an identified elevated blood lead level. At least quarterly, the designated party shall also report an updated list of the addresses of units receiving assistance under a tenant-based rental assistance program to the same public health department(s), except that the report(s) to the public health department(s) is not required if the health department states that it does not wish to receive such report. If it obtains names and addresses of elevated blood lead level children from the public health department(s), the designated party shall match information on cases of elevated blood lead levels with the names and addresses of families receiving tenant-based rental assistance, unless the public health department performs such a matching procedure.
            If a match occurs, the designated party shall carry out the requirements of this section.
            [82 FR 4171, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
        
        
          Subparts N-Q [Reserved]
        
        
          Subpart R—Methods and Standards for Lead-Paint Hazard Evaluation and Hazard Reduction Activities
          
            Source:
            64 FR 50218, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 35.1300
            Purpose and applicability.
            The purpose of this subpart R is to provide standards and methods for evaluation and hazard reduction activities required in subparts B, C, D, and F through M of this part.
          
          
            § 35.1305
            Definitions and other general requirements.
            Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.
          
          
            § 35.1310
            References.
            Further guidance information regarding evaluation and hazard reduction activities described in this subpart is found in the following:
            (a) The HUD Guidelines for the Evaluation and Control of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Housing (Guidelines);
            (b) The EPA Guidance on Residential Lead-Based Paint, Lead-Contaminated Dust, and Lead Contaminated Soil;
            (c) Guidance, methods or protocols issued by States and Indian tribes that have been authorized by EPA under 40 CFR 745.324 to administer and enforce lead-based paint programs.
          
          
            § 35.1315
            Collection and laboratory analysis of samples.
            All paint chip, dust, or soil samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with standards established either by a State or Indian tribe under a program authorized by EPA in accordance with 40 CFR part 745, subpart Q, or by the EPA in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227, and as further provided in this subpart.
          
          
            § 35.1320
            Lead-based paint inspections, paint testing, risk assessments, lead-hazard screens, and reevaluations.
            (a) Lead-based paint inspections and paint testing. Lead-based paint inspections shall be performed in accordance with methods and standards established either by a State or Tribal program authorized by the EPA under 40 CFR 745.324, or by the EPA at 40 CFR 745.227(b) and (h). Paint testing to determine the presence or absence of lead-based paint on deteriorated paint surfaces or surfaces to be disturbed or replaced shall be performed by a certified lead-based paint inspector or risk assessor.
            (b) Risk assessments, lead-hazard screens and reevaluations. (1) Risk assessments and lead-hazard screens shall be performed in accordance with methods and standards established either by a state or tribal program authorized by the EPA, or by the EPA at 40 CFR 745.227(c), (d), and (h) and paragraph (b)(2) of this section. Reevaluations shall be performed by a certified risk assessor in accordance with § 35.1355(b) and paragraph (b)(2) of this section.

            (2) Risk assessors shall use standards for determining dust-lead hazards and soil-lead hazards that are at least as protective as those promulgated by the EPA at 40 CFR 745.227(h) or, if such standards are not in effect, the following levels for dust or soil:
            
            (i) Dust. A dust-lead hazard is surface dust that contains a mass-per-area concentration (loading) of lead, based on wipe samples, equal to or exceeding the applicable level in the following table:
            
              Dust Lead Standards
              
                Evaluation method
                Surface
                Floors, µg/ft 2
                  (mg/m 2)
                
                Interior windowsills, µg/ft 2
                  
                  (mg/m 2)
                
                Window troughs,µg/ft 2 (mg/m 2)
                
              
              
                Risk Assessment
                40 (0.43)
                250 (2.7)
                Not Applicable.
              
              
                Lead Hazard Screen
                25 (0.27)
                125 (1.4)
                Not Applicable.
              
              
                Reevaluation
                40 (0.43)
                250 (2.7)
                Not Applicable.
              
              
                Clearance
                40 (0.43)
                250 (2.7)
                400 (4.3).
              
              Note 1: “Floors” includes carpeted and uncarpeted interior floors.
              Note 2: A dust-lead hazard is present or clearance fails when the weighted arithmetic mean lead loading for all single-surface or composite samples is equal to or greater than the applicable standard. For composite samples of two to four subsamples, the standard is determined by dividing the standard in the table by one half the number of subsamples. See EPA regulations at 40 CFR 745.63 and 745.227(h)(3)(i).
            
            (ii) Soil. (A) A soil-lead hazard for play areas frequented by children under six years of age is bare soil with lead equal to or exceeding 400 parts per million (micrograms per gram).
            (B) For the rest of the yard, a soil-lead hazard is bare soil that totals more than 9 square feet (0.8 square meters) per property with lead equal to or exceeding an average of 1,200 parts per million (micrograms per gram).

            (3) Lead-hazard screens shall be performed in accordance with the methods and standards established either by a state or Tribal program authorized by the EPA, or by the EPA at 40 CFR 745.227(c), and paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. If the lead-hazard screen indicates the need for a follow-up risk assessment (e.g., if dust-lead measurements exceed the levels established for lead-hazard screens in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section), a risk assessment shall be conducted in accordance with paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. Dust, soil, and paint samples collected for the lead-hazard screen may be used in the risk assessment. If the lead hazard screen does not indicate the need for a follow-up risk assessment, no further risk assessment is required.
            (c) It is strongly recommended, but not required, that lead-based paint inspectors, risk assessors, and sampling technicians provide a plain-language summary of the results suitable for posting or distribution to occupants in compliance with § 35.125.
            [69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.1325
            Abatement.
            Abatement shall be performed in accordance with methods and standards established either by a State or Indian tribe under a program authorized by EPA, or by EPA at 40 CFR 745.227(e), and shall be completed by achieving clearance in accordance with § 35.1340. If encapsulation or enclosure is used as a method of abatement, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities shall be performed as required by the applicable subpart of this part in accordance with § 35.1355. Abatement of an intact, factory-applied prime coating on metal surfaces is not required unless the surface is a friction surface.
          
          
            § 35.1330
            Interim controls.
            Interim controls of lead-based paint hazards identified in a risk assessment shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this section. Interim control measures include paint stabilization of deteriorated paint, treatments for friction and impact surfaces where levels of lead dust are above the levels specified in § 35.1320, dust control, and lead-contaminated soil control. As provided by § 35.155, interim controls may be performed in combination with, or be replaced by, abatement methods.
            (a) General requirements. (1) Only those interim control methods identified as acceptable methods in a current risk assessment report shall be used to control identified hazards, except that, if only paint stabilization is required in accordance with subparts F, H, K or M of this part, it shall not be necessary to have conducted a risk assessment.
            (2) Occupants of dwelling units where interim controls are being performed shall be protected during the course of the work in accordance with § 35.1345.
            (3) Clearance testing shall be performed at the conclusion of interim control activities in accordance with § 35.1340.

            (4) A person performing interim controls must be trained in accordance with the hazard communication standard for the construction industry issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor at 29 CFR 1926.59, and either be supervised by an individual certified as a lead-based paint abatement supervisor or have completed successfully one of the following lead-safe work practices courses, except that this supervision or lead-safe work practices training requirement does not apply to work that disturbs painted surfaces less than the de minimis limits of § 35.1350(d):
            (i) A lead-based paint abatement supervisor course accredited in accordance with 40 CFR 745.225;
            (ii) A lead-based paint abatement worker course accredited in accordance with 40 CFR 745.225; or
            (iii) A renovator course accredited in accordance with 40 CFR 745.225.
            (iv) “The Remodeler's and Renovator's Lead-Based Paint Training Program,” prepared by HUD and the National Association of the Remodeling Industry; or
            (v) Another course approved by HUD for this purpose after consultation with EPA.
            (b) Paint stabilization. (1) Interim control treatments used to stabilize deteriorated lead-based paint shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of this section. Interim control treatments of intact, factory applied prime coatings on metal surfaces are not required. Finish coatings on such surfaces shall be treated by interim controls if those coatings contain lead-based paint.
            (2) Any physical defect in the substrate of a painted surface or component that is causing deterioration of the surface or component shall be repaired before treating the surface or component. Examples of defective substrate conditions include dry-rot, rust, moisture-related defects, crumbling plaster, and missing siding or other components that are not securely fastened.
            (3) Before applying new paint, all loose paint and other loose material shall be removed from the surface to be treated. Acceptable methods for preparing the surface to be treated include wet scraping, wet sanding, and power sanding performed in conjunction with a HEPA filtered local exhaust attachment operated according to the manufacturer's instructions.
            (4) Dry sanding or dry scraping is permitted only in accordance with § 35.140(e) (i.e., for electrical safety reasons or for specified minor amounts of work).
            (5) Paint stabilization shall include the application of a new protective coating or paint. The surface substrate shall be dry and protected from future moisture damage before applying a new protective coating or paint. All protective coatings and paints shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
            (6) Paint stabilization shall incorporate the use of safe work practices in accordance with § 35.1350.
            (c) Friction and impact surfaces. (1) Friction surfaces are required to be treated only if:
            (i) Lead dust levels on the nearest horizontal surface underneath the friction surface (e.g., the window sill, window trough, or floor) are equal to or greater than the standards specified in 35.1320(b);
            (ii) There is evidence that the paint surface is subject to abrasion; and
            (iii) Lead-based paint is known or presumed to be present on the friction surface.
            (2) Impact surfaces are required to be treated only if:
            (i) Paint on an impact surface is damaged or otherwise deteriorated;
            (ii) The damaged paint is caused by impact from a related building component (such as a door knob that knocks into a wall, or a door that knocks against its door frame); and
            (iii) Lead-based paint is known or presumed to be present on the impact surface.
            (3) Examples of building components that may contain friction or impact surfaces include the following:
            (i) Window systems;
            (ii) Doors;
            (iii) Stair treads and risers;
            (iv) Baseboards;
            (v) Drawers and cabinets; and

            (vi) Porches, decks, interior floors, and any other painted surfaces that are abraded, rubbed, or impacted.
            
            (4) Interim control treatments for friction surfaces shall eliminate friction points or treat the friction surface so that paint is not subject to abrasion. Examples of acceptable treatments include rehanging and/or planing doors so that the door does not rub against the door frame, and installing window channel guides that reduce or eliminate abrasion of painted surfaces. Paint on stair treads and floors shall be protected with a durable cover or coating that will prevent abrasion of the painted surfaces. Examples of acceptable materials include carpeting, tile, and sheet flooring.
            (5) Interim control treatments for impact surfaces shall protect the paint from impact. Examples of acceptable treatments include treatments that eliminate impact with the paint surface, such as a door stop to prevent a door from striking a wall or baseboard.
            (6) Interim control for impact or friction surfaces does not include covering such a surface with a coating or other treatment, such as painting over the surface, that does not protect lead-based paint from impact or abrasion.
            (d) Chewable surfaces. (1) Chewable surfaces are required to be treated only if there is evidence of teeth marks, indicating that a child of less than six years of age has chewed on the painted surface, and lead-based paint is known or presumed to be present on the surface.
            (2) Interim control treatments for chewable surfaces shall make the lead-based paint inaccessible for chewing by children of less than 6 years of age. Examples include enclosures or coatings that cannot be penetrated by the teeth of such children.
            (e) Dust-lead hazard control. (1) Interim control treatments used to control dust-lead hazards shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of this section. Additional information on dust removal is found in the HUD Guidelines, particularly Chapter 11 (see § 35.1310).
            (2) Dust control shall involve a thorough cleaning of all horizontal surfaces, such as interior window sills, window troughs, floors, and stairs, but excluding ceilings. All horizontal surfaces, such as floors, stairs, window sills and window troughs, that are rough, pitted, or porous shall be covered with a smooth, cleanable covering or coating, such as metal coil stock, plastic, polyurethane, or linoleum.
            (3) Surfaces covered by a rug or carpeting shall be cleaned as follows:
            (i) The floor surface under a rug or carpeting shall be cleaned where feasible, including upon removal of the rug or carpeting, with a HEPA vacuum or other method of equivalent efficacy.
            (ii) An unattached rug or an attached carpet that is to be removed, and padding associated with such rug or carpet, located in an area of the dwelling unit with dust-lead hazards on the floor, shall be thoroughly vacuumed with a HEPA vacuum or other method of equivalent efficacy. Protective measures shall be used to prevent the spread of dust during removal of a rug, carpet or padding from the dwelling. For example, it shall be misted to reduce dust generation during removal. The item(s) being removed shall be wrapped or otherwise sealed before removal from the worksite.
            (iii) An attached carpet located in an area of the dwelling unit with dust-lead hazards on the floor shall be thoroughly vacuumed with a HEPA vacuum or other method of equivalent efficacy if it is not to be removed.
            (f) Soil-lead hazards. (1) Interim control treatments used to control soil-lead hazards shall be performed in accordance with this section.
            (2) Soil with a lead concentration equal to or greater than 5,000 µg/g of lead shall be abated in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(e).
            (3) Acceptable interim control methods for soil lead are impermanent surface coverings and land use controls.
            (i) Impermanent surface coverings may be used to treat lead-contaminated soil if applied in accordance with the following requirements. Examples of acceptable impermanent coverings include gravel, bark, sod, and artificial turf.
            (A) Impermanent surface coverings selected shall be designed to withstand the reasonably-expected traffic. For example, if the area to be treated is heavily traveled, neither grass or sod shall be used.

            (B) When loose impermanent surface coverings such as bark or gravel are used, they shall be applied in a thickness not less than six inches deep.
            (C) The impermanent surface covering material shall not contain more than 400 µg/g of lead.
            (D) Adequate controls to prevent erosion shall be used in conjunction with impermanent surface coverings.
            (ii) Land use controls may be used to reduce exposure to soil-lead hazards only if they effectively control access to areas with soil-lead hazards. Examples of land use controls include: fencing, warning signs, and landscaping.
            (A) Land use controls shall be implemented only if residents have reasonable alternatives to using the area to be controlled.
            (B) If land use controls are used for a soil area that is subject to erosion, measures shall be taken to contain the soil and control dispersion of lead.
            [64 FR 50218, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34274, June 21, 2004; 79 FR 35043, June 19, 2014; 82 FR 4172, Jan. 13, 2017]
          
          
            § 35.1335
            Standard treatments.
            Standard treatments shall be conducted in accordance with this section.
            (a) Paint stabilization. All deteriorated paint on exterior and interior surfaces located on the residential property shall be stabilized in accordance with § 35.1330(a)(b), or abated in accordance with § 35.1325.
            (b) Smooth and cleanable horizontal surfaces. All horizontal surfaces, such as uncarpeted floors, stairs, interior window sills and window troughs, that are rough, pitted, or porous, shall be covered with a smooth, cleanable covering or coating, such as metal coil stock, plastic, polyurethane, or linoleum.
            (c) Correcting dust-generating conditions. Conditions causing friction or impact of painted surfaces shall be corrected in accordance with § 35.1330(c)(4)-(6).
            (d) Bare residential soil. Bare soil shall be treated in accordance with the requirements of § 35.1330, unless it is found not to be a soil-lead hazard in accordance with § 35.1320(b).
            (e) Safe work practices. All standard treatments described in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section shall incorporate the use of safe work practices in accordance with § 35.1350.
            (f) Clearance. A clearance examination shall be performed in accordance with § 35.1340 at the conclusion of any lead hazard reduction activities.
            (g) Qualifications. An individual performing standard treatments must meet the training and/or supervision requirements of § 35.1330(a)(4).
          
          
            § 35.1340
            Clearance.
            Clearance examinations required under subparts B, C, D, F through M, and R, of this part shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
            (a) Clearance following abatement. Clearance examinations performed following abatement of lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(e) and paragraphs (c)-(f) of this section. Such clearances shall be performed by a person certified to perform risk assessments or lead-based paint inspections.
            (b) Clearance following activities other than abatement. Clearance examinations performed following interim controls, paint stabilization, standard treatments, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance, or rehabilitation shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of this paragraph (b) and paragraphs (c) through (g) of this section. Clearance is not required if the work being cleared does not disturb painted surfaces of a total area more than that set forth in § 35.1350(d).
            (1) Qualified personnel. Clearance examinations shall be performed by:
            (i) A certified risk assessor;
            (ii) A certified lead-based paint inspector;

            (iii) A person who has successfully completed a training course for sampling technicians (or a discipline of similar purpose and title) that is developed or accepted by EPA or a State or tribal program authorized by EPA pursuant to 40 CFR part 745, subpart Q, and that is given by a training provider accredited by EPA or a State or Indian Tribe for training in lead-based paint inspection or risk assessment, provided a certified risk assessor or a certified lead-based paint inspector approves the work of the sampling technician and signs the report of the clearance examination; or
            
            (iv) A technician licensed or certified by EPA or a State or Indian Tribe to perform clearance examinations without the approval of a certified risk assessor or certified lead-based paint inspector, provided that a clearance examination by such a licensed or certified technician shall be performed only for a single-family property or individual dwelling units and associated common areas in a multi-unit property, and provided further that a clearance examination by such a licensed or certified sampling technician shall not be performed using random sampling of dwelling units or common areas in multifamily properties, except that a clearance examination performed by such a licensed or certified sampling technician is acceptable for any residential property if the clearance examination is approved and the report signed by a certified risk assessor or a certified lead-based paint inspector.
            (2) Required activities. (i) Clearance examinations shall include a visual assessment, dust sampling, submission of samples for analysis for lead in dust, interpretation of sampling results, and preparation of a report. Soil sampling is not required. Clearance examinations shall be performed in dwelling units, common areas, and exterior areas in accordance with this section and the steps set forth at 40 CFR 745.227(e)(8). If clearance is being performed after lead-based paint hazard reduction, paint stabilization, maintenance, or rehabilitation that affected exterior surfaces but did not disturb interior painted surfaces or involve elimination of an interior dust-lead hazard, interior clearance is not required if window, door, ventilation, and other openings are sealed during the exterior work. If clearance is being performed for more than 10 dwelling units of similar construction and maintenance, as in a multifamily property, random sampling for the purpose of clearance may be conducted in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(e)(9).
            (ii) The visual assessment shall be performed to determine if deteriorated paint surfaces and/or visible amounts of dust, debris, paint chips or other residue are still present. Both exterior and interior painted surfaces shall be examined for the presence of deteriorated paint. If deteriorated paint or visible dust, debris or residue are present in areas subject to dust sampling, they must be eliminated prior to the continuation of the clearance examination, except elimination of deteriorated paint is not required if it has been determined, through paint testing or a lead-based paint inspection, that the deteriorated paint is not lead-based paint. If exterior painted surfaces have been disturbed by the hazard reduction, maintenance or rehabilitation activity, the visual assessment shall include an assessment of the ground and any outdoor living areas close to the affected exterior painted surfaces. Visible dust or debris in living areas shall be cleaned up and visible paint chips on the ground shall be removed.
            (iii) Dust samples shall be wipe samples and shall be taken on floors and, where practicable, interior window sills and window troughs. Dust samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with § 35.1315 of this part.
            (iv) Clearance reports shall be prepared in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
            (c) Clearance report. When clearance is required, the designated party shall ensure that a clearance report is prepared that provides documentation of the hazard reduction or maintenance activity as well as the clearance examination. When abatement is performed, the report shall be an abatement report in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(e)(10). When another hazard reduction or maintenance activity requiring a clearance report is performed, the report shall include the following information:
            (1) The address of the residential property and, if only part of a multifamily property is affected, the specific dwelling units and common areas affected.
            (2) The following information on the clearance examination:
            (i) The date(s) of the clearance examination;
            (ii) The name, address, and signature of each person performing the clearance examination, including certification number;

            (iii) The results of the visual assessment for the presence of deteriorated paint and visible dust, debris, residue or paint chips;
            (iv) The results of the analysis of dust samples, in µg/sq.ft., by location of sample; and
            (v) The name and address of each laboratory that conducted the analysis of the dust samples, including the identification number for each such laboratory recognized by EPA under section 405(b) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2685(b)).
            (3) The following information on the hazard reduction or maintenance activity for which clearance was performed:
            (i) The start and completion dates of the hazard reduction or maintenance activity;
            (ii) The name and address of each firm or organization conducting the hazard reduction or maintenance activity and the name of each supervisor assigned;
            (iii) A detailed written description of the hazard reduction or maintenance activity, including the methods used, locations of exterior surfaces, interior rooms, common areas, and/or components where the hazard reduction activity occurred, and any suggested monitoring of encapsulants or enclosures; and
            (iv) If soil hazards were reduced, a detailed description of the location(s) of the hazard reduction activity and the method(s) used.
            (d) Standards. The clearance standards in § 35.1320(b)(2) shall apply. If test results equal or exceed the standards, the dwelling unit, worksite, or common area represented by the sample fails the clearance examination.
            (e) Clearance failure. All surfaces represented by a failed clearance sample shall be recleaned or treated by hazard reduction, and retested, until the applicable clearance level in § 35.1320(b)(2) is met.
            (f) Independence. Clearance examinations shall be performed by persons or entities independent of those performing hazard reduction or maintenance activities, unless the designated party uses qualified in-house employees to conduct clearance. An in-house employee shall not conduct both a hazard reduction or maintenance activity and its clearance examination.
            (g) Worksite clearance. Clearance of only the worksite is permitted after work covered by §§ 35.930, 35.1330, 35.1335, or 35.1355, when containment is used to ensure that dust and debris generated by the work is kept within the worksite. Otherwise, clearance must be of the entire dwelling unit, common area, or outbuilding, as applicable. When clearance is of an interior worksite that is not an entire dwelling unit, common area, or outbuilding, dust samples shall be taken for paragraph (b) of this section as follows:
            (1) Sample, from each of at least four rooms, hallways, stairwells, or common areas within the dust containment area:
            (i) The floor (one sample); and
            (ii) Windows (one interior sill sample and one trough sample, if present); and
            (2) Sample the floor in a room, hallway, stairwell, or common area connected to the dust containment area, within five feet outside the area (one sample).
            [64 FR 50218, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34274, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.1345
            Occupant protection and worksite preparation.
            This section establishes procedures for protecting dwelling unit occupants and the environment from contamination from lead-contaminated or lead-containing materials during hazard reduction activities.
            (a) Occupant protection. (1) Occupants shall not be permitted to enter the worksite during hazard reduction activities (unless they are employed in the conduct of these activities at the worksite), until after hazard reduction work has been completed and clearance, if required, has been achieved.
            (2) Occupants shall be temporarily relocated before and during hazard reduction activities to a suitable, decent, safe, and similarly accessible dwelling unit that does not have lead-based paint hazards, except if:
            (i) Treatment will not disturb lead-based paint, dust-lead hazards or soil-lead hazards;

            (ii) Only the exterior of the dwelling unit is treated, and windows, doors, ventilation intakes and other openings in or near the worksite are sealed during hazard control work and cleaned afterward, and entry free of dust-lead hazards, soil-lead hazards, and debris is provided;
            (iii) Treatment of the interior will be completed within one period of 8-daytime hours, the worksite is contained so as to prevent the release of leaded dust and debris into other areas, and treatment does not create other safety, health or environmental hazards (e.g., exposed live electrical wiring, release of toxic fumes, or on-site disposal of hazardous waste); or
            (iv) Treatment of the interior will be completed within 5 calendar days, the worksite is contained so as to prevent the release of leaded dust and debris into other areas, treatment does not create other safety, health or environmental hazards; and, at the end of work on each day, the worksite and the area within at least 10 feet (3 meters) of the containment area is cleaned to remove any visible dust or debris, and occupants have safe access to sleeping areas, and bathroom and kitchen facilities.
            (3) The dwelling unit and the worksite shall be secured against unauthorized entry, and occupants' belongings protected from contamination by dust-lead hazards and debris during hazard reduction activities. Occupants' belongings in the containment area shall be relocated to a safe and secure area outside the containment area, or covered with an impermeable covering with all seams and edges taped or otherwise sealed.
            (b) Worksite preparation. (1) The worksite shall be prepared to prevent the release of leaded dust, and contain lead-based paint chips and other debris from hazard reduction activities within the worksite until they can be safely removed. Practices that minimize the spread of leaded dust, paint chips, soil and debris shall be used during worksite preparation.
            (2) A warning sign shall be posted at each entry to a room where hazard reduction activities are conducted when occupants are present; or at each main and secondary entryway to a building from which occupants have been relocated; or, for an exterior hazard reduction activity, where it is easily read 20 feet (6 meters) from the edge of the hazard reduction activity worksite. Each warning sign shall be as described in 29 CFR 1926.62(m), except that it shall be posted irrespective of employees' lead exposure and, to the extent practicable, provided in the occupants' primary language.
          
          
            § 35.1350
            Safe work practices.
            (a) Prohibited methods. Methods of paint removal listed in § 35.140 shall not be used.
            (b) Occupant protection and worksite preparation. Occupants and their belongings shall be protected, and the worksite prepared, in accordance with § 35.1345. A person performing this work shall be trained on hazards and either be supervised or have completed successfully one of the specified courses, in accordance with § 35.1330(a)(4).
            (c) Specialized cleaning. After hazard reduction activities have been completed, the worksite shall be cleaned using cleaning methods, products, and devices that are successful in cleaning up dust-lead hazards, such as a HEPA vacuum or other method of equivalent efficacy, and lead-specific detergents or equivalent.
            (d) De minimis levels. Safe work practices are not required when maintenance or hazard reduction activities do not disturb painted surfaces that total more than:
            (1) 20 square feet (2 square meters) on exterior surfaces;
            (2) 2 square feet (0.2 square meters) in any one interior room or space; or
            (3) 10 percent of the total surface area on an interior or exterior type of component with a small surface area. Examples include window sills, baseboards, and trim.
            [64 FR 50218, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34275, June 21, 2004]
          
          
            § 35.1355
            Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance and reevaluation activities.
            (a) Maintenance. Maintenance activities shall be conducted in accordance with paragraphs (a)(2)-(6) of this section, except as provided in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

            (1) Maintenance activities need not be conducted in accordance with this section if a lead-based paint inspection indicates that no lead-based paint is present in the dwelling units, common areas, and on exterior surfaces, or a clearance report prepared in accordance with § 35.1340(a) indicates that all lead-based paint has been removed.
            (2) A visual assessment for deteriorated paint, bare soil, and the failure of any hazard reduction measures shall be performed at unit turnover and every twelve months.
            (3) (i) Deteriorated paint. All deteriorated paint on interior and exterior surfaces located on the residential property shall be stabilized in accordance with § 35.1330(a)(b), except for any paint that an evaluation has found is not lead-based paint.
            (ii) Bare soil. All bare soil shall be treated with standard treatments in accordance with § 35.1335(d) through (g), or interim controls in accordance with § 35.1330(a) and (f); except for any bare soil that a current evaluation has found is not a soil-lead hazard.
            (4) Safe work practices, in accordance with sec. 35.1350, shall be used when performing any maintenance or renovation work that disturbs paint that may be lead-based paint.
            (5) Any encapsulation or enclosure of lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards which has failed to maintain its effectiveness shall be repaired, or abatement or interim controls shall be performed in accordance with §§ 35.1325 or 35.1330, respectively.
            (6) Clearance testing of the worksite shall be performed at the conclusion of repair, abatement or interim controls in accordance with § 35.1340.
            (7) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with written notice asking occupants to report deteriorated paint and, if applicable, failure of encapsulation or enclosure, along with the name, address and telephone number of the person whom occupants should contact. The language of the notice shall be in accordance with § 35.125(c)(3). The designated party shall respond to such report and stabilize the deteriorated paint or repair the encapsulation or enclosure within 30 days.
            (b) Reevaluation. Reevaluation shall be conducted in accordance with this paragraph (b), and the designated party shall conduct interim controls of lead-based paint hazards found in the reevaluation.
            (1) Reevaluation shall be conducted if hazard reduction has been conducted to reduce lead-based paint hazards found in a risk assessment or if standard treatments have been conducted, except that reevaluation is not required if any of the following cases are met:
            (i) An initial risk assessment found no lead-based paint hazards;
            (ii) A lead-based paint inspection found no lead-based paint; or
            (iii) All lead-based paint was abated in accordance with § 35.1325, provided that no failures of encapsulations or enclosures have been found during visual assessments conducted in accordance with § 35.1355(a)(2) or during other observations by maintenance and repair workers in accordance with § 35.1355(a)(5) since the encapsulations or enclosures were performed.
            (2) Reevaluation shall be conducted to identify:
            (i) Deteriorated paint surfaces with known or suspected lead-based paint;
            (ii) Deteriorated or failed interim controls of lead-based paint hazards or encapsulation or enclosure treatments;
            (iii) Dust-lead hazards; and
            (iv) Soil that is newly bare with lead levels equal to or above the standards in § 35.1320(b)(2).
            (3) Each reevaluation shall be performed by a certified risk assessor.

            (4) Each reevaluation shall be conducted in accordance with the following schedule if a risk assessment or other evaluation has found deteriorated lead-based paint in the residential property, a soil-lead hazard, or a dust-lead hazard on a floor or interior window sill. (Window troughs are not sampled during reevaluation). The first reevaluation shall be conducted no later than two years from completion of hazard reduction. Subsequent reevaluation shall be conducted at intervals of two years, plus or minus 60 days. To be exempt from additional reevaluation, at least two consecutive reevaluations conducted at such two-year intervals must be conducted without finding lead-based paint hazards or a failure of an encapsulation or enclosure. If, however, a reevaluation finds lead-based paint hazards or a failure, at least two more consecutive reevaluations conducted at such two year intervals must be conducted without finding lead-based paint hazards or a failure.
            (5) Each reevaluation shall be performed as follows:
            (i) Dwelling units and common areas shall be selected and reevaluated in accordance with § 35.1320(b).
            (ii) The worksites of previous hazard reduction activities that are similar on the basis of their original lead-based paint hazard and type of treatment shall be grouped. Worksites within such groups shall be selected and reevaluated in accordance with § 35.1320(b).
            (6) Each reevaluation shall include reviewing available information, conducting selected visual assessment, recommending responses to hazard reduction omissions or failures, performing selected evaluation of paint, soil and dust, and recommending response to newly-found lead-based paint hazards.
            (i) Review of available information. The risk assessor shall review any available past evaluation, hazard reduction and clearance reports, and any other available information describing hazard reduction measures, ongoing maintenance activities, and relevant building operations.
            (ii) Visual assessment. The risk assessor shall:
            (A) Visually evaluate all lead-based paint hazard reduction treatments, any known or suspected lead-based paint, any deteriorated paint, and each exterior site, and shall identify any new areas of bare soil;
            (B) Determine acceptable options for controlling the hazard; and
            (C) Await the correction of any hazard reduction omission or failure and the reduction of any lead-based paint hazard before sampling any dust or soil the risk assessor determines may reasonably be associated with such hazard.
            (iii) Reaction to hazard reduction omission or failure. If any hazard reduction control has not been implemented or is failing (e.g., an encapsulant is peeling away from the wall, a paint-stabilized surface is no longer intact, or gravel covering an area of bare soil has worn away), or deteriorated lead-based paint is present, the risk assessor shall:
            (A) Determine acceptable options for controlling the hazard; and
            (B) Await the correction of any hazard reduction omission or failure and the reduction of any lead-based paint hazard before sampling any dust or soil the risk assessor determines may reasonably be associated with such hazard.
            (iv) Selected paint, soil and dust evaluation. (A) The risk assessor shall sample deteriorated paint surfaces identified during the visual assessment and have the samples analyzed, in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(b)(3)(4), but only if reliable information about lead content is unavailable.
            (B) The risk assessor shall evaluate new areas of bare soil identified during the visual assessment. Soil samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 745.227(d)(8)-(11), but only if the soil lead levels have not been previously measured.
            (C) The risk assessor shall take selected dust samples and have them analyzed. Dust samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with § 35.1320(b). At least two composite samples, one from floors and the other from interior window sills, shall be taken in each dwelling unit and common area selected. Each composite sample shall consist of four individual samples, each collected from a different room or area. If the dwelling unit contains both carpeted and uncarpeted living areas, separate floor samples are required from the carpeted and uncarpeted areas. Equivalent single-surface sampling may be used instead of composite sampling.
            (7) The risk assessor shall provide the designated party with a written report documenting the presence or absence of lead-based paint hazards, the current status of any hazard reduction and standard treatment measures used previously and any newly-conducted evaluation and hazard reduction activities. The report shall include the information in 40 CFR 745.227(d)(11), and shall:

            (i) Identify any lead-based paint hazards previously detected and discuss the effectiveness of any hazard reduction or standard treatment measures used, and list those for which no measures have been used.
            (ii) Describe any new hazards found and present the owner with acceptable control options and their accompanying reevaluation schedules.
            (iii) Identify when the next reevaluation, if any, must occur, in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
            (c) Response to the reevaluation—(1) Hazard reduction omission or failure found by a reevaluation. The designated party shall respond in accordance with paragraph (b)(6)(iii)(A) of this section to a report by the risk assessor of a hazard reduction control that has not been implemented or is failing, or that deteriorated lead-based paint is present.
            (2) Newly-identified lead-based paint hazard found by a reevaluation. The designated party shall treat each:
            (i) Dust-lead hazard or paint lead hazard by cleaning or hazard reduction measures, which are considered completed when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.
            (ii) Soil-lead hazard by hazard reduction measures, which are considered completed when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.
            [64 FR 50218, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34275, June 21, 2004]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 40
        PART 40—ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS FOR DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND ALTERATION OF PUBLICLY OWNED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
        
          Sec.
          40.1
          Purpose.
          40.2
          Definition of “residential structure”.
          40.3
          Applicability.
          40.4
          Standards.
          40.5
          [Reserved]
          40.6
          Records.
          40.7
          Availability of Accessibility Standards.
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 4153.
        
        
          Source:
          36 FR 24437, Dec. 22, 1971, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 40.1
          Purpose.
          This part prescribes standards for the design, construction, and alteration of publicly owned residential structures to insure that physically handicapped persons will have ready access to, and use of, such structures.
        
        
          § 40.2
          Definition of “residential structure”.
          (a) As used in this part, the term residential structure means a residential structure (other than a privately owned residential structure and a residential structure on a military reservation):
          (1) Constructed or altered by or on behalf of the United States;
          (2) Leased in whole or in part by the United States after August 12, 1968, if constructed or altered in accordance with plans and specifications of the United States; or
          (3) Financed in whole or in part by a grant or loan made by the United States after August 12, 1968, if such residential structure is subject to standards for design, construction, or alteration issued under authority of the law authorizing such grant or loan.
          (b) As used in this part, residential structure includes the following:
          (1) Any residential structure which, in whole or in part, is intended for occupancy by the physically handicapped or designed for occupancy by the elderly;
          (2) All elevator residential structures;
          (3) Any residential structure that contains 15 or more housing units, unless otherwise specifically prescribed by the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
          (4) Nonresidential structures appurtenant to a residential structure covered under this part.
          [36 FR 24437, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 49 FR 31620, Aug. 7, 1984; 83 FR 26361, June 7, 2018]
        
        
          § 40.3
          Applicability.

          (a) The standards prescribed in § 40.4 are applicable to residential structures designed after the effective date of this part. If the design of a structure commenced prior to that date, the standards shall be made applicable to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the head of the department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States concerned. If no design stage is involved in the construction or alteration of a residential structure, the standards of § 40.4 shall be applicable to construction or alteration for which bids are solicited after the effective date of this part.
          (b) The standards prescribed in § 40.4 are not applicable to:
          (1) Any portion of a residential structure or its grounds which need not, because of its intended use, be made accessible to, or usable by, the public or by physically handicapped persons;
          (2) The alteration of an existing residential structure to the extent that the alteration does not involve work which is related to the standards of this part; or
          (3) The alteration of an existing building, or of such portions thereof, to which application of the standards is not structurally feasible.
        
        
          § 40.4
          Standards.
          Residential structures subject to this part shall be designed, constructed or altered to ensure that physically handicapped persons have access to, and use of, these structures. This requirement is satisfied by using the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS).
          [49 FR 31621, Aug. 7, 1984, as amended at 83 FR 26361, June 7, 2018]
        
        
          § 40.5
          [Reserved]
        
        
          § 40.6
          Records.
          The administering agency's file on each contract, grant, or loan involving the design, construction, or alteration of a residential structure shall include appropriate documentation indicating: (a) That the standards prescribed in § 40.4 are applicable to and have been or will be incorporated in the residential structure, or (b) that the grant or loan has been or will be made subject to the requirement that the standards are applicable and will be incorporated in the residential structure. The file should also indicate any modification or waiver of the standards which has been issued by the Secretary of HUD.
        
        
          § 40.7
          Availability of Accessibility Standards.
          Copies of the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards are available from the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Room 5230, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410, telephone (202) 755-5404 (this is not a toll-free number). Hearing or speech-impaired individuals may call HUD's TDD number (202) 708-0113 or 1-800-877-8399 (Federal Information Relay Service TDD). (Other than the “800” number, these are not toll-free numbers.)
          [61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996]
        
      
      
        Pt. 41
        PART 41—POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSIBILITY BY THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED
        
          Sec.
          41.1
          Applicability.
          41.2
          Definitions.
          41.3
          Assurance and declaration required.
          41.4
          Waiver or modification of standards.
          41.5
          Achieving compliance.
          41.6
          Matters involving the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
        
        
          Authority:

          Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended by Pub. L. 90-480, 42 U.S.C. 4151 et seq.
          
        
        
          Source:
          44 FR 62806, Oct. 31, 1979, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 41.1
          Applicability.
          This part sets forth policies and procedures for the enforcement of standards and requirements for accessibility by the physically handicapped imposed:
          (a) For nonresidential buildings or facilities by regulations issued by the General Services Administration at subchapter D of the Federal Property Management Regulations, subpart 101-19.6—Accommodations for the Physically Handicapped, or
          (b) By regulation or contract under any other program of the Department, except a program subject only to standards or requirements at 24 CFR part 8 imposed pursuant to section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
          The policies and procedures of this part shall apply after the effective date of these regulations to all complaints received, and/or findings of noncompliance made, regarding buildings or facilities subject to such regulatory or contractural requirements.
        
        
          
          § 41.2
          Definitions.
          As used in this part, the term Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, or to the extent of any delegation of authority by the Secretary to act under this part, any other Department Official to whom authority has been delegated.
        
        
          § 41.3
          Assurance and declaration required.
          (a) Each Assistant Secretary shall, as a condition for approval of any contract or application for assistance under a program imposing standards and/or requirements for accessibility which are subject to this part, require an assurance of compliance with those standards and requirements. Such assurance shall be in a form acceptable to the Secretary.
          (b) For each project covered under this part, except a project subject to Departmental examinations and inspections as set forth in § 41.5(a), the responsible Assistant Secretary shall require a declaration as to project drawings, specifications, and other construction documents. The declaration shall be signed by the licensed, or registered, architect or engineer, or by such other responsible official as designated by HUD, who has prepared such construction documents. The declaration shall affirm that the proposed project, to the best knowledge and belief of the declarer, conforms to applicable accessibility design standards and requirements. The declaration statement shall be in a form acceptable to the Secretary.
        
        
          § 41.4
          Waiver or modification of standards.
          (a) The applicability of standards and requirements for accessibility by the physically handicapped may be waived or modified on a case-by-case basis upon a written request from a recipient of a Departmental grant or loan or from a Departmental agency leasing a building or facility.
          (b) For residential buildings or facilities, a waiver or modification may be granted only by the Secretary.
          (c) Upon the recommendation of an Assistant Secretary, a waiver or modification for nonresidential buildings or facilities may be granted only by the Administrator, General Services Administration.
          (d) No request for a waiver or modification shall be recommended for approval by an Assistant Secretary or approved by the Secretary unless the following criteria obtain:
          (1) The granting of the waiver or modification is based upon findings of fact, and is not inconsistent with the provisions of the Architectural Barriers Act, and
          (2) Application of the requirement or standard would adversely affect the purposes of the Departmental program under which the loan or grant is being provided or for which the building or facility is being leased.
          (e) Requests for a waiver or modification shall be submitted to the appropriate Assistant Secretary for review. Each request shall include:
          (1) The name and address of the requestor.
          (2) The name and location of the involved building or facility.
          (3) Any applicable plans, drawings, specifications or other descriptions of the building or facility.
          (4) The standard provision or requirement from which the requestor seeks a waiver or modification.
          (5) A description of the building or facility as to its accessibility for the physically handicapped and how the waiving or modification of a standard or requirement would affect that accessibility.
          (6) A statement of the facts which establish that the criteria of paragraph (d) of this section would be satisfied.
          (7) A description of the steps taken, or to be taken, to comply with standards and requirements for which a waiver or modification is not being requested.
          (8) Such other information as the requestor or the responsible Assistant Secretary deems appropriate or necessary.

          (f) If the responsible Assistant Secretary finds that the criteria of paragraph (d) of this section are satisfied, then he or she shall submit the request along with his or her recommendations to the Secretary for action or for referral to the Administrator, General Services Administration for action. In reviewing request for waiver and modifications, the Secretary shall assure consistent Department policy regarding the removal of architectural barriers and accessibility by physically handicapped persons.
          (g) All waivers and modifications granted pursuant to this part shall have only future effect on; and are limited to cases for which the request is made.
        
        
          § 41.5
          Achieving compliance.
          (a) Examinations and inspections. If, for any project, an Assistant Secretary requires Departmental architectural and engineering examinations of drawings and specifications or other construction documents or requires Departmental architectural and engineering inspections during or upon completion of construction, those examinations and inspections shall include a determination of compliance with standards and requirements for accessibility referenced in this part.
          (b) Periodic compliance reviews. The Secretary, in consultation with the appropriate Assistant Secretary, shall conduct surveys and investigations as deemed appropriate to achieve compliance with standards or requirements subject to this part.
          (c) Complaints. Any interested person who has reason to believe that there has been noncompliance with standards or requirements subject to this part, may, by himself or herself, or by a representative, file a written complaint with the responsible Department Official or with the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, Washington, DC 20201.
          (d) Investigations. The Secretary shall, after consultation with the appropriate Assistant Secretary, make a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, report, complaint, or any other information indicates a possible failure to comply with standards or requirements subject to this part. The investigation should include a determination of the authority under which the standards or requirements were imposed and, where appropriate, a review of the records kept pursuant to 24 CFR 40.6; the circumstances under which the building of facility was designed, constructed or altered; and other factors relevant to a determination as to whether there has been noncompliance with this part.
          (e) Resolution of matters. (1) If any examination, inspection, periodic compliance review, complaint, or investigation pursuant to this section indicates a failure to comply with the applicable standards or requirements, the Secretary shall attempt to gain voluntary compliance whenever possible.
          (2) If it has been determined that voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, the Secretary shall refer the matter to the appropriate Assistant Secretary for action pursuant to his or her program authority regarding the residential structure or other building or facility under investigation, to achieve compliance with the requirements subject to this part. The Assistant Secretary shall report to the Secretary within 30 days of the date of such referral regarding the action taken and the schedule and means of achieving compliance, except that the Secretary may specify a shorter or longer reporting period, as deeded appropriate.
          (f) Disposition of unresolved complaints. Unresolved complaints shall be referred to the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board to be processed in accordance with 36 CFR part 1150. A complaint shall be deemed unresolved if it is not resolved within 90 days of the date of the filing of the complaint with the Department.
          (g) Compliance action by other individuals. Individuals other than the Secretary may receive complaints and undertake other appropriate actions to achieve compliance with requirements subject to this part, so long as initial notification of such complaints or proposed actions is given both to the Secretary and the appropriate Assistant Secretary.
        
        
          § 41.6
          Matters involving the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
          (a) Complaints. With respect to any complaint referred to the responsible Department Official by the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (A&TBCB), the procedures set forth in this part shall apply. In such a case, the Secretary shall coordinate all investigations and/or other compliance actions to assure that the Department resolves any architectural barriers deficiencies so as to respond to the A&TBCB within its required 60-day period set forth at 36 CFR 1150.41 for the informal resolution of complaints.
          (b) Citations. The Office of General Counsel shall, with the assistance of the appropriate Assistant Secretary, respond to any citation issued by the A&TBCB to the Department alleging noncompliance with the standards issued pursuant to the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended. The applicable procedures regarding such a citation are set forth at 36 CFR part 1150.
        
      
      
        Pt. 42
        PART 42—DISPLACEMENT, RELOCATION ASSISTANCE, AND REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION FOR HUD AND HUD-ASSISTED PROGRAMS
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            42.1
            Applicable rules.
          
          
            Subpart B [Reserved]
          
          
            Subpart C—Requirements Under Section 104(d) of Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
            42.301
            Applicability.
            42.305
            Definitions.
            42.325
            Residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan.
            42.350
            Relocation assistance for displaced persons.
            42.375
            One-for-one replacement of lower-income dwelling units.
            42.390
            Appeals.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 4601, 5304, and 12705(b).
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 51757, Oct. 3, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 42.1
            Applicable rules.
            (a) URA. HUD-assisted programs and projects are subject to the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, 42 U.S.C. 4601 (URA) (42 U.S.C. 4601), and implementing regulations issued by the Department of Transportation at 49 CFR part 24.
            (b) Section 104(d). In addition to the URA, the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG), and HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) programs are also subject to section 104(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5304(d)). The provisions applicable to these programs are set out in subpart C of this part.
            (c) Additional requirements. Applicable program regulations may contain additional relocation provisions.
          
        
        
          Subpart B [Reserved]
        
        
          Subpart C—Requirements Under Section 104(d) of Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
          
            § 42.301
            Applicability.
            This subpart applies only to CDBG grants under 24 CFR part 570, subparts D, F, and I (Entitlement grants, HUD-Administered Small Cities, and State programs); grants under 24 CFR part 570, subpart G (Urban Development Action Grants), and Loan Guarantees under 24 CFR part 570, subpart M; and assistance to State and local governments under 24 CFR part 92 (HOME program).
          
          
            § 42.305
            Definitions.
            The terms Fair Market Rent (FMR), HUD, Section 8, and Uniform Relocation Act (URA) are defined in part 5 of this title. Otherwise, as used in this subpart:
            
              Comparable replacement dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that:
            (1) Meets the criteria of 49 CFR 24.2(d)(1) through (6); and

            (2) Is available at a monthly cost for rent plus estimated average monthly utility costs that does not exceed the “Total Tenant Payment” determined under § 813.107 of this title, after taking into account any rental assistance the household would receive.
            
            
              Conversion. (1) This term means altering a housing unit so that it is:
            (i) Used for nonhousing purposes;
            (ii) Used for housing purposes, but no longer meets the definition of lower-income dwelling unit; or
            (iii) Used as an emergency shelter.
            (2) A housing unit that continues to be used for housing after completion of the project is not considered a “conversion” if, upon completion of the project, the unit is owned and occupied by a person who owned and occupied the unit before the project.
            
              Displaced person means a lower-income person who, in connection with an activity assisted under any program subject to this subpart, permanently moves from real property or permanently moves personal property from real property as a direct result of the demolition or conversion of a lower-income dwelling. For purposes of this definition, a permanent move includes a move made permanently and:
            (1) After notice by the grantee to move from the property following initial submission to HUD of the consolidated plan required of entitlement grantees pursuant to § 570.302; of an application for assistance pursuant to §§ 570.426, 570.430, or 570.465 that is thereafter approved; or an application for loan assistance under § 570.701 that is thereafter approved;
            (2) After notice by the property owner to move from the property, following the submission of a request for financial assistance by the property owner (or other person in control of the site) that is thereafter approved; or
            (3) Before the dates described in this definition, if HUD or the grantee determine that the displacement was a direct result of conversion or demolition in connection with an activity subject to this subpart for which financial assistance has been requested and is thereafter approved.
            
              HCD Act of 1974 means the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.).
            
              Lower-income dwelling unit means a dwelling unit with a market rent (including utility costs) that does not exceed the applicable Fair Market Rent (FMR) for existing housing established under 24 CFR part 888.
            
              Lower-income person means, as appropriate, a “low and moderate income person” as that term is defined in § 570.3 of this title, or a “low-income family” as that term is defined in § 92.2 of this title.
            
              Recipient means CDBG grantee, UDAG grantee, or the HOME participating jurisdiction.
            
              Standard condition and substandard condition suitable for rehabilitation have the meaning the recipient has established for those terms in its HUD-approved consolidated plan pursuant to 24 CFR part 91. In the case of a unit of general local government funded by a State, either the State's definitions for those terms or the definitions adopted by the unit of general local government for this purpose shall apply.
            
              Vacant occupiable dwelling unit means a vacant dwelling unit that is in a standard condition; a vacant dwelling unit that is in a substandard condition, but is suitable for rehabilitation; or a dwelling unit in any condition that has been occupied (except by a squatter) at any time within the period beginning 3 months before the date of execution of the agreement by the recipient covering the rehabilitation or demolition.
          
          
            § 42.325
            Residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan.
            (a) Certification. (1) As part of its consolidated plan under 24 CFR part 91, the recipient must certify that it has in effect and is following a residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan.
            (2) A unit of general local government receiving funds from the State must certify to the State that it has in effect and is following a residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan, and that it will minimize displacement of persons as a result of assisted activities. The State may require the unit of general local government to follow the State's plan or permit it to develop its own plan. A unit of general local government that develops its own plan must adopt the plan and make it public.
            (b) Plan contents. (1) The plan shall indicate the steps that will be taken consistent with other goals and objectives of the program, as provided in parts 92 and 570 of this title, to minimize the displacement of families and individuals from their homes and neighborhoods as a result of any assisted activities.
            (2) The plan shall provide for relocation assistance in accordance with § 42.350.
            (3) The plan shall provide one-for-one replacement units to the extent required by § 42.375.
          
          
            § 42.350
            Relocation assistance for displaced persons.
            A displaced person may choose to receive either assistance under the URA and implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24 or assistance under section 104(d) of the HCD Act of 1974, including:
            (a) Advisory services. Advisory services at the levels described in 49 CFR part 24. A displaced person must be advised of his or her rights under the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19). If the comparable replacement dwelling to be provided to a minority person is located in an area of minority concentration, as defined in the recipient's consolidated plan, if applicable, the minority person must also be given, if possible, referrals to comparable and suitable decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwellings not located in such areas.
            (b) Moving expenses. Payment for moving expenses at the levels described in 49 CFR part 24.
            (c) Security deposits and credit checks. The reasonable and necessary cost of any security deposit required to rent the replacement dwelling unit, and for credit checks required to rent or purchase the replacement dwelling unit.
            (d) Interim living costs. The recipient shall reimburse a person for actual reasonable out-of-pocket costs incurred in connection with a displacement, including moving expenses and increased housing costs, if:
            (1) The person must relocate temporarily because continued occupancy of the dwelling unit constitutes a substantial danger to the health or safety of the person or the public; or
            (2) The person is displaced from a “lower-income dwelling unit,” none of the comparable replacement dwelling units to which the person has been referred qualifies as a lower-income dwelling unit, and a suitable lower-income dwelling unit is scheduled to become available in accordance with § 42.375.
            (e) Replacement housing assistance. Persons are eligible to receive one of the following two forms of replacement housing assistance:
            (1) Each person must be offered rental assistance equal to 60 times the amount necessary to reduce the monthly rent and estimated average monthly cost of utilities for a replacement dwelling (comparable replacement dwelling or decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwelling to which the person relocates, whichever costs less) to the “Total Tenant Payment,” as determined under part 813 of this title. All or a portion of this assistance may be offered through a certificate or voucher for rental assistance (if available) provided under Section 8. If a Section 8 certificate or voucher is provided to a person, the recipient must provide referrals to comparable replacement dwelling units where the owner is willing to participate in the Section 8 Tenant-Based Assistance Existing Housing Program (see part 982 of this title). When provided, cash assistance will generally be in installments, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 3537c; or
            (2) If the person purchases an interest in a housing cooperative or mutual housing association and occupies a decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling in the cooperative or association, the person may elect to receive a payment equal to the capitalized value of 60 times the amount that is obtained by subtracting the “Total Tenant Payment,” as determined under part 813 of this title, from the monthly rent and estimated average monthly cost of utilities at a comparable replacement dwelling unit. To compute the capitalized value, the installments shall be discounted at the rate of interest paid on passbook savings deposits by a federally insured financial institution conducting business within the recipient's jurisdiction. To the extent necessary to minimize hardship to the household, the recipient shall, subject to appropriate safeguards, issue a payment in advance of the purchase of the interest in the housing cooperative or mutual housing association.
          
          
            
            § 42.375
            One-for-one replacement of lower-income dwelling units.
            (a) Units that must be replaced. All occupied and vacant occupiable lower-income dwelling units that are demolished or converted to a use other than as lower-income dwelling units in connection with an assisted activity must be replaced with comparable lower-income dwelling units.
            (b) Acceptable replacement units. Replacement lower-income dwelling units may be provided by any government agency or private developer and must meet the following requirements:
            (1) The units must be located within the recipient's jurisdiction. To the extent feasible and consistent with other statutory priorities, the units shall be located within the same neighborhood as the units replaced.
            (2) The units must be sufficient in number and size to house no fewer than the number of occupants who could have been housed in the units that are demolished or converted. The number of occupants who could have been housed in units shall be determined in accordance with applicable local housing occupancy codes. The recipient may not replace those units with smaller units (e.g., a 2-bedroom unit with two 1-bedroom units), unless the recipient has provided the information required under paragraph (c)(7) of this section.
            (3) The units must be provided in standard condition. Replacement lower-income dwelling units may include units that have been raised to standard from substandard condition if:
            (i) No person was displaced from the unit (see definition of “displaced person” in § 42.305); and
            (ii) The unit was vacant for at least 3 months before execution of the agreement between the recipient and the property owner.
            (4) The units must initially be made available for occupancy at any time during the period beginning 1 year before the recipient makes public the information required under paragraph (d) of this section and ending 3 years after the commencement of the demolition or rehabilitation related to the conversion.
            (5) The units must be designed to remain lower-income dwelling units for at least 10 years from the date of initial occupancy. Replacement lower-income dwelling units may include, but are not limited to, public housing or existing housing receiving Section 8 project-based assistance.
            (c) Preliminary information to be made public. Before the recipient enters into a contract committing it to provide funds under programs covered by this subpart for any activity that will directly result in the demolition of lower-income dwelling units or the conversion of lower-income dwelling units to another use, the recipient must make public, and submit in writing to the HUD field office (or State, in the case of a unit of general local government funded by the State), the following information:
            (1) A description of the proposed assisted activity;
            (2) The location on a map and number of dwelling units by size (number of bedrooms) that will be demolished or converted to a use other than for lower-income dwelling units as a direct result of the assisted activity;
            (3) A time schedule for the commencement and completion of the demolition or conversion;
            (4) The location on a map and the number of dwelling units by size (number of bedrooms) that will be provided as replacement dwelling units. If such data are not available at the time of the general submission, the submission shall identify the general location on an area map and the approximate number of dwelling units by size, and information identifying the specific location and number of dwelling units by size shall be submitted and disclosed to the public as soon as it is available;
            (5) The source of funding and a time schedule for the provision of replacement dwelling units;
            (6) The basis for concluding that each replacement dwelling unit will remain a lower-income dwelling unit for at least 10 years from the date of initial occupancy; and

            (7) Information demonstrating that any proposed replacement of dwelling units with smaller dwelling units (e.g., a 2-bedroom unit with two 1-bedroom units) is consistent with the needs assessment contained in its HUD-approved consolidated plan. A unit of general local government funded by the State that is not required to submit a consolidated plan to HUD must make public information demonstrating that the proposed replacement is consistent with the housing needs of lower-income households in the jurisdiction.
            (d) Replacement not required. (1) In accordance with 42 U.S.C. 5304(d)(3), the one-for-one replacement requirement of this section does not apply to the extent the HUD field office determines, based upon objective data, that there is an adequate supply of vacant lower-income dwelling units in standard condition available on a nondiscriminatory basis within the area.
            (2) The recipient must submit directly to the HUD field office the request for determination that the one-for-one replacement requirement does not apply. Simultaneously with the submission of the request, the recipient must make the submission public and inform interested persons that they have 30 days from the date of submission to provide to HUD additional information supporting or opposing the request.
            (3) A unit of general local government funded by the State must submit the request for determination under this paragraph to the State. Simultaneously with the submission of the request, the unit of general local government must make the submission public and inform interested persons that they have 30 days from the date of submission to provide to the State additional information supporting or opposing the request. If the State, after considering the submission and the additional data, agrees with the request, the State must provide its recommendation with supporting information to the field office.
          
          
            § 42.390
            Appeals.
            A person who disagrees with the recipient's determination concerning whether the person qualifies as a “displaced person,” or with the amount of relocation assistance for which the person is eligible, may file a written appeal of that determination with the recipient. A person who is dissatisfied with the recipient's determination on his or her appeal may submit a written request for review of that determination to the HUD field office (or to the State in the case of a unit of general local government funded by the State). If the full relief is not granted, the recipient shall advise the person of his or her right to seek judicial review.
          
        
      
      
        PARTS 43-45 [RESERVED]
      
      
        Pt. 50
        PART 50—PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
        
          
            Subpart A—General: Federal Laws and Authorities
            Sec.
            50.1
            Purpose, authority, and applicability.
            50.2
            Terms and abbreviations.
            50.3
            Environmental policy.
            50.4
            Related Federal laws and authorities.
          
          
            Subpart B—General Policy: Responsibilities and Program Coverage
            50.10
            Basic environmental responsibility.
            50.11
            Responsibility of the HUD approving official.
          
          
            Subpart C—General Policy: Decision Points
            50.16
            Decision points for policy actions.
            50.17
            Decision points for projects.
          
          
            Subpart D—General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures
            50.18
            General.
            50.19
            Categorical exclusions not subject to the Federal laws and authorities cited in § 50.4.
            50.20
            Categorical exclusions subject to the Federal laws and authorities cited in § 50.4.
            50.21
            Aggregation.
            50.22
            Environmental management and monitoring.
            50.23
            Public participation.
            50.24
            HUD review of another agency's EIS.
          
          
            Subpart E—Environmental Assessments and Related Reviews
            50.31
            The EA.
            50.32
            Responsibility for environmental processing.
            50.33
            Action resulting from the assessment.
            50.34
            Time delays for exceptional circumstances.
            50.35
            Use of prior environmental assessments.
            50.36
            Updating of environmental reviews.
          
          
            
            Subpart F—Environmental Impact Statements
            50.41
            EIS policy.
            50.42
            Cases when an EIS is required.
            50.43
            Emergencies.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 4321-4335; and Executive Order 11991, 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 123.
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General: Federal Laws and Authorities
          
            § 50.1
            Purpose, authority, and applicability.
            (a) This part implements the policies of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other environmental requirements (as specified in § 50.4).
            (b) NEPA (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), establishes national policy, goals and procedures for protecting, restoring and enhancing environmental quality. NEPA is implemented by Executive Order 11514 of March 5, 1970, (3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 902) as amended by Executive Order 11991 of May 24, 1977, (3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 123) and by the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Regulations, 40 CFR parts 1500-1508.
            (c) The regulations issued by CEQ at 40 CFR parts 1500-1508 establish the basic procedural requirements for compliance with NEPA. These procedures are to be followed by all Federal agencies and are incorporated by reference into this part. This part, therefore, provides supplemental instructions to reflect the particular nature of HUD programs, and is to be used in tandem with 40 CFR parts 1500-1508 and regulations that implement authorities cited at § 50.4.
            (d) These regulations apply to all HUD policy actions (as defined in § 50.16), and to all HUD project actions (see § 50.2(a)(2)). Also, they apply to projects and activities carried out by recipients subject to environmental policy and procedures of 24 CFR part 58, when the recipient that is regulated under 24 CFR part 58 claims the lack of legal capacity to assume the Secretary's environmental review responsibilities and the claim is approved by HUD or when HUD determines to conduct an environmental review itself in place of a nonrecipient responsible entity. For programs, activities or actions not specifically identified or when there are questions regarding the applicability of this part, the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development shall be consulted.
          
          
            § 50.2
            Terms and abbreviations.
            (a) The definitions for most of the key terms or phrases contained in this part appear in 40 CFR part 1508 and in the authorities cited in § 50.4.
            The following definitions also apply to this part:
            
              Environmental review means a process for complying with NEPA (through an EA or EIS) and/or with the laws and authorities cited in § 50.4.
            
              HUD approving official means the HUD official authorized to make the approval decision for any proposed policy or project subject to this part.
            
              Project means an activity, or a group of integrally-related activities, undertaken directly by HUD or proposed for HUD assistance or insurance.
            (b) The following abbreviations are used throughout this part:
            
              AS/CPD—Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development.
            
              CEQ—Council on Environmental Quality
            
              EA—Environmental Assessment
            
              EIS—Environmental Impact Statement
            
              FONSI—Finding of No Significant Impact
            
              HUD—Department of Housing and Urban Development
            
              NEPA—National Environmental Policy Act
            
              NOI/EIS—Notice of Intent to Prepare an Environmental Impact Statement
          
          
            § 50.3
            Environmental policy.
            (a) It is the policy of the Department to reject proposals which have significant adverse environmental impacts and to encourage the modification of projects in order to enhance environmental quality and minimize environmental harm.

            (b) The HUD approving official shall consider environmental and other Departmental objectives in the decisionmaking process.
            
            (c) When EA's or EIS's or reviews under § 50.4 reveal conditions or safeguards that should be implemented once a proposal is approved in order to protect and enhance environmental quality or minimize adverse environmental impacts, such conditions or safeguards must be included in agreements or other relevant documents.
            (d) A systematic, interdisciplinary approach shall be used to assure the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the environmental design arts in making decisions.
            (e) Environmental impacts shall be evaluated on as comprehensive a scale as is practicable.
            (f) HUD offices shall begin the environmental review process at the earliest possible time so that potential conflicts between program procedures and environmental requirements are identified at an early stage.
            (g) Applicants for HUD assistance shall be advised of environmental requirements and consultation with governmental agencies and individuals shall take place at the earliest time feasible.

            (h) For HUD grant programs in which the funding approval for an applicant's program must occur before the applicant's selection of properties, the application shall contain an assurance that the applicant agrees to assist HUD to comply with this part and that the applicant shall:
            (1) Supply HUD with all available, relevant information necessary for HUD to perform for each property any environmental review required by this part;
            (2) Carry out mitigating measures required by HUD or select alternate eligible property; and
            (3) Not acquire, rehabilitate, convert, lease, repair or construct property, nor commit or expend HUD or local funds for these program activities with respect to any eligible property, until HUD approval of the property is received.
            (i)(1) It is HUD policy that all property proposed for use in HUD programs be free of hazardous materials, contamination, toxic chemicals and gasses, and radioactive substances, where a hazard could affect the health and safety of occupants or conflict with the intended utilization of the property.
            (2) HUD environmental review of multifamily and non-residential properties shall include evaluation of previous uses of the site and other evidence of contamination on or near the site, to assure that occupants of proposed sites are not adversely affected by the hazards listed in paragraph (i)(1) of this section.
            (3) Particular attention should be given to any proposed site on or in the general proximity of such areas as dumps, landfills, industrial sites or other locations that contain hazardous wastes.
            (4) HUD shall require the use of current techniques by qualified professionals to undertake investigations determined necessary.
          
          
            § 50.4
            Related Federal laws and authorities.
            HUD and/or applicants must comply, where applicable, with all environmental requirements, guidelines and statutory obligations under the following authorities and HUD standards:
            (a) Historic properties. (1) The National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.), as amended.
            (2) Executive Order 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment, May 13, 1971 (3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 559).

            (3) The Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974, which amends the Reservoir Salvage Act of 1960 (16 U.S.C. 469 et seq.).
            (4) Procedures for the Protection of Historic and Cultural Properties (Advisory Council on Historic Preservation—36 CFR part 800).
            (b) Flood insurance, floodplain management and wetland protection. (1) Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4001-4128) and the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994 (Pub.L. 103-325, 108 Stat. 2160).
            (2) HUD procedure for the implementation of Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management), (3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 117)—24 CFR part 55, Floodplain Management and Protection of Wetlands.

            (3) HUD procedure for the implementation of Executive Order 11990 (Protection of Wetlands), (3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 121)—24 CFR part 55, Floodplain Management and Protection of Wetlands.
            (c) Coastal areas protection and management. (1) The Coastal Barrier Resources Act, as amended by the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (16 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.).

            (2) The Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.), as amended.
            (d) Sole source aquifers. The Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 201, 300 et seq., and 21 U.S.C. 349), as amended. (See 40 CFR part 149.)
            (e) Endangered species. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), as amended. (See 50 CFR part 402.)
            (f) Wild and scenic rivers. The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C 1271 et seq.), as amended.
            (g) Water quality. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and later enactments.
            (h) Air quality. The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.), as amended. (See 40 CFR parts 6, 51, and 93.)
            (i) Solid waste management. (1) The Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.), and later enactments.

            (2) The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), as amended.
            (j) Farmlands protection. The Farmland Protection Policy Act of 1981 (7 U.S.C. 4201 et seq.), as amended. (See 7 CFR part 658.)
            (k) HUD environmental standards. Applicable criteria and standards specified in HUD environmental regulations (24 CFR part 51).
            (l) Environmental justice. Executive Order 12898—Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations (3 CFR, 1994 Comp., p. 859).
            [61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 68728, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
        
        
          Subpart B—General Policy: Responsibilities and Program Coverage
          
            § 50.10
            Basic environmental responsibility.
            (a) It is the responsibility of all Assistant Secretaries, the General Counsel, and the HUD approving official to assure that the requirements of this part are implemented.
            (b) The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development (A/S CPD), represented by the Office of Community Viability, whose Director shall serve as the Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer (DECO), is assigned the overall Departmental responsibility for environmental policies and procedures for compliance with NEPA and the related laws and authorities. To the extent permitted by applicable laws and the CEQ regulations, the A/S CPD shall approve waivers and exceptions or establish criteria for exceptions from the requirements of this part.
          
          
            § 50.11
            Responsibility of the HUD approving official.
            (a) The HUD approving official shall make an independent evaluation of the environmental issues, take responsibility for the scope and content of the compliance finding, EA or EIS, and make the environmental finding, where applicable. (Also, see § 50.32.)

            (b) Copies of environmental reviews and findings shall be maintained in the project file for projects, in the rules docket files for Federal Register publications, and in program files for non-Federal Register policy documents.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—General Policy: Decision Points
          
            § 50.16
            Decision points for policy actions.

            Either an EA and FONSI or an EIS on all policy actions not meeting the criteria of § 50.19 shall be completed prior to the approval action. Policy actions include all proposed Federal Register policy documents and other policy-related Federal actions (40 CFR 1508.18). The decision as to whether a proposed policy action is categorically excluded from an EA shall be made by the Program Environmental Clearance Officer (PECO) in Headquarters as early as possible. Where the PECO has any doubt as to whether a proposed action qualifies for exclusion, the PECO shall request a determination by the AS/CPD. The EA and FONSI may be combined into a single document.
          
          
            § 50.17
            Decision points for projects.
            Either an EA and FONSI or an EIS for individual projects shall be completed before the applicable program decision points below for projects not meeting the criteria of § 50.20. Compliance with applicable authorities cited in § 50.4 shall be completed before the applicable program decision points below unless the project meets the criteria for exclusion under § 50.19.
            (a) New Construction. (1) Project mortgage insurance or other financial assistance for multifamily housing projects (including sections 202 and 811), nursing homes, hospitals, group practice facilities and manufactured home parks: Issuance of Site Appraisal and Market Analysis (SAMA) Letter or initial equivalent indication of HUD approval of a specific site;
            (2) Public Housing: HUD approval of the proposal.
            
            (3) Loan Guarantee Recovery Fund Program (24 CFR part 573). HUD issuance of a letter of commitment or initial equivalent indication of HUD approval.
            (b) Rehabilitation projects. Use the decision points under “new construction” for HUD programs cited in paragraph (a) of this section; otherwise the decision point is the HUD project approval.
            (c) Public housing modernization programs. HUD approval of the modernization grants.
            (d) Property Disposition. Multifamily structures, college housing, nursing homes, manufactured homes and parks, group practice facilities, vacant land and one to four family structures: HUD approval of the Disposition Program.
            (e) HUD programs subject to 24 CFR part 58. For cases in which HUD exercises environmental responsibility under this part where a recipient lacks legal capacity to do so or HUD determines to do so in place of a nonrecipient responsible entity under 24 CFR part 58 (see § 50.1(d)), the decision point is: HUD's execution of an agreement or contract, whichever comes first, or in the case of Section 8 Project-Based Certificate Assistance and Moderate Rehabilitation, HUD notification to the Public Housing Agency to proceed with execution of an Agreement to Enter into Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) Contract.
            (f) Section 50.3(h). Notwithstanding the other paragraphs of this section, the decision point for grant programs in which HUD approval of funding for an applicant's program must occur before the applicant's selection of properties for use in its program is: HUD approval of specific properties.
            (g) Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act Programs. Where the recipients are nonprofit organizations or governmental entities with special or limited purpose powers, the decision point is: HUD project approval.
            (h) Programs not specifically covered in this section. Consult with the AS/CPD for decision points.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures
          
            § 50.18
            General.
            (a) The Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer (DECO) shall establish a prescribed format to be used to document compliance with NEPA and the Federal laws and authorities cited in § 50.4. The DECO may prescribe alternative formats as necessary to meet specific program needs.
            (b) HUD may, from time to time, complete programmatic reviews that further avoid the necessity of complying with the laws and authorities in § 50.4 on a property-by-property basis.
            [61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, as amended at 79 FR 49228, Aug. 20, 2014]
          
          
            § 50.19
            Categorical exclusions not subject to the Federal laws and authorities cited in § 50.4.
            (a) General. The activities and related approvals of policy documents listed in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section are not subject to the individual compliance requirements of the Federal laws and authorities cited in § 50.4, unless otherwise indicated below. These activities and approvals of policy documents are also categorically excluded from the EA required by NEPA except in extraordinary circumstances (§ 50.20(b)). HUD approval or implementation of these categories of activities and policy documents does not require environmental review, because they do not alter physical conditions in a manner or to an extent that would require review under NEPA or the other laws and authorities cited at § 50.4.
            (b) Activities. (1) Environmental and other studies, resource identification and the development of plans and strategies.
            (2) Information and financial advisory services.
            (3) Administrative and management expenses.
            (4) Public services that will not have a physical impact or result in any physical changes, including but not limited to services concerned with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug abuse, education, counseling, energy conservation and welfare or recreational needs.
            (5) Inspections and testing of properties for hazards or defects.
            (6) Purchase of insurance.
            (7) Purchase of tools.
            (8) Engineering or design costs.
            (9) Technical assistance and training.
            (10) Assistance for temporary or permanent improvements that do not alter environmental conditions and are limited to protection, repair or restoration activities necessary only to control or arrest the effects from disasters or imminent threats to public safety including those resulting from physical deterioration.
            (11) Tenant-based rental assistance.
            (12) Supportive services including, but not limited to, health care, housing services, permanent housing placement, day care, nutritional services, short-term payments for rent/mortgage/utility costs, and assistance in gaining access to local, State, and Federal government benefits and services.
            (13) Operating costs including maintenance, security, operation, utilities, furnishings, equipment, supplies, staff training and recruitment and other incidental costs; however, in the case of equipment, compliance with § 50.4(b)(1) is required.
            (14) Economic development activities, including but not limited to, equipment purchase, inventory financing, interest subsidy, operating expenses and similar costs not associated with construction or physical expansion of existing facilities; however, in the case of equipment purchase, compliance with § 50.4(b)(1) is required.
            (15) Activities to assist homebuyers to purchase existing dwelling units or dwelling units under construction, including closing costs and downpayment assistance, interest buydowns, and similar activities that result in the transfer of title.
            (16) Housing pre-development costs including legal, consulting, developer and other costs related to site options, project financing, administrative costs and fees for loan commitments, zoning approvals, and other related activities which do not have a physical impact.
            (17) HUD's insurance of one-to-four family mortgages under the Direct Endorsement program, the insurance of one-to-four family mortgages under the Lender Insurance program, and HUD's guarantee of loans for one-to-four family dwellings under the Direct Guarantee procedure for the Indian Housing loan guarantee program, without any HUD review or approval before the completion of construction or rehabilitation and the loan closing; and HUD's acceptance for insurance of loans insured under Title I of the National Housing Act; however, compliance with §§ 50.4(b)(1) and (c)(1) and 24 CFR 51.303(a)(3) is required.
            (18) HUD's endorsement of one-to-four family mortgage insurance for proposed construction under Improved Area processing; however, the Appraiser/Review Appraiser Checksheet (Form HUD-54891) must be completed.

            (19) Activities of the Government National Mortgage Association under Title III of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1716 et seq.).

            (20) Activities under the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act (15 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).
            (21) Refinancing of HUD-insured mortgages that will not allow new construction or rehabilitation, nor result in any physical impacts or changes except for routine maintenance; however, compliance with § 50.4(b)(1) is required.
            (22) Approval of the sale of a HUD-held mortgage.
            
            (23) Approval of the foreclosure sale of a property with a HUD-held mortgage; however, appropriate restrictions will be imposed to protect historic properties.
            (24) HUD guarantees under the Loan Guarantee Recovery Fund Program (24 CFR part 573) of loans that refinance existing loans and mortgages, where any new construction or rehabilitation financed by the existing loan or mortgage has been completed prior to the filing of an application under the program, and the refinancing will not allow further construction or rehabilitation, nor result in any physical impacts or changes except for routine maintenance; however, compliance with §§ 50.4 (b)(1) and (c)(1) and 51.303(a) is required.
            (c) Approval of policy documents. (1) Approval of rules and notices proposed for publication in the Federal Register or other policy documents that do not:
            (i) Direct, provide for assistance or loan and mortgage insurance for, or otherwise govern or regulate, real property acquisition, disposition, leasing (other than tenant-based rental assistance), rehabilitation, alteration, demolition, or new construction; or
            (ii) Establish, revise, or provide for standards for construction or construction materials, manufactured housing, or occupancy.
            (2) Approval of policy documents that amend an existing document where the existing document as a whole would not fall within an exclusion in this paragraph (c) but the amendment by itself would do so;
            (3) Approval of policy documents that set out fair housing or nondiscrimination standards or enforcement procedures or provide for assistance in promoting or enforcing fair housing or nondiscrimination;

            (4) Approval of handbooks, notices and other documents that provide operating instructions and procedures in connection with activities under a Federal Register document that has previously been subject to a required environmental review.

            (5) Approval of a Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) that provides funding under, and does not alter any environmental requirements of, a regulation or program guideline that was previously published in the Federal Register, provided that
            (i) The NOFA specifically refers to the environmental review provisions of the regulation or guideline; or
            (ii) The regulation or guideline contains no environmental review provisions because it concerns only activities listed in paragraph (b) of this section.
            (6) Statutorily required and/or discretionary establishment and review of interest rates, loan limits, building cost limits, prototype costs, fair market rent schedules, HUD-determined prevailing wage rates, income limits and exclusions with regard to eligibility for or calculation of HUD housing assistance or rental assistance, and similar rate and cost determinations and related external administrative or fiscal requirements or procedures which do not constitute a development decision that affects the physical condition of specific project areas or building sites.
            [61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 15802, Apr. 2, 1997; 63 FR 48990, Sept. 11, 1998; 68 FR 56127, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 50.20
            Categorical exclusions subject to the Federal laws and authorities cited in § 50.4.
            (a) The following actions, activities, and programs are categorically excluded from the NEPA requirements for further review in an Environmental Assessment or an Environmental Impact Statement as set forth in this part. They are not excluded from individual compliance requirements of other environmental statutes, Executive orders, and HUD standards cited in § 50.4, where appropriate. Where the responsible official determines that any proposed action identified below may have an environmental effect because of extraordinary circumstances (40 CFR 1508.4), the requirements for further review under NEPA shall apply (see paragraph (b) of this section).
            (1) Special projects directed to the removal of material and architectural barriers that restrict the mobility of and accessibility to elderly and persons with disabilities.

            (2) Rehabilitation of buildings and improvements when the following conditions are met:
            
            (i) In the case of a building for residential use (with one to four units), the density is not increased beyond four units, the land use is not changed, and the footprint of the building is not increased in a floodplain or in a wetland;
            (ii) In the case of multifamily residential buildings:
            (A) Unit density is not changed more than 20 percent;
            (B) The project does not involve changes in land use from residential to non-residential; and
            (C) The estimated cost of rehabilitation is less than 75 percent of the total estimated cost of replacement after rehabilitation.
            (iii) In the case of non-residential structures, including commercial, industrial, and public buildings:
            (A) The facilities and improvements are in place and will not be changed in size nor capacity by more than 20 percent; and
            (B) The activity does not involve a change in land use, such as from non-residential to residential, commercial to industrial, or from one industrial use to another.
            (3)(i) An individual action on up to four dwelling units where there is a maximum of four units on any one site. The units can be four one-unit buildings or one four-unit building or any combination in between; or
            (ii) An individual action on a project of five or more housing units developed on scattered sites when the sites are more than 2,000 feet apart and there are not more than four housing units on any one site.
            (iii) Paragraphs (a)(3)(i) and (ii) of this section do not apply to rehabilitation of a building for residential use (with one to four units) (see paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section).
            (4) Acquisition (including leasing) or disposition of, or equity loans on an existing structure, or acquisition (including leasing) of vacant land provided that the structure or land acquired, financed, or disposed of will be retained for the same use.
            (5) Purchased or refinanced housing and medical facilities under section 223(f) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715n).
            (6) Mortgage prepayments or plans of action (including incentives) under 24 CFR part 248.
            (b) For categorical exclusions having the potential for significant impact because of extraordinary circumstances, HUD must prepare an EA in accordance with subpart E. If it is evident without preparing an EA that an EIS is required pursuant to § 50.42, HUD should proceed directly to the preparation of an EIS in accordance with subpart F.
            [61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56127, Sept. 29, 2003; 79 FR 49229, Aug. 20, 2014]
          
          
            § 50.21
            Aggregation.
            Activities which are geographically related and are logical parts of a composite of contemplated HUD projects shall be evaluated together.
          
          
            § 50.22
            Environmental management and monitoring.
            An Environmental Management and Monitoring Program shall be established prior to project approval when it is deemed necessary by the HUD approving official. The program shall be part of the approval document and must:
            (a) Be concurred in by the Field Environmental Clearance Officer (FECO) (in the absence of a FECO, by the Program Environmental Clearance Officer in Headquarters) and any cooperating agencies;
            (b) Contain specific standards, safeguards and commitments to be completed during project implementation;
            (c) Identify the staff who will be responsible for the post-approval inspection; and
            (d) Specify the time periods for conducting the evaluation and monitoring the applicant's compliance with the project agreements.
          
          
            § 50.23
            Public participation.

            HUD shall inform the affected public about NEPA-related hearings, public meetings, and the availability of environmental documents (see 40 CFR 1506.6(b)) in accordance with this section. Where project actions result in a FONSI, the FONSI will be available in the project file. The local HUD field office may be contacted by persons who wish to review the FONSI. In all cases, HUD shall mail notices to those who have requested them. Additional efforts for involving the public in specific notice or compliance requirements shall be made in accord with the implementing procedures of the laws and authorities cited in § 50.4. Notices pertaining to an EIS or an amendment to an EIS or a FONSI subject to § 50.34 shall be given to the public in accordance with paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section.

            (a) A NOI/EIS shall be forwarded to the AS/CPD to the attention of the Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer for publication in the Federal Register.
            
            (b) Notices will be bilingual if the affected public includes a significant portion of non-English speaking persons and will identify a date when the official public involvement element of the proposed action is to be completed and HUD internal processing is to continue.
            (c) All required notices shall be published in an appropriate local printed news medium, and sent to individuals and groups known to be interested in the proposed action.
            (d) All notices shall inform the public where additional information may be obtained.
          
          
            § 50.24
            HUD review of another agency's EIS.
            Where another agency's EIS is referred to the HUD Field Office in whose jurisdiction the project is located, the Field Environmental Clearance Officer shall determine whether HUD has an interest in the EIS and, if so, will review and comment. Any EIS received from another Federal agency requesting comment on legislative proposals, regulations, or other policy documents shall be sent to the AS/CPD for comment, and the AS/CPD shall provide the General Counsel the opportunity for comment.
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Environmental Assessments and Related Reviews
          
            § 50.31
            The EA.
            (a) The Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer (DECO) shall establish a prescribed format used for the environmental analysis and documentation of projects and activities under subpart E. The DECO may prescribe alternative formats as necessary to meet specific program needs.
            (b) The program representative shall obtain interdisciplinary assistance from professional experts and other HUD staff as needed. Additional information may also be requested of the sponsor/applicant. HUD is responsible for assessing and documenting the extent of the environmental impact.
            [61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, as amended at 79 FR 49229, Aug. 20, 2014]
          
          
            § 50.32
            Responsibility for environmental processing.
            The program staff in the HUD office responsible for processing the project application or recommending a policy action is responsible for conducting the compliance finding, EA, or EIS. The collection of data and studies as part of the information contained in the environmental review may be done by an applicant or the applicant's contractor. The HUD program staff may use any information supplied by the applicant or contractor, provided HUD independently evaluates the information, will be responsible for its accuracy, supplements the information, if necessary, to conform to the requirements of this part, and prepares the environmental finding. Assessments for projects over 200 lots/dwelling units or beds shall be sent to the Field Environmental Clearance Officer (FECO) or, in the absence of a FECO, to the Program Environmental Clearance Officer in Headquarters for review and comment.
          
          
            § 50.33
            Action resulting from the assessment.
            (a) A proposal may be accepted without modifications if the EA indicates that the proposal will not significantly (see 40 CFR 1508.27) affect the quality of the human environment and a FONSI is prepared.
            (b) A proposal may be accepted with modifications provided that:
            (1) Changes have been made that would reduce adverse environmental impact to acceptable and insignificant levels; and

            (2) An Environmental Management and Monitoring Program is developed in accordance with § 50.22 when it is deemed necessary by the HUD approving official.
            (c) A proposal should be rejected if significant and unavoidable adverse environmental impacts would still exist after modifications have been made to the proposal and an EIS is not prepared.
            (d) A proposal (if not rejected) shall require an EIS if the EA indicates that significant environmental impacts would result.
          
          
            § 50.34
            Time delays for exceptional circumstances.
            (a) Under the circumstances described in this section, the FONSI must be made available for public review for 30 calendar days before a final decision is made whether to prepare an EIS and before the HUD action is taken. The circumstances are:
            (1) When the proposed action is, or is closely similar to, one which normally requires the preparation of an EIS pursuant to § 50.42(b) but it is determined, as a result of an EA or in the course of preparation of a draft EIS, that the proposed action will not have a significant impact on the human environment; or
            (2) When the nature of the proposed action is without precedent and does not appear to require more than an assessment.
            (b) In such cases, the FONSI must be concurred in by the AS/CPD and the Program Environmental Clearance Officer. Notice of the availability of the FONSI shall be given to the public in accordance with paragraphs (a) through (d) of § 50.23.
          
          
            § 50.35
            Use of prior environmental assessments.
            When other Federal, State, or local agencies have prepared an EA or other environmental analysis for a proposed HUD project, these documents should be requested and used to the extent possible. HUD must, however, conduct the environmental analysis and prepare the EA and be responsible for the required environmental finding.
          
          
            § 50.36
            Updating of environmental reviews.
            The environmental review must be re-evaluated and updated when the basis for the original environmental or compliance findings is affected by a major change requiring HUD approval in the nature, magnitude or extent of a project and the project is not yet complete. A change only in the amount of financing or mortgage insurance involved does not normally require the environmental review to be re-evaluated or updated.
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Environmental Impact Statements
          
            § 50.41
            EIS policy.
            EIS's will be prepared and considered in program determinations pursuant to the general environmental policy stated in § 50.3 and 40 CFR 1505.2 (b) and (c).
          
          
            § 50.42
            Cases when an EIS is required.
            (a) An EIS is required if the proposal is determined to have a significant impact on the human environment pursuant to subpart E.
            (b) An EIS will normally be required if the proposal:
            (1) Would provide a site or sites for hospitals or nursing homes containing a total of 2,500 or more beds; or
            (2) Would remove, demolish, convert, or substantially rehabilitate 2,500 or more existing housing units (but not including rehabilitation projects categorically excluded under § 50.20), or which would result in the construction or installation of 2,500 or more housing units, or which would provide sites for 2,500 or more housing units.
            (c) When the environmental concerns of one or more Federal authorities cited in § 50.4 will be affected by the proposal, the cumulative impact of all such effects should be assessed to determine whether an EIS is required. Where all of the affected authorities provide alternative procedures for resolution, those procedures should be used in lieu of an EIS.
          
          
            § 50.43
            Emergencies.

            In cases of national emergency and disasters or cases of imminent threat to health and safety or other emergency which require the taking of an action with significant environmental impact, the provisions of 40 CFR 1506.11 and of any applicable § 50.4 authorities which provide for emergencies shall apply.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 51
        PART 51—ENVIRONMENTAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS
        
          
            Subpart A—General Provisions
            Sec.
            51.1
            Purpose.
            51.2
            Authority.
            51.3
            Responsibilities.
            51.4
            Program coverage.
          
          
            Subpart B—Noise Abatement and Control
            51.100
            Purpose and authority.
            51.101
            General policy.
            51.102
            Responsibilities.
            51.103
            Criteria and standards.
            51.104
            Special requirements.
            51.105
            Exceptions.
            51.106
            Implementation.
            Appendix I to Subpart B of Part 51—Definition of Acoustical Quantities
          
          
            Subpart C—Siting of HUD-Assisted Projects Near Hazardous Operations Handling Conventional Fuels or Chemicals of an Explosive or Flammable Nature
            51.200
            Purpose.
            51.201
            Definitions.
            51.202
            Approval of HUD-assisted projects.
            51.203
            Safety standards.
            51.204
            HUD-assisted hazardous facilities.
            51.205
            Mitigating measures.
            51.206
            Implementation.
            51.207
            Special circumstances.
            51.208
            Reservation of administrative and legal rights.
            Appendix I to Subpart C of Part 51—Specific Hazardous Substances
            Appendix II to Subpart C of Part 51—Development of Standards; Calculation Methods
          
          
            Subpart D—Siting of HUD Assisted Projects in Runway Clear Zones at Civil Airports and Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones at Military Airfields
            51.300
            Purpose.
            51.301
            Definitions.
            51.302
            Coverage.
            51.303
            General policy.
            51.304
            Responsibilities.
            51.305
            Implementation.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Source:
          44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General Provisions
          
            § 51.1
            Purpose.
            The Department of Housing and Urban Development is providing program Assistant Secretaries and administrators and field offices with environmental standards, criteria and guidelines for determining project acceptability and necessary mitigating measures to insure that activities assisted by the Department achieve the goal of a suitable living environment.
          
          
            § 51.2
            Authority.

            This part implements the Department's responsibilities under: The National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.); sec. 2 of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 U.S.C. 1441); secs. 2 and 7(d) of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3531 and 3535(d)); the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321); and the other statutes that are referred to in this part.
            [61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.3
            Responsibilities.

            The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development is responsible for administering HUD's environmental criteria and standards as set forth in this part. The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development may be assisted by HUD officials in implementing the responsibilities established by this part. HUD will identify these HUD officials and their specific responsibilities through Federal Register notice.
            [61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.4
            Program coverage.
            Environmental standards shall apply to all HUD actions except where special provisions and exemptions are contained in each subpart.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Noise Abatement and Control
          
            § 51.100
            Purpose and authority.
            (a) It is the purpose of this subpart B to:

            (1) Call attention to the threat of noise pollution;
            
            (2) Encourage the control of noise at its source in cooperation with other Federal departments and agencies;
            (3) Encourage land use patterns for housing and other noise sensitive urban needs that will provide a suitable separation between them and major noise sources;
            (4) Generally prohibit HUD support for new construction of noise sensitive uses on sites having unacceptable noise exposure;
            (5) Provide policy on the use of structural and other noise attenuation measures where needed; and
            (6) Provide policy to guide implementation of various HUD programs.
            (b) Authority. Specific authorities for noise abatement and control are contained in the Noise Control Act of 1972, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4901 et seq.); and the General Services Administration, Federal Management Circular 75-2; Compatible Land Uses at Federal Airfields.
            
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.101
            General policy.
            (a) It is HUD's general policy to provide minimum national standards applicable to HUD programs to protect citizens against excessive noise in their communities and places of residence.
            (1) Planning assistance. HUD requires that grantees give adequate consideration to noise exposures and sources of noise as an integral part of the urban environment when HUD assistance is provided for planning purposes, as follows:
            (i) Particular emphasis shall be placed on the importance of compatible land use planning in relation to airports, highways and other sources of high noise.
            (ii) Applicants shall take into consideration HUD environmental standards impacting the use of land.
            (2) Activities subject to 24 CFR part 58. (i) Responsible entities under 24 CFR part 58 must take into consideration the noise criteria and standards in the environmental review process and consider ameliorative actions when noise sensitive land development is proposed in noise exposed areas. Responsible entities shall address deviations from the standards in their environmental reviews as required in 24 CFR part 58.
            (ii) Where activities are planned in a noisy area, and HUD assistance is contemplated later for housing and/or other noise sensitive activities, the responsible entity risks denial of the HUD assistance unless the HUD standards are met.
            (3) HUD support for new construction. HUD assistance for the construction of new noise sensitive uses is prohibited generally for projects with unacceptable noise exposures and is discouraged for projects with normally unacceptable noise exposure. (Standards of acceptability are contained in § 51.103(c).) This policy applies to all HUD programs providing assistance, subsidy or insurance for housing, manufactured home parks, nursing homes, hospitals, and all programs providing assistance or insurance for land development, redevelopment or any other provision of facilities and services which are directed to making land available for housing or noise sensitive development. The policy does not apply to research demonstration projects which do not result in new construction or reconstruction, flood insurance, interstate land sales egistration, or any action or emergency assistance under disaster assistance provisions or appropriations which are provided to save lives, protect property, protect public health and safety, remove debris and wreckage, or assistance that has the effect of restoring facilities substantially as they existed prior to the disaster.
            (4) HUD support for existing construction. Noise exposure by itself will not result in the denial of HUD support for the resale and purchase of otherwise acceptable existing buildings. However, environmental noise is a marketability factor which HUD will consider in determining the amount of insurance or other assistance that may be given.
            (5) HUD support of modernization and rehabilitation. For modernization projects located in all noise exposed areas, HUD shall encourage noise attenuation features in alterations. For major or substantial rehabilitation projects in the Normally Unacceptable and Unacceptable noise zones, HUD actively shall seek to have project sponsors incorporate noise attenuation features, given the extent and nature of the rehabilitation being undertaken and the level or exterior noise exposure. In Unacceptable noise zones, HUD shall strongly encourage conversion of noise-exposed sites to land uses compatible with the high noise levels.
            (6) Research, guidance and publications. HUD shall maintain a continuing program designed to provide new knowledge of noise abatement and control to public and private bodies, to develop improved methods for anticipating noise encroachment, to develop noise abatement measures through land use and building construction practices, and to foster better understanding of the consequences of noise. It shall be HUD's policy to issue guidance documents periodically to assist HUD personnel in assigning an acceptability category to projects in accordance with noise exposure standards, in evaluating noise attenuation measures, and in advising local agencies about noise abatement strategies. The guidance documents shall be updated periodically in accordance with advances in the state-of-the-art.
            (7) Construction equipment, building equipment and appliances. HUD shall encourage the use of quieter construction equipment and methods in population centers, the use of quieter equipment and appliances in buildings, and the use of appropriate noise abatement techniques in the design of residential structures with potential noise problems.
            (8) Exterior noise goals. It is a HUD goal that exterior noise levels do not exceed a day-night average sound level of 55 decibels. This level is recommended by the Environmental Protection Agency as a goal for outdoors in residential areas. The levels recommended by EPA are not standards and do not take into account cost or feasibility. For the purposes of this regulation and to meet other program objectives, sites with a day-night average sound level of 65 and below are acceptable and are allowable (see Standards in § 51.103(c)).
            (9) Interior noise goals. It is a HUD goal that the interior auditory environment shall not exceed a day-night average sound level of 45 decibels. Attenuation measures to meet these interior goals shall be employed where feasible. Emphasis shall be given to noise sensitive interior spaces such as bedrooms. Minimum attenuation requirements are prescribed in § 51.104(a).
            (10) Acoustical privacy in multifamily buildings. HUD shall require the use of building design and acoustical treatment to afford acoustical privacy in multifamily buildings pursuant to requirements of the Minimum Property Standards.
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 50 FR 9268, Mar. 7, 1985; 61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.102
            Responsibilities.
            (a) Surveillance of noise problem areas. Appropriate field staff shall maintain surveillance of potential noise problem areas and advise local officials, developers, and planning groups of the unacceptability of sites because of noise exposure at the earliest possible time in the decision process. Every attempt shall be made to insure that applicants' site choices are consistent with the policy and standards contained herein.
            (b) Notice to applicants. At the earliest possible stage, HUD program staff shall:
            (1) Determine the suitability of the acoustical environment of proposed projects;
            (2) Notify applicants of any adverse or questionable situations; and
            (3) Assure that prospective applicants are apprised of the standards contained herein so that future site choices will be consistent with these standards.
            (c) Interdepartmental coordination. HUD shall foster appropriate coordination between field offices and other departments and agencies, particularly the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Transportation, Department of Defense representatives, and the Department of Veterans Affairs. HUD staff shall utilize the acceptability standards in commenting on the prospective impacts of transportation facilities and other noise generators in the Environmental Impact Statement review process.
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 54 FR 39525, Sept. 27, 1989; 61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.103
            Criteria and standards.
            These standards apply to all programs as indicated in § 51.101.
            (a) Measure of external noise environments. The magnitude of the external noise environment at a site is determined by the value of the day-night average sound level produced as the result of the accumulation of noise from all sources contributing to the external noise environment at the site. Day-night average sound level, abbreviated as DNL and symbolized as Ldn, is the 24-hour average sound level, in decibels, obtained after addition of 10 decibels to sound levels in the night from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. Mathematical expressions for average sound level and day-night average sound level are stated in the Appendix I to this subpart.
            (b) Loud impulsive sounds. On an interim basis, when loud impulsive sounds, such as explosions or sonic booms, are experienced at a site, the day-night average sound level produced by the loud impulsive sounds alone shall have 8 decibels added to it in assessing the acceptability of the site (see appendix I to this subpart). Alternatively, the C-weighted day-night average sound level (LCdn) may be used without the 8 decibel addition, as indicated in § 51.106(a)(3). Methods for assessing the contribution of loud impulsive sounds to day-night average sound level at a site and mathematical expressions for determining whether a sound is classed as “loud impulsive” are provided in the appendix I to this subpart.
            (c) Exterior standards. (1) The degree of acceptability of the noise environment at a site is determined by the sound levels external to buildings or other facilities containing noise sensitive uses. The standards shall usually apply at a location 2 meters (6.5 feet) from the building housing noise sensitive activities in the direction of the predominant noise source. Where the building location is undetermined, the standards shall apply 2 meters (6.5 feet) from the building setback line nearest to the predominant noise source. The standards shall also apply at other locations where it is determined that quiet outdoor space is required in an area ancillary to the principal use on the site.
            (2) The noise environment inside a building is considered acceptable if: (i) The noise environment external to the building complies with these standards, and (ii) the building is constructed in a manner common to the area or, if of uncommon construction, has at least the equivalent noise attenuation characteristics.
            
              Site Acceptability Standards
              
                 
                Day-night average sound level (in decibels)
                Special approvals and requirements
              
              
                Acceptable
                Not exceeding 65 dB(1)
                None.
              
              
                Normally Unacceptable
                Above 65 dB but not exceeding 75 dB
                Special Approvals (2)
              
              
                 
                
                Environmental Review (3).
              
              
                 
                
                Attenuation (4).
              
              
                Unacceptable
                Above 75 dB
                Special Approvals (2).
              
              
                 
                
                Environmental Review (3).
              
              
                 
                
                Attenuation (5).
              
              Notes: (1) Acceptable threshold may be shifted to 70 dB in special circumstances pursuant to § 51.105(a).
              (2) See § 51.104(b) for requirements.
              (3) See § 51.104(b) for requirements.
              (4) 5 dB additional attenuation required for sites above 65 dB but not exceeding 70 dB and 10 dB additional attenuation required for sites above 70 dB but not exceeding 75 dB. (See § 51.104(a).)
              (5) Attenuation measures to be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for CPD for approval on a case-by-case basis.
            
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 49 FR 12214, Mar. 29, 1984]
          
          
            
            § 51.104
            Special requirements.
            (a)(1) Noise attenuation. Noise attenuation measures are those required in addition to attenuation provided by buildings as commonly constructed in the area, and requiring open windows for ventilation. Measures that reduce external noise at a site shall be used wherever practicable in preference to the incorporation of additional noise attenuation in buildings. Building designs and construction techniques that provide more noise attenuation than typical construction may be employed also to meet the noise attenuation requirements.
            (2) Normally unacceptable noise zones and unacceptable noise zones. Approvals in Normally Unacceptable Noise Zones require a minimum of 5 decibels additional sound attenuation for buildings having noise-sensitive uses if the day-night average sound level is greater than 65 decibels but does not exceed 70 decibels, or a minimum of 10 decibels of additional sound attenuation if the day-night average sound level is greater than 70 decibels but does not exceed 75 decibels. Noise attenuation measures in Unacceptable Noise Zones require the approval of the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, or the Certifying Officer for activities subject to 24 CFR part 58. (See § 51.104(b)(2).)
            (b) Environmental review requirements. Environmental reviews shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of 24 CFR parts 50 and 58, as applicable, or other environmental regulations issued by the Department. These requirements are hereby modified for all projects proposed in the Normally Unacceptable and Unacceptable noise exposure zones as follows:
            (1) Normally unacceptable noise zone. (i) All projects located in the Normally Unacceptable Noise Zone require a Special Environmental Clearance except an EIS is required for a proposed project located in a largely undeveloped area, or where the HUD action is likely to encourage the establishment of incompatible land use in this noise zone.
            (ii) When an EIS is required, the concurrence of the Program Assistant Secretary is also required before a project can be approved. For the purposes of this paragraph, an area will be considered as largely undeveloped unless the area within a 2-mile radius of the project boundary is more than 50 percent developed for urban uses and infrastructure (particularly water and sewers) is available and has capacity to serve the project.
            (iii) All other projects in the Normally Unacceptable zone require a Special Environmental Clearance, except where an EIS is required for other reasons pursuant to HUD environmental policies.
            (2) Unacceptable noise zone. An EIS is required prior to the approval of projects with unacceptable noise exposure. Projects in or partially in an Unacceptable Noise Zone shall be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, or the Certifying Officer for activities subject to 24 CFR part 58, for approval. The Assistant Secretary or the Certifying Officer may waive the EIS requirement in cases where noise is the only environmental issue and no outdoor noise sensitive activity will take place on the site. In such cases, an environmental review shall be made pursuant to the requirements of 24 CFR parts 50 or 58, as appropriate.
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.105
            Exceptions.
            (a) Flexibility for non-acoustic benefits. Where it is determined that program objectives cannot be achieved on sites meeting the acceptability standard of 65 decibels, the Acceptable Zone may be shifted to Ldn 70 on a case-by-case basis if all the following conditions are satisfied:
            (1) The project does not require an Environmental Impact Statement under provisions of § 51.104(b)(1) and noise is the only environmental issue.
            (2) The project has received a Special Environmental Clearance and has received the concurrence of the Environmental Clearance Officer.
            (3) The project meets other program goals to provide housing in proximity to employment, public facilities and transportation.

            (4) The project is in conformance with local goals and maintains the character of the neighborhood.
            

            (5) The project sponsor has set forth reasons, acceptable to HUD, as to why the noise attenuation measures that would normally be required for new construction in the Ldn 65 to Ldn 70 zone cannot be met.
            (6) Other sites which are not exposed to noise above Ldn 65 and which meet program objectives are generally not available.
            The above factors shall be documented and made part of the project file.
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.106
            Implementation.
            (a) Use of available data. HUD field staff shall make maximum use of noise data prepared by others when such data are determined to be current and adequately projected into the future and are in terms of the following:
            (1) Sites in the vicinity of airports. The noise environment around airports is described sometimes in terms of Noise Exposure Forecasts, abbreviated as NEF or, in the State of California, as Community Noise Equivalent Level, abbreviated as CNEL. The noise environment for sites in the vicinity of airports for which day-night average sound level data are not available may be evaluated from NEF or CNEL analyses using the following conversions to DNL:
            
            
              DNL ≉ NEF + 35
              DNL ≉ CNEL
            
            
            (2) Sites in the vicinity of highways. Highway projects receiving Federal aid are subject to noise analyses under the procedures of the Federal Highway Administration. Where such analyses are available they may be used to assess sites subject to the requirements of this standard. The Federal Highway Administration employs two alternate sound level descriptors: (i) The A-weighted sound level not exceeded more than 10 percent of the time for the highway design hour traffic flow, symbolized as L10; or (ii) the equivalent sound level for the design hour, symbolized as Leq. The day-night average sound level may be estimated from the design hour L10 or Leq values by the following relationships, provided heavy trucks do not exceed 10 percent of the total traffic flow in vehicles per 24 hours and the traffic flow between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. does not exceed 15 percent of the average daily traffic flow in vehicles per 24 hours:
            
            
              DNL ≉ L10 (design hour)—3 decibels
              DNL ≉ Leq (design hour) decibels
            
            
            Where the auto/truck mix and time of day relationships as stated in this section do not exist, the HUD Noise Assessment Guidelines or other noise analysis shall be used.
            (3) Sites in the vicinity of installations producing loud impulsive sounds. Certain Department of Defense installations produce loud impulsive sounds from artillery firing and bombing practice ranges. Noise analyses for these facilities sometimes encompass sites that may be subject to the requirements of this standard. Where such analyses are available they may be used on an interim basis to establish the acceptability of sites under this standard. The Department of Defense uses day-night average sound level based on C-weighted sound level, symbolized LCdn, for the analysis of loud impulsive sounds. Where such analyses are provided, the 8 decibel addition specified in § 51.103(b), is not required, and the same numerical values of day-night average sound level used on an interim basis to determine site suitability for non-impulsive sounds apply to the LCdn.
            (4) Use of areawide acoustical data. HUD encourages the preparation and use of areawide acoustical information, such as noise contours for airports. Where such new or revised contours become available for airports (civil or military) and military installations they shall first be referred to the HUD State Office (Environmental Officer) for review, evaluation and decision on appropriateness for use by HUD. The HUD State Office shall submit revised contours to the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development for review, evaluation and decision whenever the area affected is changed by 20 percent or more, or whenever it is determined that the new contours will have a significant effect on HUD programs, or whenever the contours are not provided in a methodology acceptable under § 51.106(a)(1) or in other cases where the HUD State Office determines that Headquarters review is warranted. For other areawide acoustical data, review is required only where existing areawide data are being utilized and where such data have been changed to reflect changes in the measurement methodology or underlying noise source assumptions. Requests for determination on usage of new or revised areawide data shall include the following:
            (i) Maps showing old, if applicable, and new noise contours, along with brief description of data source and methodology.
            (ii) Impact on existing and prospective urbanized areas and on development activity.
            (iii) Impact on HUD-assisted projects currently in processing.
            (iv) Impact on future HUD program activity. Where a field office has determined that immediate approval of new areawide data is necessary and warranted in limited geographic areas, the request for approval should state the circumstances warranting such approval. Actions on proposed projects shall not be undertaken while new areawide noise data are being considered for HUD use except where the proposed location is affected in the same manner under both the old and new noise data.
            (b) Site assessments. Compliance with the standards contained in § 51.103(c) shall, where necessary, be determined using noise assessment guidelines, handbooks, technical documents and procedures issued by the Department.
            (c) Variations in site noise levels. In many instances the noise environment will vary across a site, with portions of the site being in an Acceptable noise environment and other portions in a Normally Unacceptable noise environment. The standards in § 51.103(c) shall apply to the portions of a building or buildings used for residential purposes and for ancillary noise sensitive open spaces.
            (d) Noise measurements. Where noise assessments result in a finding that the site is borderline or questionable, or is controversial, noise measurements may be performed. Where it is determined that noise measurements are required, such measurements will be conducted in accordance with methods and measurement criteria established by the Department. Locations for noise measurements will depend on the location of noise sensitive uses that are nearest to the predominant noise source (see § 51.103(c)).
            (e) Projections of noise exposure. In addition to assessing existing exposure, future conditions should be projected. To the extent possible, noise exposure shall be projected to be representative of conditions that are expected to exist at a time at least 10 years beyond the date of the project or action under review.
            (f) Reduction of site noise by use of berms and/or barriers. If it is determined by adequate analysis that a berm and/or barrier will reduce noise at a housing site, and if the barrier is existing or there are assurances that it will be in place prior to occupancy, the environmental noise analysis for the site may reflect the benefits afforded by the berm and/or barrier. In the environmental review process under § 51.104(b), the location height and design of the berm and/or barrier shall be evaluated to determine its effectiveness, and impact on design and aesthetic quality, circulation and other environmental factors.
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            Pt. 51, Subpt. B, App. I
            Appendix I to Subpart B of Part 51—Definition of Acoustical Quantities
            1. Sound Level. The quantity in decibels measured with an instrument satisfying requirements of American National Standard Specification for Type 1 Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971. Fast time-averaging and A-frequency weighting are to be used, unless others are specified. The sound level meter with the A-weighting is progressively less sensitive to sounds of frequency below 1,000 hertz (cycles per second), somewhat as is the ear. With fast time averaging the sound level meter responds particularly to recent sounds almost as quickly as does the ear in judging the loudness of a sound.
            2. Average Sound Level. Average sound level, in decibels, is the level of the mean-square A-weighted sound pressure during the stated time period, with reference to the square of the standard reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals.

            Day-night average sound level, abbreviated as DNL, and symbolized mathematically as Ldn is defined as:
            
              
              EC12OC91.000
            

            Time t is in seconds, so the limits shown in hours and minutes are actually interpreted in seconds. LA(t) is the time varying value of A-weighted sound level, the quantity in decibels measured by an instrument satisfying requirements of American National Standard Specification for Type 1 Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971.
            3. Loud Impulsive Sounds. When loud impulsive sounds such as sonic booms or explosions are anticipated contributors to the noise environment at a site, the contribution to day-night average sound level produced by the loud impulsive sounds shall have 8 decibels added to it in assessing the acceptability of a site.
            A loud impulsive sound is defined for the purpose of this regulation as one for which:
            (i) The sound is definable as a discrete event wherein the sound level increases to a maximum and then decreases in a total time interval of approximately one second or less to the ambient background level that exists without the sound; and
            (ii) The maximum sound level (obtained with slow averaging time and A-weighting of a Type 1 sound level meter whose characteristics comply with ANSI S1.4-1971) exceeds the sound level prior to the onset of the event by at least 6 decibels; and
            (iii) The maximum sound level obtained with fast averaging time of a sound level meter exceeds the maximum value obtained with slow averaging time by at least 4 decibels.
            [44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979; 49 FR 10253, Mar. 20, 1984; 49 FR 12214, Mar. 29, 1984]
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Siting of HUD-Assisted Projects Near Hazardous Operations Handling Conventional Fuels or Chemicals of an Explosive or Flammable Nature
          
            Authority:
            42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
          
          
            Source:
            49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 51.200
            Purpose.
            The purpose of this subpart C is to:
            (a) Establish safety standards which can be used as a basis for calculating acceptable separation distances (ASD) for HUD-assisted projects from specific, stationary, hazardous operations which store, handle, or process hazardous substances;
            (b) Alert those responsible for the siting of HUD-assisted projects to the inherent potential dangers when such projects are located in the vicinity of such hazardous operations;
            (c) Provide guidance for identifying those hazardous operations which are most prevalent;
            (d) Provide the technical guidance required to evaluate the degree of danger anticipated from explosion and thermal radiation (fire); and
            (e) Provide technical guidance required to determine acceptable separation distances from such hazards.
            [49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.201
            Definitions.
            The terms Department and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
            
              Acceptable separation distance (ASD)—means the distance beyond which the explosion or combustion of a hazard is not likely to cause structures or individuals to be subjected to blast overpressure or thermal radiation flux levels in excess of the safety standards in § 51.203. The ASD is determined by applying the safety standards established by this subpart C to the guidance set forth in HUD Guidebook, “Siting of HUD-Assisted Projects Near Hazardous Facilities.”
            
              Blast overpressure—means the pressure, in pounds per square inch, in excess of normal atmospheric pressure on the surrounding medium caused by an explosion.
            
            
              Danger zone—means the land area circumscribed by the radius which delineates the ASD of a given hazard.
            
              Hazard—means any stationary container which stores, handles or processes hazardous substances of an explosive or fire prone nature. The term “hazard” does not include pipelines for the transmission of hazardous substances, if such pipelines are located underground or comply with applicable Federal, State and local safety standards. Also excepted are: (1) Containers with a capacity of 100 gallons or less when they contain common liquid industrial fuels, such as gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene and crude oil since they generally would pose no danger in terms of thermal radiation of blast overpressure to a project; and (2) facilities which are shielded from a proposed HUD-assisted project by the topography, because these topographic features effectively provide a mitigating measure already in place.
            
              Hazardous substances—means petroleum products (petrochemicals) and chemicals that can produce blast overpressure or thermal radiation levels in excess of the standards set forth in § 51.203. A specific list of hazardous substance is found in appendix I to this subpart.
            
              HUD-assisted project—the development, construction, rehabilitation, modernization or conversion with HUD subsidy, grant assistance, loan, loan guarantee, or mortgage insurance, of any project which is intended for residential, institutional, recreational, commercial or industrial use. For purposes of this subpart the terms “rehabilitation” and “modernization” refer only to such repairs and renovation of a building or buildings as will result in an increased number of people being exposed to hazardous operations by increasing residential densities, converting the type of use of a building to habitation, or making a vacant building habitable.
            
              Thermal radiation level—means the emission and propagation of heat energy through space or a material medium, expressed in BTU per square foot per hour (BTU/ft.2 hr.).
            [49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.202
            Approval of HUD-assisted projects.
            (a) The Department will not approve an application for assistance for a proposed project located at less than the acceptable separation distance from a hazard, as defined in § 51.201, unless appropriate mitigating measures, as defined in § 51.205, are implemented, or unless mitigating measures are already in place.
            (b) In the case of all applications for proposed HUD-assisted projects, the Department shall evaluate projected development plans in the vicinity of these projects to determine whether there are plans to install a hazardous operation in close proximity to the proposed project. If the evaluation shows that such a plan exists, the Department shall not approve assistance for the project unless the Department obtains satisfactory assurances that adequate mitigating measures will be taken when the hazardous operation is installed.
            [49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.203
            Safety standards.
            The following standards shall be used in determining the acceptable separation distance of a proposed HUD-assisted project from a hazard:
            (a) Thermal Radiation Safety Standard. Projects shall be located so that:
            (1) The allowable thermal radiation flux level at the building shall not exceed 10,000 BTU/sq. ft. per hr.;
            (2) The allowable thermal radiation flux level for outdoor, unprotected facilities or areas of congregation shall not exceed 450 BTU/sq. ft. per hour.
            (b) Blast Overpressure Safety Standard. Projects shall be located so that the maximum allowable blast overpressure at both buildings and outdoor, unprotected facilities or areas shall not exceed 0.5 psi.
            (c) If a hazardous substance constitutes both a thermal radiation and blast overpressure hazard, the ASD for each hazard shall be calculated, and the larger of the two ASDs shall be used to determine compliance with this subpart.

            (d) Background information on the standards and the logarithmic thermal radiation and blast overpressure charts that provide assistance in determining acceptable separation distances are contained in appendix II to this subpart C.
            [49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.204
            HUD-assisted hazardous facilities.
            In reviewing applications for proposed HUD-assisted projects involving the installation of hazardous facilities, the Department shall ensure that such hazardous facilities are located at an acceptable separation distance from residences and from any other facility or area where people may congregate or be present. The mitigating measures listed in § 51.205 may be taken into account in determining compliance with this section.
          
          
            § 51.205
            Mitigating measures.
            Application of the standards for determining an Acceptable Separation Distance (ASD) for a HUD-assisted project from a potential hazard of an explosion or fire prone nature is predicated on level topography with no intervening object(s) between the hazard and the project. Application of the standards can be eliminated or modified if:
            (a) The nature of the topography shields the proposed project from the hazard.
            (b) An existing permanent fire resistant structure of adequate size and strength will shield the proposed project from the hazard.
            (c) A barrier is constructed surrounding the hazard, at the site of the project, or in between the potential hazard and the proposed project.
            (d) The structure and outdoor areas used by people are designed to withstand blast overpressure and thermal radiation anticipated from the potential hazard (e.g., the project is of masonry and steel or reinforced concrete and steel construction).
          
          
            § 51.206
            Implementation.
            This subpart C shall be implemented for each proposed HUD-assisted project by the HUD approving official or responsible entity responsible for review of the project. The implementation procedure will be part of the environmental review process in accordance with the procedures set forth in 24 CFR parts 50 and 58.
            [61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.207
            Special circumstances.
            The Secretary or the Secretary's designee may, on a case-by-case basis, when circumstances warrant, require the application of this subpart C with respect to a substance not listed in appendix I to this subpart C that would create thermal or overpressure effect in excess of that listed in § 51.203.
            [61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.208
            Reservation of administrative and legal rights.
            Publication of these standards does not constitute a waiver of any right: (a) Of HUD to disapprove a project proposal if the siting is too close to a potential hazard not covered by this subpart, and (b) of HUD or any person or other entity to seek to abate or to collect damages occasioned by a nuisance, whether or not covered by the subpart.
          
          
            Pt. 51, Subpt. C, App. I
            Appendix I to Subpart C of Part 51—Specific Hazardous Substances
            The following is a list of specific petroleum products and chemicals defined to be hazardous substances under § 51.201.
            Hazardous Liquids
            
              Acetic Acid
              Acetic Anhydride
              Acetone
              Acrylonitrile
              Amyl Acetate
              Amyl Alcohol
              Benzene
              Butyl Acetate
              Butyl Acrylate
              Butyl Alcohol
              Carbon Bisulfide
              Carbon Disulfide
              Cellosolve
              Cresols
              Crude Oil (Petroleum)
              Cumene
              Cyclohexane
              No. 2 Diesel Fuel
              Ethyl Acetate
              Ethyl Acrylate
              Ethyl Alcohol
              Ethyl Benzene
              Ethyl Dichloride
              Ethyl Ether
              Gasoline
              Heptane
              Hexane
              Isobutyl Acetate
              Isobutyl Alcohol
              Isopropyl Acetate
              Isopropyl Alcohol
              Jet Fuel and Kerosene
              Methyl Alcohol
              Methyl Amyl Alcohol
              Methyl Cellosolve
              Methyl Ethyl Ketone
              Naptha
              Pentane
              Propylene Oxide
              Toluene
              Vinyl Acetate
              Xylene
              
            
            Hazardous Gases
            
              Acetaldehyde
              Butadiene
              Butane
              Ethene
              Ethylene
              Ethylene Oxide
              Hydrogen
              Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
              Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
              Propane
              Propylene
              Vinyl Chloride
            
            
            (Primary Source: “Urban Development Siting with respect to Hazardous Commercial/Industrial Facilities,” by Rolf Jensen and Associates, Inc., April 1982)
            [49 FR 5105, Feb. 10, 1984; 49 FR 12214, Mar. 29, 1984]
          
          
            Pt. 51, Subpt. C, App. II
            Appendix II to Subpart C of Part 51—Development of Standards; Calculation Methods
            I. Background Information Concerning the Standards
            (a) Thermal Radiation:
            
            (1) Introduction. Flammable products stored in above ground containers represent a definite, potential threat to human life and structures in the event of fire. The resulting fireball emits thermal radiation which is absorbed by the surroundings. Combustible structures, such as wooden houses, may be ignited by the thermal radiation being emitted. The radiation can cause severe burn, injuries and even death to exposed persons some distance away from the site of the fire.
            (2) Criteria for Acceptable Separation Distance (ASD). Wooden buildings, window drapes and trees generally ignite spontaneously when exposed for a relatively long period of time to thermal radiation levels of approximately 10,000 Btu/hr. sq. ft. It will take 15 to 20 minutes for a building to ignite at that degree of thermal intensity. Since the reasonable response time for fire fighting units in urbanized areas is approximately five to ten minutes, a standard of 10,000 BTU/hr. sq. ft. is considered an acceptable level of thermal radiation for buildings.
            People in outdoor areas exposed to a thermal radiation flux level of approximately 1,500 Btu/ft2 hr will suffer intolerable pain after 15 seconds. Longer exposure causes blistering, permanent skin damage, and even death. Since it is assumed that children and the elderly could not take refuge behind walls or run away from the thermal effect of the fire within the 15 seconds before skin blistering occurs, unprotected (outdoor) areas, such as playgrounds, parks, yards, school grounds, etc., must be placed at such a distance from potential fire locations so that the radiation flux level is well below 1500 Btu/ft2 hr. An acceptable flux level, particularly for elderly people and children, is 450 Btu/ft2 hr. The skin can be exposed to this degree of thermal radiation for 3 minutes or longer with no serious detrimental effect. The result would be the same as a bad sunburn. Therefore, the standard for areas in which there will be exposed people, e.g. outdoor recreation areas such as playgrounds and parks, is set at 450 Btu/hr. sq. ft. Areas covered also include open space ancillary to residential structures, such as yard areas and vehicle parking areas.
            (3) Acceptable Separation Distance From a Potential Fire Hazard. This is the actual setback required for the safety of occupied buildings and their inhabitants, and people in open spaces (exposed areas) from a potential fire hazard. The specific distance required for safety from such a hazard depends upon the nature and the volume of the substance. The Technical Guidebook entitled “Urban Development Siting With Respect to Hazardous/Commercial Industrial Facilities,” which supplements this regulation, contains the technical guidance required to compute Acceptable Separation Distances (ASD) for those flammable substances most often encountered.
            (b) Blast Overpressure: The Acceptable Separation Distance (ASD) for people and structures from materials prone to explosion is dependent upon the resultant blast measured in pounds per square inch (psi) overpressure. It has been determined by the military and corroborated by two independent studies conducted for the Department of Housing and Urban Development that 0.5 psi is the acceptable level of blast overpressure for both buildings and occupants, because a frame structure can normally withstand that level of external exertion with no serious structural damage, and it is unlikely that human beings inside the building would normally suffer any serious injury. Using this as the safety standard for blast overpressure, nomographs have been developed from which an ASD can be determined for a given quantify of hazardous substance. These nomographs are contained in the handbook with detailed instructions on their use.
            (c) Hazard evaluation: The Acceptable Separation Distances for buildings, which are determined for thermal radiation and blast overpressure, delineate separate identifiable danger zones for each potential accident source. For some materials the fire danger zone will have the greatest radius and cover the largest area, while for others the explosion danger zone will be the greatest. For example, conventional petroleum fuel products stored in unpressurized tanks do not emit blast overpressure of dangerous levels when ignited. In most cases, hazardous substances will be stored in pressurized containers. The resulting blast overpressure will be experienced at a greater distance than the resulting thermal radiation for the standards set in Section 51.203. In any event the hazard requiring the greatest separation distance will prevail in determining the location of HUD-assisted projects.
            
            The standards developed for the protection of people and property are given in the following table.
            
              
                 
                Thermal radiation
                Blast overpressure
              
              
                Amount of acceptable exposure allowed for building structures
                10,000 BTU/ft2 hr
                0.5 psi.
              
              
                Amount of acceptable exposure allowed for people in open areas
                450 BTU/ft2 hr
                0.5 psi.
              
            
            Problem Example
            The following example is given as a guide to assist in understanding how the procedures are used to determine an acceptable separation distance. The technical data are found in the HUD Guidebook. Liquid propane is used in the example since it is both an explosion and a fire hazard.
            In this hypothetical case a proposed housing project is to be located 850 feet from a 30,000 gallon liquid propane (LPG) tank. The objective is to determine the acceptable separation distance from the LPG tank. Since propane is both explosive and fire prone it will be necessary to determine the ASD for both explosion and for fire. The greatest of the two will govern. There is no dike around the tank in this example.
            Nomographs from the technical Guidebook have been reproduced to facilitate the solving of the problem.
            ASD For Explosion
            Use Figure 1 to determine the acceptable separation distance for explosion.
            The graph depicted on Figure 1 is predicated on a blast overpressure of 0.5 psi.
            The ASD in feet can be determined by applying the quantity of the hazard (in gallons) to the graph.
            In this case locate the 30,000 gallon point on the horizontal axis and draw a vertical line from that point to the intersection with the straight line curve. Then draw a horizontal line from the point where the lines cross to the left vertical axis where the ACCEPTABLE SEPARATION DISTANCE of 660 feet is found.
            
              Therefore the ASD for explosion is 660 feet
            
            Since the proposed project site is located 850 feet from the tank it is located at a safe distance with regards to blast overpressure.
            
              
              EC12OC91.001
            
            ASD For Fire
            To determine the ASD for fire it will be necessary to first find the fire width (diameter of the fireball) on Figure 2. Then apply this to Figure 3 to determine the ASD.
            Since there are two safety standards for fire: (a) 10,000 BTU/ft2 hr. for buildings; and (b) 450 BTU/ft2 hr. for people in exposed areas, it will be necessary to determine an ASD for each.

            To determine the fire width locate the 30,000 gallon point on the horizontal axis on Figure 2 and draw a vertical line to the straight line curve. Then draw a horizontal line from the point where the lines cross to the left vertical axis where the FIRE WIDTH is found to be 350 feet.
              
            
            Now locate the 350 ft. point on the horizontal axis of Figure 3 and draw a vertical line from that point to curves 1 and 2. Then draw horizontal lines from the points where the lines cross to the left vertical axis where the ACCEPTABLE SEPARATION DISTANCES of 240 feet for buildings and 1,150 feet for exposure to people is found.

            Based on this the proposed project site is located at a safe distance from a potential fireball. However, exposed playgrounds or other exposed areas of congregation must be at least 1,150 feet from the tank, or be appropriately shielded from a potential fireball.
            
            (Source: HUD Handbook, “Urban Development Siting With Respect to Hazardous Commercial/Industrial Facilities.”)
            
              EC12OC91.002
            
            
              
              EC12OC91.003
            
            [49 FR 5105, Feb. 10, 1984; 49 FR 12214, Mar. 29, 1984]
          
        
        
          
          Subpart D—Siting of HUD Assisted Projects in Runway Clear Zones at Civil Airports and Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones at Military Airfields
          
            Authority:
            Sec. 2, Housing Act of 1949, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 1441, affirmed by sec. 2, HUD Act of 1969, Pub. L. 90-448; sec. 7(d), HUD Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. 3535(d); OMB, Fed'l Mgmt. Cir. 75-2: Compatible Land Uses At Federal Airfields.
          
          
            Source:
            49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 51.300
            Purpose.
            It is the purpose of this subpart to promote compatible land uses around civil airports and military airfields by identifying suitable land uses for Runway Clear Zones at civil airports and Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones at military airfields and by establishing them as standards for providing HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance.
            [49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.301
            Definitions.
            For the purposes of this regulation, the following definitions apply:
            (a) Accident Potential Zone. An area at military airfields which is beyond the Clear Zone. The standards for the Accident Potential Zones are set out in Department of Defense Instruction 4165.57, “Air Installations Compatible Use Zones,” November 8, 1977, 32 CFR part 256. There are no Accident Potential Zones at civil airports.
            (b) Airport Operator. The civilian or military agency, group or individual which exercises control over the operations of the civil airport or military airfield.
            (c) Civil Airport. An existing commercial service airport as designated in the National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems prepared by the Federal Aviation Administration in accordance with section 504 of the Airport and Airway Improvement Act of 1982.
            (d) Runway Clear Zones and Clear Zones. Areas immediately beyond the ends of a runway. The standards for Runway Clear Zones for civil airports are established by FAA regulation 14 CFR part 152. The standards for Clear Zones for military airfields are established by DOD Instruction 4165.57, 32 CFR part 256.
          
          
            § 51.302
            Coverage.
            (a) These policies apply to HUD programs which provide assistance, subsidy or insurance for construction, land development, community development or redevelopment or any other provision of facilities and services which are designed to make land available for construction. When the HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance is used to make land available for construction rather than for the actual construction, the provision of the HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance shall be dependent upon whether the facility to be built is itself acceptable in accordance with the standards in § 51.303.
            (b) These policies apply not only to new construction but also to substantial or major modernization and rehabilitation and to any other program which significantly prolongs the physical or economic life of existing facilities or which, in the case of Accident Potential Zones:
            (1) Changes the use of the facility so that it becomes one which is no longer acceptable in accordance with the standards contained in § 51.303(b);
            (2) Significantly increases the density or number of people at the site; or
            (3) Introduces explosive, flammable or toxic materials to the area.
            (c) Except as noted in § 51.303(a)(3), these policies do not apply to HUD programs where the action only involves the purchase, sale or rental of an existing property without significantly prolonging the physical or economic life of the property.
            (d) The policies do not apply to research or demonstration projects which do not result in new construction or reconstruction, to interstate land sales registration, or to any action or emergency assistance which is provided to save lives, protect property, protect public health and safety, or remove debris and wreckage.
            [49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            
            § 51.303
            General policy.
            It is HUD's general policy to apply standards to prevent incompatible development around civil airports and military airfields.
            (a) HUD policy for actions in Runway Clear Zones and Clear Zones.
            (1) HUD policy is not to provide any assistance, subsidy or insurance for projects and actions covered by this part except as stated in § 51.303(a)(2) below.
            (2) If a project proposed for HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance is one which will not be frequently used or occupied by people, HUD policy is to provide assistance, subsidy or insurance only when written assurances are provided to HUD by the airport operator to the effect that there are no plans to purchase the land involved with such facilities as part of a Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone acquisition program.
            (3) Special notification requirements for Runway Clear Zones and Clear Zones. In all cases involving HUD assistance, subsidy, or insurance for the purchase or sale of an existing property in a Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone, HUD (or the responsible entity or recipient under 24 CFR part 58) shall advise the buyer that the property is in a Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone, what the implications of such a location are, and that there is a possibility that the property may, at a later date, be acquired by the airport operator. The buyer must sign a statement acknowledging receipt of this information.

            (b) HUD policy for actions in Accident Potential Zones at Military Airfields. HUD policy is to discourage the provision of any assistance, subsidy or insurance for projects and actions in the Accident Potential Zones. To be approved, projects must be generally consistent with the recommendations in the Land Use Compatibility Guidelines For Accident Potential Zones chart contained in DOD Instruction 4165.57, 32 CFR part 256.
            [49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.304
            Responsibilities.
            (a) The following persons have the authority to approve actions in Accident Potential Zones:
            (1) For programs subject to environmental review under 24 CFR part 58: the Certifying Officer of the responsible entity as defined in 24 CFR part 58.
            (2) For all other HUD programs: the HUD approving official having approval authority for the project.
            (b) The following persons have the authority to approve actions in Runway Clear Zones and Clear Zones:
            (1) For programs subject to environmental review under 24 CFR part 58: The Certifying Officer of the responsible entity as defined in 24 CFR part 58.
            (2) For all other HUD programs: the Program Assistant Secretary.
            [61 FR 13335, Mar. 26, 1996]
          
          
            § 51.305
            Implementation.
            (a) Projects already approved for assistance. This regulation does not apply to any project approved for assistance prior to the effective date of the regulation whether the project was actually under construction at that date or not.
            (b) Acceptable data on Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones. The only Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones which will be recognized in applying this part are those provided by the airport operators and which for civil airports are defined in accordance with FAA regulations 14 CFR part 152 or for military airfields, DOD Instruction 4165.57, 32 CFR part 256. All data, including changes, related to the dimensions of Runway Clear Zones for civil airports shall be verified with the nearest FAA Airports District Office before use by HUD.
            (c) Changes in Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones, and Accident Potential Zones. If changes in the Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones or Accident Potential Zones are made, the field offices shall immediately adopt these revised zones for use in reviewing proposed projects.

            (d) The decision to approve projects in the Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones must be documented as part of the enviornmental assessment or, when no assessment is required, as part of the project file.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 52
        PART 52—INTERGOVERNMENTAL REVIEW OF DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES
        
          Sec.
          52.1
          What is the purpose of these regulations?
          52.2
          What definitions apply to these regulations?
          52.3
          What programs and activities of the Department are subject to these regulations?
          52.4
          What are the Secretary's general responsibilities under the Order?
          52.5
          What is the Secretary's obligation with respect to Federal interagency coordination?
          52.6
          What procedures apply to the selection of programs and activities under these regulations?
          52.7
          How does the Secretary communicate with state and local officials concerning the Department's programs and activities?
          52.8
          How does the Secretary provide states an opportunity to comment on proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development?
          52.9
          How does the Secretary receive and respond to comments?
          52.10
          How does the Secretary make efforts to accommodate intergovernmental concerns?
          52.11
          What are the Secretary's obligations in interstate situations?
          52.12
          [Reserved]
        
        
          Authority:
          31 U.S.C. 6506; 42 U.S.C. 3334, 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          48 FR 29216, June 24, 1983, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 52.1
          What is the purpose of these regulations?
          (a) The regulations in this part implement Executive Order 12372, “Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs,” issued July 14, 1982 and amended on April 8, 1983. These regulations also implement applicable provisions of section 401 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 and section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act of 1966.
          (b) These regulations are intended to foster an intergovernmental partnership and a strengthened Federalism by relying on state processes and on state, areawide, regional and local coordination for review of proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development.
          (c) These regulations are intended to aid the internal management of the Department, and are not intended to create any right or benefit enforceable at law by a party against the Department or its officers.
        
        
          § 52.2
          What definitions apply to these regulations?
          
            Order means Executive Order 12372, issued July 14, 1982, and amended April 8, 1983 and titled “Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs.”
          
            Secretary means the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or an official or employee of the Department acting for the Secretary under a delegation of authority.
          
            State means any of the 50 states, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
          [48 FR 29216, June 24, 1983, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]
        
        
          § 52.3
          What programs and activities of the Department are subject to these regulations?
          The Secretary publishes in the Federal Register a list of the Department's programs and activities that are subject to these regulations and identifies which of these are subject to the requirements of section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act.
        
        
          § 52.4
          What are the Secretary's general responsibilities under the Order?

          (a) The Secretary provides opportunities for consultation by elected officials of those state and local governments that would provide the non-federal funds for, or that would be directly affected by, proposed Federal financial assistance from, or direct Federal development by, the Department.
          
          (b) If a state adopts a process under the Order to review and coordinate proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development, the Secretary, to the extent permitted by law:
          (1) Uses the state process to determine official views of state and local elected officials;
          (2) Communicates with state and local elected officials as early in a program planning cycle as is reasonably feasible to explain specific plans and actions;
          (3) Makes efforts to accommodate state and local elected officials' concerns with proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development that are communicated through the state process;
          (4) Allows the states to simplify and consolidate existing federally required state plan submissions;
          (5) Where state planning and budgeting systems are sufficient and where permitted by law, encourages the substitution of state plans for federally required state plans;
          (6) Seeks the coordination of views of affected state and local elected officials in one state with those of another state when proposed Federal financial assistance or direct Federal development has an impact on interstate metropolitan urban centers or other interstate areas; and
          (7) Supports state and local governments by discouraging the reauthorization or creation of any planning organization which is federally-funded, which has a limited purpose, and which is not adequately representative of, or accountable to, state or local elected officials.
        
        
          § 52.5
          What is the Secretary's obligation with respect to Federal interagency coordination?
          The Secretary, to the extent practicable, consults with and seeks advice from all other substantially affected Federal departments and agencies in an effort to assure full coordination between such agencies and the Department regarding programs and activities covered under these regulations.
        
        
          § 52.6
          What procedures apply to the selection of programs and activities under these regulations?

          (a) A state may select any program or activity published in the Federal Register in accordance with § 52.3 of this part for intergovernmental review under these regulations. Each state, before selecting programs and activities shall consult with local elected officials.
          (b) Each state that adopts a process shall notify the Secretary of the Department's programs and activities selected for that process.
          (c) A state may notify the Secretary of changes in its selections at any time. For each change, the state shall submit to the Secretary an assurance that the state has consulted with local elected officials regarding the change. The Department may establish deadlines by which states are required to inform the Secretary of changes in their program selections.
          (d) The Secretary uses a state's process as soon as feasible, depending on individual programs and activities, after the Secretary is notified of its selections.
        
        
          § 52.7
          How does the Secretary communicate with state and local officials concerning the Department's programs and activities?
          (a) For those programs and activities covered by a state process under § 52.6, the Secretary, to the extent permitted by law—
          (1) Uses the state process to determine views of state and local elected officials; and,
          (2) Communicates with state and local elected officials, through the state process, as early in a program planning cycle as is reasonably feasible to explain specific plans and actions.
          (b) The Secretary provides notice to directly affected state, areawide, regional, and local entities in a state of proposed Federal financial assistance or direct Federal development if—
          (1) The state has not adopted a process under the Order; or

          (2) The assistance or development involves a program or activity not selected for the state process.
          
          This notice may be made by publication in the Federal Register or other appropriate means, which the Department in its discretion deems appropriate.
        
        
          § 52.8
          How does the Secretary provide states an opportunity to comment on proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development?
          (a) Except in unusual circumstances, the Secretary gives state processes or directly affected state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities—
          (1) At least 30 days from the date established by the Secretary to comment on proposed Federal financial assistance under: (i) A covered mortgage insurance program, (ii) the Urban Development Action Grant Program, or (iii) the Housing Development Grant Program.
          (2) At least 60 days from the date established by the Secretary to comment on proposed Federal financial assistance other than under a program covered by paragraph (a)(1).
          (b) This section also applies to comments in cases in which the review, coordination, and communication with the Department have been delegated.
          (c) Applicants for programs and activities subject to section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Act shall allow areawide agencies a 60-day opportunity for review and comment.
          [48 FR 29216, June 24, 1983, as amended at 49 FR 24653, June 14, 1984]
        
        
          § 52.9
          How does the Secretary receive and respond to comments?
          (a) The Secretary follows the procedures in § 52.10 if—
          (1) A state office or official is designated to act as a single point of contact between a state process and all Federal agencies, and
          (2) That office or official transmits a state process recommendation for a program selected under § 52.6.
          (b)(1) The single point of contact is not obligated to transmit comments from state, areawide, regional or local officials and entities where there is no state process recommendation.
          (2) If a state process recommendation is transmitted by a single point of contact, all comments from state, areawide, regional, and local officials and entities that differ from it must also be transmitted.
          (c) If a state has not established a process, or is unable to submit a state process recommendation, state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities may submit comments either to the applicant or to the Department.
          (d) If a program or activity is not selected for a state process, state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities may submit comments either to the applicant or to the Department. In addition, if a state process recommendation for a nonselected program or activity is transmitted to the Department by the single point of contact, the Secretary follows the procedures of § 52.10 of this part.
          (e) The Secretary considers comments which do not constitute a state process recommendation submitted under these regulations and for which the Secretary is not required to apply the procedures of § 52.10 of this part, when such comments are provided by a single point of contact, by the applicant, or directly to the Department by a commenting party.
        
        
          § 52.10
          How does the Secretary make efforts to accommodate intergovernmental concerns?
          (a) If a state process provides a state process recommendation to the Department through its single point of contact, the Secretary either—
          (1) Accepts the recommendation;
          (2) Reaches a mutually agreeable solution with the state process; or
          (3) Provides the single point of contact with such written explanation of its decision, as the Secretary in his or her discretion deems appropriate. The Secretary may also supplement the written explanation by providing the explanation to the single point of contact by telephone, other telecommunication, or other means.
          (b) In any explanation under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the Secretary informs the single point of contact that—

          (1) The Department will not implement its decision for at least ten days after the single point of contact receives the explanation; or
          
          (2) The Secretary has reviewed the decision and determined that, because of unusual circumstances, the waiting period of at least ten days is not feasible.
          (c) For purposes of computing the waiting period under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, a single point of contact is presumed to have received written notification 5 days after the date of mailing of such notification.
        
        
          § 52.11
          What are the Secretary's obligations in interstate situations?
          (a) The Secretary is responsible for—
          (1) Identifying proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development that have an impact on interstate areas;
          (2) Notifying appropriate officials and entities in states which have adopted a process and which select the Department's program or activity.
          (3) Making efforts to identify and notify the affected state, areawide, regional, and local officials and entities in those states that have not adopted a process under the Order or do not select the Department's program or activity;
          (4) Responding pursuant to § 52.10 of this part if the Secretary receives a recommendation from a designated areawide agency transmitted by a single point of contact, in cases in which review, coordination, and communication with the Department have been delegated.
          (b) The Secretary uses the procedures in § 52.10 if a state process provides a state process recommendation to the Department through a single point of contact.
        
        
          § 52.12
          [Reserved]
        
      
      
        Pt. 55
        PART 55—FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION OF WETLANDS
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            55.1
            Purpose and basic responsibility.
            55.2
            Terminology.
            55.3
            Assignment of responsibilities.
          
          
            Subpart B—Application of Executive Orders on Floodplain Management and Protection of Wetlands
            55.10
            Environmental review procedures under 24 CFR parts 50 and 58.
            55.11
            Applicability of subpart C decisionmaking process.
            55.12
            Inapplicability of 24 CFR part 55 to certain categories of proposed actions.
          
          
            Subpart C—Procedures for Making Determinations on Floodplain Management and Protection of Wetlands
            55.20
            Decision making process.
            55.21
            Notification of floodplain hazard.
            55.22
            Conveyance restrictions for the disposition of multifamily real property.
            55.23
            [Reserved]
            55.24
            Aggregation.
            55.25
            Areawide compliance.
            55.26
            Adoption of another agency's review under the executive orders.
            55.27
            Documentation.
            55.28
            Use of individual permits under section 404 of the Clean Water Act for HUD Executive Order 11990 processing where all wetlands are covered by the permit.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 4001-4128 and 5154a; E.O. 11988, 42 FR 26951, 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 117; E.O. 11990, 42 FR 26961, 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p 121.
        
        
          Source:
          59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 55.1
            Purpose and basic responsibility.
            (a)(1) The purpose of Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management, is “to avoid to the extent possible the long and short-term adverse impacts associated with the occupancy and modification of floodplains and to avoid direct or indirect support of floodplain development wherever there is a practicable alternative.”

            (2) The purpose of Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands, is “to avoid to the extent possible the long- and short-term adverse impacts associated with the destruction or modification of wetlands and to avoid direct or indirect support of new construction in wetlands wherever there is a practicable alternative.”
            
            (3) This part implements the requirements of Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management, and Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands, and employs the principles of the Unified National Program for Floodplain Management. These regulations apply to all HUD (or responsible entity) actions that are subject to potential harm by location in floodplains or wetlands. Covered actions include the proposed acquisition, construction, demolition, improvement, disposition, financing, and use of properties located in floodplains or wetlands for which approval is required either from HUD, under any applicable HUD program, or from a responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58.
            (4) This part does not prohibit approval of such actions (except for certain actions in Coastal High Hazard Areas), but provides a consistent means for implementing the Department's interpretation of the Executive Orders in the project approval decisionmaking processes of HUD and of responsible entities subject to 24 CFR part 58. The implementation of Executive Orders 11988 and 11990 under this part shall be conducted by HUD for Department-administered programs subject to environmental review under 24 CFR part 50 and by authorized responsible entities that are responsible for environmental review under 24 CFR part 58.
            (5) Nonstructural alternatives to floodplain development and the destruction of wetlands are both favored and encouraged to reduce the loss of life and property caused by floods, and to restore the natural resources and functions of floodplains and wetlands. Nonstructural alternatives should be discussed in the decisionmaking process where practicable.
            (b)(1) Under section 202(a) of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, 42 U.S.C. 4106(a), proposed HUD financial assistance (including mortgage insurance) for acquisition or construction purposes in any “area having special flood hazards” (a flood zone designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)) shall not be approved in communities identified by FEMA as eligible for flood insurance but which are not participating in the National Flood Insurance Program. This prohibition only applies to proposed HUD financial assistance in a FEMA-designated area of special flood hazard one year after the community has been formally notified by FEMA of the designation of the affected area. This prohibition is not applicable to HUD financial assistance in the form of formula grants to states, including financial assistance under the State-administered CDBG Program (24 CFR part 570, subpart I) and the State-administered Rental Rehabilitation Program (24 CFR 511.51), Emergency Shelter Grant amounts allocated to States (24 CFR parts 575 and 576), and HOME funds provided to a state under Title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12701-12839).
            (2) Under section 582 of the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 5154a), HUD disaster assistance that is made available in a special flood hazard area may not be used to make a payment (including any loan assistance payment) to a person for repair, replacement, or restoration of damage to any personal, residential, or commercial property if:
            (i) The person had previously received Federal flood disaster assistance conditioned on obtaining and maintaining flood insurance; and
            (ii) The person failed to obtain and maintain the flood insurance.
            (c) Except with respect to actions listed in § 55.12(c), no HUD financial assistance (including mortgage insurance) may be approved after May 23, 1994 with respect to:
            (1) Any action other than a functionally dependent use or floodplain function restoration activity, located in a floodway;
            (2) Any critical action located in a coastal high hazard area; or

            (3) Any noncritical action located in a Coastal High Hazard Area, unless the action is a functionally dependent use, existing construction (including improvements), or reconstruction following destruction caused by a disaster. If the action is not a functionally dependent use, the action must be designed for location in a Coastal High Hazard Area. An action will be considered designed for a Coastal High Hazard Area if:
            (i) In the case of reconstruction following destruction caused by a disaster or substantial improvement, the work meets the current standards for V zones in FEMA regulations (44 CFR 60.3(e)) and, if applicable, the Minimum Property Standards for such construction in 24 CFR 200.926d(c)(4)(iii); or
            (ii) In the case of existing construction (including any minor improvements):
            (A) The work met FEMA elevation and construction standards for a coastal high hazard area (or if such a zone or such standards were not designated, the 100-year floodplain) applicable at the time the original improvements were constructed; or
            (B) If the original improvements were constructed before FEMA standards for the 100-year floodplain became effective or before FEMA designated the location of the action as within the 100-year floodplain, the work would meet at least the earliest FEMA standards for construction in the 100-year floodplain.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 78 FR 68728, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.2
            Terminology.
            (a) With the exception of those terms defined in paragraph (b) of this section, the terms used in this part shall follow the definitions contained in section 6 of Executive Order 11988, section 7 of Executive Order 11990, and the Floodplain Management Guidelines for Implementing Executive Order 11988 (43 FR 6030, February 10, 1978), issued by the Water Resources Council; the terms “special flood hazard area,” “criteria,” and “Regular Program” shall follow the definitions contained in FEMA regulations at 44 CFR 59.1; and the terms “Letter of Map Revision” and “Letter of Map Amendment” shall refer to letters issued by FEMA, as provided in 44 CFR part 65 and 44 CFR part 70, respectively.
            (b) For purposes of this part, the following definitions apply:
            (1) Coastal high hazard area means the area subject to high velocity waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS) under FEMA regulations. FIRMs and FISs are also relied upon for the designation of “100-year floodplains” (§ 55.2(b)(9)), “500-year floodplains” (§ 55.2(b)(4)), and “floodways” (§ 55.2(b)(5)). When FEMA provides interim flood hazard data, such as Advisory Base Flood Elevations (ABFE) or preliminary maps and studies, HUD or the responsible entity shall use the latest of these sources. If FEMA information is unavailable or insufficiently detailed, other Federal, state, or local data may be used as “best available information” in accordance with Executive Order 11988. However, a base flood elevation from an interim or preliminary or non-FEMA source cannot be used if it is lower than the current FIRM and FIS.
            (2) Compensatory mitigation means the restoration (reestablishment or rehabilitation), establishment (creation), enhancement, and/or, in certain circumstances, preservation of aquatic resources for the purposes of offsetting unavoidable adverse impacts that remain after all appropriate and practicable avoidance and minimization have been achieved.
            Examples include, but are not limited to:
            (i) Permittee-responsible mitigation: On-site or off-site mitigation undertaken by the holder of a wetlands permit under section 404 of the Clean Water Act (or an authorized agent or contractor), for which the permittee retains full responsibility;
            (ii) Mitigation banking: A permittee's purchase of credits from a wetlands mitigation bank, comprising wetlands that have been set aside to compensate for conversions of other wetlands; the mitigation obligation is transferred to the sponsor of the mitigation bank; and
            (iii) In-lieu fee mitigation: A permittee's provision of funds to an in-lieu fee sponsor (public agency or nonprofit organization) that builds and maintains a mitigation site, often after the permitted adverse wetland impacts have occurred; the mitigation obligation is transferred to the in-lieu fee sponsor.
            (3)(i) Critical action means any activity for which even a slight chance of flooding would be too great, because such flooding might result in loss of life, injury to persons, or damage to property. Critical actions include activities that create, maintain or extend the useful life of those structures or facilities that:
            (A) Produce, use or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic or water-reactive materials;
            (B) Provide essential and irreplaceable records or utility or emergency services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events (e.g., data storage centers, generating plants, principal utility lines, emergency operations centers including fire and police stations, and roadways providing sole egress from flood-prone areas); or
            (C) Are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury during flood or storm events, e.g., persons who reside in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes, intermediate care facilities, board and care facilities, and retirement service centers. Housing for independent living for the elderly is not considered a critical action.
            (ii) Critical actions shall not be approved in floodways or coastal high hazard areas.
            (4) 500-year floodplain means the minimum floodplain of concern for Critical Actions and is the area subject to inundation from a flood having a 0.2 percent chance of occurring in any given year. (See § 55.2(b)(1) for appropriate data sources.)
            (5) Floodway means that portion of the floodplain which is effective in carrying flow, where the flood hazard is generally the greatest, and where water depths and velocities are the highest. The term “floodway” as used here is consistent with “regulatory floodways” as identified by FEMA. (See § 55.2(b)(1) for appropriate data sources.)
            (6) Functionally dependent use means a land use that must necessarily be conducted in close proximity to water (e.g., a dam, marina, port facility, water-front park, and many types of bridges).
            (7) High hazard area means a floodway or a coastal high hazard area.
            (8) New construction includes draining, dredging, channelizing, filling, diking, impounding, and related activities and any structures or facilities begun after the effective date of Executive Order 11990. (See section 7(b) of Executive Order 11990.)
            (9) 100-year floodplain means the floodplain of concern for this part and is the area subject to inundation from a flood having a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See § 55.2(b)(1) for appropriate data sources.)
            (10)(i) Substantial improvement means either:
            (A) Any repair, reconstruction, modernization or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:
            (1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
            (2) If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred; or
            (B) Any repair, reconstruction, modernization or improvement of a structure that results in an increase of more than twenty percent in the number of dwelling units in a residential project or in the average peak number of customers and employees likely to be on-site at any one time for a commercial or industrial project.
            (ii) Substantial improvement may not be defined to include either:
            (A) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that is solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
            (B) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historical Places or on a State Inventory of Historic Places.
            (iii) Structural repairs, reconstruction, or improvements not meeting this definition are considered “minor improvements”.
            (11) Wetlands means those areas that are inundated by surface or ground water with a frequency sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does or would support, a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life that requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas such as sloughs, potholes, wet meadows, river overflows, mud flats, and natural ponds. This definition includes those wetland areas separated from their natural supply of water as a result of activities such as the construction of structural flood protection methods or solid-fill road beds and activities such as mineral extraction and navigation improvements. This definition includes both wetlands subject to and those not subject to section 404 of the Clean Water Act as well as constructed wetlands. The following process shall be followed in making the wetlands determination:
            (i) HUD or, for programs subject to 24 CFR part 58, the responsible entity, shall make a determination whether the action is new construction that is located in a wetland. These actions are subject to processing under the § 55.20 decisionmaking process for the protection of wetlands.
            (ii) As primary screening, HUD or the responsible entity shall verify whether the project area is located in proximity to wetlands identified on the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI). If so, HUD or the responsible entity should make a reasonable attempt to consult with the Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), for information concerning the location, boundaries, scale, and classification of wetlands within the area. If an NWI map indicates the presence of wetlands, FWS staff, if available, must find that no wetland is present in order for the action to proceed without further processing. Where FWS staff is unavailable to resolve any NWI map ambiguity or controversy, an appropriate wetlands professional must find that no wetland is present in order for the action to proceed without § 55.20 processing.
            (iii) As secondary screening used in conjunction with NWI maps, HUD or the responsible entity is encouraged to use the Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) National Soil Survey (NSS) and any state and local information concerning the location, boundaries, scale, and classification of wetlands within the action area.
            (iv) Any challenges from the public or other interested parties to the wetlands determinations made under this part must be made in writing to HUD (or the responsible entity authorized under 24 CFR part 58) during the commenting period and must be substantiated with verifiable scientific information. Commenters may request a reasonable extension of the time for the commenting period for the purpose of substantiating any objections with verifiable scientific information. HUD or the responsible entity shall consult FWS staff, if available, on the validity of the challenger's scientific information prior to making a final wetlands determination.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 78 FR 68729, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.3
            Assignment of responsibilities.
            (a)(1) The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development (CPD) shall oversee:
            (i) The Department's implementation of Executive Orders 11988 and 11990 and this part in all HUD programs; and
            (ii) The implementation activities of HUD program managers and, for HUD financial assistance subject to 24 CFR part 58, of grant recipients and responsible entities.
            (2) In performing these responsibilities, the Assistant Secretary for CPD shall make pertinent policy determinations in cooperation with appropriate program offices and provide necessary assistance, training, publications, and procedural guidance.
            (b) Other HUD Assistant Secretaries, the General Counsel, and the President of the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) shall:
            (1) Ensure compliance with this part for all actions under their jurisdiction that are proposed to be conducted, supported, or permitted in a floodplain or wetland;
            (2) Ensure that actions approved by HUD or responsible entities are monitored and that any prescribed mitigation is implemented;
            (3) Ensure that the offices under their jurisdiction have the technical resources to implement the requirements of this part; and

            (4) Incorporate in departmental regulations, handbooks, and project and site standards those criteria, standards, and procedures necessary to comply with the requirements of this part.
            (c) Responsible Entity Certifying Officer. Certifying Officers of responsible entities administering or reviewing activities subject to 24 CFR part 58 shall comply with this part in carrying out HUD-assisted programs. Certifying Officers of responsible entities subject to 24 CFR part 58 shall monitor approved actions and ensure that any prescribed mitigation is implemented.
            (d) Recipient. Recipients subject to 24 CFR part 58 shall monitor approved actions and ensure that any prescribed mitigation is implemented. Recipients shall:
            (1) Supply HUD (or the responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58) with all available, relevant information necessary for HUD (or the responsible entity) to perform the compliance required by this part; and
            (2) Implement mitigating measures required by HUD (or the responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58) under this part or select alternate eligible property.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at78 FR 68730, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Application of Executive Orders on Floodplain Management and Protection of Wetlands
          
            § 55.10
            Environmental review procedures under 24 CFR parts 50 and 58.

            (a) Where an environmental review is required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), and 24 CFR part 50 or part 58, compliance with this part shall be completed before the completion of an environmental assessment (EA), including a finding of no significant impact (FONSI), or an environmental impact statement (EIS), in accordance with the decision points listed in 24 CFR 50.17(a) through (h), or before the preparation of an EA under 24 CFR 58.40 or an EIS under 24 CFR 58.37. For types of proposed actions that are categorically excluded from NEPA requirements under 24 CFR part 50 (or part 58), compliance with this part shall be completed before the Department's initial approval (or approval by a responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58) of proposed actions in a floodplain or wetland.
            (b) The categorical exclusion of certain proposed actions from environmental review requirements under NEPA and 24 CFR parts 50 and 58 (see 24 CFR 50.20 and 58.35(a)) does not exclude those actions from compliance with this part.
            [78 FR 68730, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.11
            Applicability of Subpart C decisionmaking process.
            (a) Before reaching the decision points described in § 55.10(a), HUD (for Department-administered programs) or the responsible entity (for HUD financial assistance subject to 24 CFR part 58) shall determine whether Executive Order 11988, Executive Order 11990, and this part apply to the proposed action.
            (b) If Executive Order 11988 or Executive Order 11990 and this part apply, the approval of a proposed action or initial commitment shall be made in accordance with this part. The primary purpose of Executive Order 11988 is “to avoid to the extent possible the long and short term adverse impacts associated with the occupancy and modification of floodplains and to avoid direct or indirect support of floodplain development wherever there is a practicable alternative.” The primary purpose of Executive Order 11990 is “to avoid to the extent possible the long and short-term adverse impacts associated with the destruction or modification of wetlands and to avoid direct or indirect support of new construction in wetlands wherever there is a practicable alternative.”

            (c) The following table indicates the applicability, by location and type of action, of the decisionmaking process for implementing Executive Order 11988 and Executive Order 11990 under subpart C of this part.
            
            
              TABLE 1
              
                Type of proposed action (new reviewable action or an amendment) 1
                
                Type of proposed action
                Floodways
                Coastal high hazard areas
                Wetlands or 100-year floodplain outside coastal high hazard area and floodways
                Nonwetlands area outside of the 100-year and within the 500-year floodplain
              
              
                Critical Actions as defined in § 55.12(b)(2)
                Critical actions not allowed.
                Critical actions not allowed.
                Allowed if the proposed critical action is processed under § 55.20.2
                
                Allowed if the proposed critical action is processed under § 55.20.2
                
              
              
                Noncritical actions not excluded under § 55.12(b) or (c)
                Allowed only if the proposed non-critical action is a functionally dependent use and processed under § 55.20.2
                
                Allowed only if the proposed noncritical action is processed under § 55.20 2 and is (1) a functionally dependent use, (2) existing construction (including improvements), or (3) reconstruction following destruction caused by a disaster. If the action is not a functionally dependent use, the action must be designed for location in a Coastal High Hazard Area under § 55.1(c)(3)
                Allowed if proposed noncritical action is processed under § 55.20.2
                
                Any noncritical action is allowed without processing under this part.
              
              
                1 Under Executive Order 11990, the decisionmaking process in § 55.20 only applies to Federal assistance for new construction in wetlands locations.
              
                2 Or those paragraphs of § 55.20 that are applicable to an action listed in § 55.12(a).
            
            [78 FR 68730, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.12
            Inapplicability of 24 CFR part 55 to certain categories of proposed actions.
            (a) The decisionmaking steps in § 55.20(b), (c), and (g) (steps 2, 3, and 7) do not apply to the following categories of proposed actions:
            (1) HUD's or the recipient's actions involving the disposition of acquired multifamily housing projects or “bulk sales” of HUD-acquired (or under part 58 of recipients') one- to four-family properties in communities that are in the Regular Program of National Flood Insurance Program and in good standing (i.e., not suspended from program eligibility or placed on probation under 44 CFR 59.24). For programs subject to part 58, this paragraph applies only to recipients' disposition activities that are subject to review under part 58.
            (2) HUD's actions under the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701) for the purchase or refinancing of existing multifamily housing projects, hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, board and care facilities, and intermediate care facilities, in communities that are in good standing under the NFIP.
            (3) HUD's or the recipient's actions under any HUD program involving the repair, rehabilitation, modernization, weatherization, or improvement of existing multifamily housing projects, hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, board and care facilities, intermediate care facilities, and one- to four-family properties, in communities that are in the Regular Program of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and are in good standing, provided that the number of units is not increased more than 20 percent, the action does not involve a conversion from nonresidential to residential land use, the action does not meet the thresholds for “substantial improvement” under § 55.2(b)(10), and the footprint of the structure and paved areas is not significantly increased.

            (4) HUD's or the recipient's actions under any HUD program involving the repair, rehabilitation, modernization, weatherization, or improvement of existing nonresidential buildings and structures, in communities that are in the Regular Program of the NFIP and are in good standing, provided that the action does not meet the thresholds for “substantial improvement” under § 55.2(b)(10) and that the footprint of the structure and paved areas is not significantly increased.
            (b) The decisionmaking process in § 55.20 shall not apply to the following categories of proposed actions:
            (1) HUD's mortgage insurance actions and other financial assistance for the purchasing, mortgaging or refinancing of existing one- to four-family properties in communities that are in the Regular Program of the NFIP and in good standing (i.e., not suspended from program eligibility or placed on probation under 44 CFR 59.24), where the action is not a critical action and the property is not located in a floodway or Coastal High Hazard Area;
            (2) Financial assistance for minor repairs or improvements on one- to four-family properties that do not meet the thresholds for “substantial improvement” under § 55.2(b)(10);
            (3) HUD or a recipient's actions involving the disposition of individual HUD-acquired, one- to four-family properties;
            (4) HUD guarantees under the Loan Guarantee Recovery Fund Program (24 CFR part 573) of loans that refinance existing loans and mortgages, where any new construction or rehabilitation financed by the existing loan or mortgage has been completed prior to the filing of an application under the program, and the refinancing will not allow further construction or rehabilitation, nor result in any physical impacts or changes except for routine maintenance; and
            (5) The approval of financial assistance to lease an existing structure located within the floodplain, but only if;
            (i) The structure is located outside the floodway or Coastal High Hazard Area, and is in a community that is in the Regular Program of the NFIP and in good standing (i.e., not suspended from program eligibility or placed on probation under 44 CFR 59.24);
            (ii) The project is not a critical action; and
            (iii) The entire structure is or will be fully insured or insured to the maximum under the NFIP for at least the term of the lease.
            (c) This part shall not apply to the following categories of proposed HUD actions:
            (1) HUD-assisted activities described in 24 CFR 58.34 and 58.35(b);
            (2) HUD-assisted activities described in 24 CFR 50.19, except as otherwise indicated in § 50.19;
            (3) The approval of financial assistance for restoring and preserving the natural and beneficial functions and values of floodplains and wetlands, including through acquisition of such floodplain and wetland property, but only if:
            (i) The property is cleared of all existing structures and related improvements;
            (ii) The property is dedicated for permanent use for flood control, wetland protection, park land, or open space; and
            (iii) A permanent covenant or comparable restriction is placed on the property's continued use to preserve the floodplain or wetland from future development.
            (4) An action involving a repossession, receivership, foreclosure, or similar acquisition of property to protect or enforce HUD's financial interests under previously approved loans, grants, mortgage insurance, or other HUD assistance;
            (5) Policy-level actions described at 24 CFR 50.16 that do not involve site-based decisions;
            (6) A minor amendment to a previously approved action with no additional adverse impact on or from a floodplain or wetland;
            (7) HUD's or the responsible entity's approval of a project site, an incidental portion of which is situated in an adjacent floodplain, including the floodway or Coastal High Hazard Area, or wetland, but only if:
            (i) The proposed construction and landscaping activities (except for minor grubbing, clearing of debris, pruning, sodding, seeding, or other similar activities) do not occupy or modify the 100-year floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain for critical actions) or the wetland;

            (ii) Appropriate provision is made for site drainage that would not have an adverse effect on the wetland; and
            
            (iii) A permanent covenant or comparable restriction is placed on the property's continued use to preserve the floodplain or wetland;
            (8) HUD's or the responsible entity's approval of financial assistance for a project on any nonwetland site in a floodplain for which FEMA has issued:
            (i) A final Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), or final Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) that removed the property from a FEMA-designated floodplain location; or
            (ii) A conditional LOMA, conditional LOMR, or conditional LOMR-F if HUD or the responsible entity's approval is subject to the requirements and conditions of the conditional LOMA or conditional LOMR;
            (9) Issuance or use of Housing Vouchers, Certificates under the Section 8 Existing Housing Program, or other forms of rental subsidy where HUD, the awarding community, or the public housing agency that administers the contract awards rental subsidies that are not project-based (i.e., do not involve site-specific subsidies);
            (10) Special projects directed to the removal of material and architectural barriers that restrict the mobility of and accessibility to elderly and persons with disabilities;
            (11) The approval of financial assistance for acquisition, leasing, construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, or operation of ships and other waterborne vessels that will be used for transportation or cruises and will not be permanently moored.
            [78 FR 68731, Nov. 15, 2013; 78 FR 74009, Dec. 10, 2013]
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Procedures for Making Determinations on Floodplain Management and Protection of Wetlands
          
            § 55.20
            Decision making process.
            Except for actions covered by § 55.12(a), the decisionmaking process for compliance with this part contains eight steps, including public notices and an examination of practicable alternatives when addressing floodplains and wetlands. The steps to be followed in the decisionmaking process are as follows:
            (a) Step 1. Determine whether the proposed action is located in the 100-year floodplain (500-year floodplain for critical actions) or results in new construction in a wetland. If the action does not occur in a floodplain or result in new construction in a wetland, then no further compliance with this part is required. The following process shall be followed by HUD (or the responsible entity) in making wetland determinations.
            (1) Refer to § 55.28(a) where an applicant has submitted with its application to HUD (or to the recipient under programs subject to 24 CFR part 58) an individual Section 404 permit (including approval conditions and related environmental review).
            (2) Refer to § 55.2(b)(11) for making wetland determinations under this part.
            (3) For proposed actions occurring in both a wetland and a floodplain, completion of the decisionmaking process under § 55.20 is required regardless of the issuance of a Section 404 permit. In such a case, the wetland will be considered among the primary natural and beneficial functions and values of the floodplain.
            (b) Step 2. Notify the public and agencies responsible for floodplain management or wetlands protection at the earliest possible time of a proposal to consider an action in a 100-year floodplain (or a 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) or wetland and involve the affected and interested public and agencies in the decisionmaking process.
            (1) The public notices required by paragraphs (b) and (g) of this section may be combined with other project notices wherever appropriate. Notices required under this part must be bilingual if the affected public is largely non-English speaking. In addition, all notices must be published in an appropriate local printed news medium, and must be sent to federal, state, and local public agencies, organizations, and, where not otherwise covered, individuals known to be interested in the proposed action.

            (2) A minimum of 15 calendar days shall be allowed for comment on the public notice.
            
            (3) A notice under this paragraph shall state: The name, proposed location, and description of the activity; the total number of acres of floodplain or wetland involved; the related natural and beneficial functions and values of the floodplain or wetland that may be adversely affected by the proposed activity; the HUD approving official (or the Certifying Officer of the responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58); and the phone number to call for information. The notice shall indicate the hours of HUD or the responsible entity's office, and any Web site at which a full description of the proposed action may be reviewed.
            (c) Step 3. Identify and evaluate practicable alternatives to locating the proposed action in a 100-year floodplain (or a 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) or wetland.
            (1) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, HUD's or the responsible entity's consideration of practicable alternatives to the proposed site selected for a project should include:
            (i) Locations outside and not affecting the 100-year floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) or wetland;
            (ii) Alternative methods to serve the identical project objective, including feasible technological alternatives; and
            (iii) A determination not to approve any action proposing the occupancy or modification of a floodplain or wetland.
            (2) Practicability of alternative sites should be addressed in light of the following:
            (i) Natural values such as topography, habitat, and hazards;
            (ii) Social values such as aesthetics, historic and cultural values, land use patterns, and environmental justice; and
            (iii) Economic values such as the cost of space, construction, services, and relocation.
            (3) For multifamily projects involving HUD mortgage insurance that are initiated by third parties, HUD's consideration of practicable alternatives should include a determination not to approve the request.
            (d) Step 4. Identify and evaluate the potential direct and indirect impacts associated with the occupancy or modification of the 100-year floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) or the wetland and the potential direct and indirect support of floodplain and wetland development that could result from the proposed action.
            (1) Floodplain evaluation: The focus of the floodplain evaluation should be on adverse impacts to lives and property, and on natural and beneficial floodplain values. Natural and beneficial values include:
            (i) Water resources such as natural moderation of floods, water quality maintenance, and groundwater recharge;
            (ii) Living resources such as flora and fauna;
            (iii) Cultural resources such as archaeological, historic, and recreational aspects; and
            (iv) Agricultural, aquacultural, and forestry resources.
            (2) Wetland evaluation: In accordance with Section 5 of Executive Order 11990, the decisionmaker shall consider factors relevant to a proposal's effect on the survival and quality of the wetland. Among these factors that should be evaluated are:
            (i) Public health, safety, and welfare, including water supply, quality, recharge, and discharge; pollution; flood and storm hazards and hazard protection; and sediment and erosion;
            (ii) Maintenance of natural systems, including conservation and long-term productivity of existing flora and fauna; species and habitat diversity and stability; natural hydrologic function; wetland type; fish; wildlife; timber; and food and fiber resources;
            (iii) Cost increases attributed to wetland-required new construction and mitigation measures to minimize harm to wetlands that may result from such use; and
            (iv) Other uses of wetlands in the public interest, including recreational, scientific, and cultural uses.
            (e) Step 5. Where practicable, design or modify the proposed action to minimize the potential adverse impacts to and from the 100-year floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) or the wetland and to restore and preserve its natural and beneficial functions and values.
            (1) Minimization techniques for floodplain and wetland purposes include, but are not limited to: the use of permeable surfaces, natural landscape enhancements that maintain or restore natural hydrology through infiltration, native plant species, bioswales, evapotranspiration, stormwater capture and reuse, green or vegetative roofs with drainage provisions, and Natural Resource Conservation Service conservation easements. Floodproofing and elevating structures, including freeboard above the required base flood elevations, are also minimization techniques for floodplain purposes.
            (2) Appropriate and practicable compensatory mitigation is recommended for unavoidable adverse impacts to more than one acre of wetland. Compensatory mitigation includes, but is not limited to: permitee-responsible mitigation, mitigation banking, in-lieu fee mitigation, the use of preservation easements or protective covenants, and any form of mitigation promoted by state or Federal agencies. The use of compensatory mitigation may not substitute for the requirement to avoid and minimize impacts to the maximum extent practicable.
            (3) Actions covered by § 55.12(a) must be rejected if the proposed minimization is financially or physically unworkable. All critical actions in the 500-year floodplain shall be designed and built at or above the 100-year floodplain (in the case of new construction) and modified to include:
            (i) Preparation of and participation in an early warning system;
            (ii) An emergency evacuation and relocation plan;
            (iii) Identification of evacuation route(s) out of the 500-year floodplain; and
            (iv) Identification marks of past or estimated flood levels on all structures.
            (f) Step 6. Reevaluate the proposed action to determine:
            (1) Whether the action is still practicable in light of exposure to flood hazards in the floodplain or wetland, possible adverse impacts on the floodplain or wetland, the extent to which it will aggravate the current hazards to other floodplains or wetlands, and the potential to disrupt the natural and beneficial functions and values of floodplains or wetlands; and
            (2) Whether alternatives preliminarily rejected at Step 3 (paragraph (c)) of this section are practicable in light of information gained in Steps 4 and 5 (paragraphs (d) and (e)) of this section.
            (i) The reevaluation of alternatives shall include the potential impacts avoided or caused inside and outside the floodplain or wetland area. The impacts should include the protection of human life, real property, and the natural and beneficial functions and values served by the floodplain or wetland.
            (ii) A reevaluation of alternatives under this step should include a discussion of economic costs. For floodplains, the cost estimates should include savings or the costs of flood insurance, where applicable; flood proofing; replacement of services or functions of critical actions that might be lost; and elevation to at least the base flood elevation for sites located in floodplains, as appropriate on the applicable source under § 55.2(b)(1). For wetlands, the cost estimates should include the cost of filling the wetlands and mitigation.
            (g) Step 7. (1) If the reevaluation results in a determination that there is no practicable alternative to locating the proposal in the 100-year floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) or the wetland, publish a final notice that includes:
            (i) The reasons why the proposal must be located in the floodplain or wetland;
            (ii) A list of the alternatives considered in accordance with paragraphs(c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section; and
            (iii) All mitigation measures to be taken to minimize adverse impacts and to restore and preserve natural and beneficial functions and values.
            (2) In addition, the public notice procedures of § 55.20(b)(1) shall be followed, and a minimum of 7 calendar days for public comment before approval of the proposed action shall be provided.
            (h) Step 8. Upon completion of the decisionmaking process in Steps 1 through 7, implement the proposed action. There is a continuing responsibility on HUD (or on the responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58) and the recipient (if other than the responsible entity) to ensure that the mitigating measures identified in Step 7 are implemented.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 78 FR 68732, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.21
            Notification of floodplain hazard.
            For HUD programs under which a financial transaction for a property located in a floodplain (a 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) is guaranteed, approved, regulated or insured, any private party participating in the transaction and any current or prospective tenant shall be informed by HUD (or by HUD's designee, e.g., a mortgagor) or a responsible entity subject to 24 CFR part 58 of the hazards of the floodplain location before the execution of documents completing the transaction.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.22
            Conveyance restrictions for the disposition of multifamily real property.
            (a) In the disposition (including leasing) of multifamily properties acquired by HUD that are located in a floodplain (a 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action), the documents used for the conveyance must: (1) Refer to those uses that are restricted under identified federal, state, or local floodplain regulations; and
            (2) Include any land use restrictions limiting the use of the property by a grantee or purchaser and any successors under state or local laws.
            (b)(1) For disposition of multifamily properties acquired by HUD that are located in a 500-year floodplain and contain Critical Actions, HUD shall, as a condition of approval of the disposition, require by covenant or comparable restriction on the property's use that the property owner and successive owners provide written notification to each current and prospective tenant concerning: (i) The hazards to life and to property for those persons who reside or work in a structure located within the 500-year floodplain, and
            (ii) The availability of flood insurance on the contents of their dwelling unit or business.
            (2) The notice shall also be posted in the building so that it will be legible at all times and easily visible to all persons entering or using the building.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 59 FR 33199, June 28, 1994]
          
          
            § 55.23
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 55.24
            Aggregation.
            Where two or more actions have been proposed, require compliance with subpart C of this part, affect the same floodplain or wetland, and are currently under review by HUD (or by a responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58), individual or aggregated approvals may be issued. A single compliance review and approval under this section is subject to compliance with the decisionmaking process in § 55.20.
            [78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.25
            Areawide compliance.
            (a) A HUD-approved areawide compliance process may be substituted for individual compliance or aggregated compliance under § 55.24 where a series of individual actions is proposed or contemplated in a pertinent area for HUD's examination of floodplain hazards. In areawide compliances, the area for examination may include a sector of, or the entire, floodplain—as relevant to the proposed or anticipated actions. The areawide compliance process shall be in accord with the decision making process under § 55.20.

            (b) The areawide compliance process shall address the relevant executive orders and shall consider local land use planning and development controls (e.g., those enforced by the community for purposes of floodplain management under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)) and applicable state programs for floodplain management. The process shall include the development and publication of a strategy that identifies the range of development and mitigation measures under which the proposed HUD assistance may be approved and that indicates the types of actions that will not be approved in the floodplain.
            (c) Individual actions that fit within the types of proposed HUD actions specifically addressed under the areawide compliance do not require further compliance with § 55.20 except that a determination by the Department or a responsible entitysubject to 24 CFR part 58 shall be made concerning whether the individual action accords with the areawide strategy. Where the individual action does not accord with the areawide strategy, specific development and mitigation measures shall be prescribed as a condition of HUD's approval of the individual action.
            (d) Areawide compliance under the procedures of this section is subject to the following provisions:
            (1) It shall be initiated by HUD through a formal agreement of understanding with affected local governments concerning mutual responsibilities governing the preparation, issuance, implementation, and enforcement of the areawide strategy;
            (2) It may be performed jointly with one or more Federal departments or agencies, or responsible entities subject to 24 CFR part 58 that serve as the responsible Federal official;
            (3) It shall establish mechanisms to ensure that:
            (i) The terms of approval of individual actions (e.g., concerning structures and facilities) will be consistent with the areawide strategy;
            (ii) The controls set forth in the areawide strategy are implemented and enforced in a timely manner; and
            (iii) Where necessary, mitigation for individual actions will be established as a condition of approval.
            (4) An open scoping process (in accordance with 40 CFR 1501.7) shall be used for determining the scope of issues to be addressed and for identifying significant issues related to housing and community development for the floodplain;
            (5) Federal, state and local agencies with expertise in floodplain management, flood evacuation preparedness, land use planning and building regulation, or soil and natural resource conservation shall be invited to participate in the scoping process and to provide advice and comments; and

            (6) Eligibility for participation in and the use of the areawide compliance must be limited to communities that are in the Regular Program of the National Flood Insurance Program and in good standing (i.e., not suspended from program eligibility or placed on probation under 44 CFR 59.24), thereby demonstrating a capacity for and commitment to floodplain management standards sufficient to perform responsibilities under this part.
            (7) An expiration date (not to exceed ten years from the date of the formal adoption by the local governments) for HUD approval of areawide compliance under this part must be stated in the agreement between the local governments and HUD. In conjunction with the setting of an expiration date, a mechanism for HUD's reevaluation of the appropriateness of areawide compliance must be provided in the agreement.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.26
            Adoption of another agency's review under the executive orders.
            If a proposed action covered under this part is already covered in a prior review performed under either or both of the Executive Orders by another agency, including HUD or a different responsible entity, that review may be adopted by HUD or by a responsible entity authorized under 24 CFR part 58, provided that:
            (a) There is no pending litigation relating to the other agency's review for floodplain management or wetland protection;
            (b) The adopting agency makes a finding that:
            (1) The type of action currently proposed is comparable to the type of action previously reviewed by the other agency; and
            (2) There has been no material change in circumstances since the previous review was conducted; and
            (c) As a condition of approval, mitigation measures similar to those prescribed in the previous review shall be required of the current proposed action.
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            
            § 55.27
            Documentation.
            (a) For purposes of compliance with § 55.20, the responsible HUD official who would approve the proposed action (or Certifying Officer for a responsible entity authorized by 24 CFR part 58) shall require that the following actions be documented:
            (1) When required by § 55.20(c), practicable alternative sites have been considered outside the floodplain or wetland, but within the local housing market area, the local public utility service area, or the jurisdictional boundaries of a recipient unit of general local government, whichever geographic area is most appropriate to the proposed action. Actual sites under review must be identified and the reasons for the nonselection of those sites as practicable alternatives must be described; and
            (2) Under § 55.20(e)(2), measures to minimize the potential adverse impacts of the proposed action on the affected floodplain or wetland as identified in § 55.20(d) have been applied to the design for the proposed action.
            (b) For purposes of compliance with § 55.24, § 55.25, or § 55.26 (as appropriate), the responsible HUD official (or the Certifying Officer for a responsible entitysubject to 24 CFR part 58) who would approve the proposed action shall require documentation of compliance with the required conditions.
            (c) Documentation of compliance with this part (including copies of public notices) must be attached to the environmental assessment, the environmental impact statement or the compliance record and be maintained as a part of the project file. In addition, for environmental impact statements, documentation of compliance with this part must be included as a part of the record of decision (or environmental review record for responsible entitiessubject to 24 CFR part 58).
            [59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 55.28
            Use of individual permits under section 404 of the Clean Water Act for HUD Executive Order 11990 processing where all wetlands are covered by the permit.
            (a) Processing requirements. HUD (or the responsible entity subject to 24 CFR part 58) shall not be required to perform the steps at § 55.20(a) through (e) upon adoption by HUD (or the responsible entity) of the terms and conditions of a Section 404 permit so long as:
            (1) The project involves new construction on a property located outside of the 100-year floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain for critical actions);
            (2) The applicant has submitted, with its application to HUD (or to the recipient under programs subject to 24 CFR part 58), an individual Section 404 permit (including approval conditions) issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) (or by a State or Tribal government under Section 404(h) of the Clean Water Act) for the proposed project; and
            (3) All wetlands adversely affected by the action are covered by the permit.
            (b) Unless a project is excluded under § 55.12, processing under all of § 55.20 is required for new construction in wetlands that are not subject to section 404 of the Clean Water Act and for new construction for which the USACE (or a State or Tribal government under section 404(h) of the Clean Water Act) issues a general permit under Section 404.
            [78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 58
        PART 58—ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR ENTITIES ASSUMING HUD ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
        
          
            Subpart A—Purpose, Legal Authority, Federal Laws and Authorities
            Sec.
            58.1
            Purpose and applicability.
            58.2
            Terms, abbreviations and definitions.
            58.4
            Assumption authority.
            58.5
            Related Federal laws and authorities.
            58.6
            Other requirements.
          
          
            Subpart B—General Policy: Responsibilities of Responsible Entities
            58.10
            Basic environmental responsibility.
            58.11
            Legal capacity and performance.
            58.12
            Technical and administrative capacity.
            58.13
            Responsibilities of the certifying officer.
            58.14
            Interaction with State, Federal and non-Federal entities.
            58.15
            Tiering.
            
            58.17
            [Reserved]
            58.18
            Responsibilities of States assuming HUD environmental responsibilities.
          
          
            Subpart C—General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures
            58.21
            Time periods.
            58.22
            Limitations on activities pending clearance.
            58.23
            Financial assistance for environmental review.
          
          
            Subpart D—Environmental Review Process: Documentation, Range of Activities, Project Aggregation and Classification
            58.30
            Environmental review process.
            58.32
            Project aggregation.
            58.33
            Emergencies.
            58.34
            Exempt activities.
            58.35
            Categorical exclusions.
            58.36
            Environmental assessments.
            58.37
            Environmental impact statement determinations.
            58.38
            Environmental review record.
          
          
            Subpart E—Environmental Review Process: Environmental Assessments (EA's)
            58.40
            Preparing the environmental assessment.
            58.43
            Dissemination and/or publication of the findings of no significant impact.
            58.45
            Public comment periods.
            58.46
            Time delays for exceptional circumstances.
            58.47
            Re-evaluation of environmental assessments and other environmental findings.
          
          
            Subpart F—Environmental Review Process: Environmental Impact Statement Determinations
            58.52
            Adoption of other agencies' EISs.
            58.53
            Use of prior environmental impact statements.
          
          
            Subpart G—Environmental Review Process: Procedures for Draft, Final and Supplemental Environmental Impact Statements
            58.55
            Notice of intent to prepare an EIS.
            58.56
            Scoping process.
            58.57
            Lead agency designation.
            58.59
            Public hearings and meetings.
            58.60
            Preparation and filing of environmental impact statements.
          
          
            Subpart H—Release of Funds for Particular Projects
            58.70
            Notice of intent to request release of funds.
            58.71
            Request for release of funds and certification.
            58.72
            HUD or State actions on RROFs and certifications.
            58.73
            Objections to release of funds.
            58.74
            Time for objecting.
            58.75
            Permissible bases for objections.
            58.76
            Procedure for objections.
            58.77
            Effect of approval of certification.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          12 U.S.C. 1707 note, 1715z-13a(k); 25 U.S.C. 4115 and 4226; 42 U.S.C. 1437x, 3535(d), 3547, 4321-4335, 4852, 5304(g), 12838, and 12905(h); title II of Pub. L. 105-276; E.O. 11514 as amended by E.O. 11991, 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 123.
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—Purpose, Legal Authority, Federal Laws and Authorities
          
            § 58.1
            Purpose and applicability.
            (a) Purpose. This part provides instructions and guidance to recipients of HUD assistance and other responsible entities for conducting an environmental review for a particular project or activity and for obtaining approval of a Request for Release of Funds.
            (b) Applicability. This part applies to activities and projects where specific statutory authority exists for recipients or other responsible entities to assume environmental responsibilities. Programs and activities subject to this part include:
            (1) Community Development Block Grant programs authorized by Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, in accordance with section 104(g) (42 U.S.C. 5304(g));
            (2) [Reserved]

            (3)(i) Grants to states and units of general local government under the Emergency Shelter Grant Program, Supportive Housing Program (and its predecessors, the Supportive Housing Demonstration Program (both Transitional Housing and Permanent Housing for Homeless Persons with Disabilities) and Supplemental Assistance for Facilities to Assist the Homeless), Shelter Plus Care Program, Safe Havens for Homeless Individuals Demonstration Program, and Rural Homeless Housing Assistance, authorized by Title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, in accordance with section 443 (42 U.S.C. 11402);
            (ii) Grants beginning with Fiscal Year 2001 to private non-profit organizations and housing agencies under the Supportive Housing Program and Shelter Plus Care Program authorized by Title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, in accordance with section 443 (42 U.S.C. 11402);
            (4) The HOME Investment Partnerships Program authorized by Title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (NAHA), in accordance with section 288 (42 U.S.C. 12838);
            (5) Grants to States and units of general local government for abatement of lead-based paint and lead dust hazards pursuant to Title II of the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1992, and grants for lead-based paint hazard reduction under section 1011 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, in accordance with section 1011(o) (42 U.S.C. 4852(o));
            (6)(i) Public Housing Programs under Title I of the United States Housing Act of 1937, including HOPE VI grants authorized under section 24 of the Act for Fiscal Year 2000 and later, in accordance with section 26 (42 U.S.C. 1437x);
            (ii) Grants for the revitalization of severely distressed public housing (HOPE VI) for Fiscal Year 1999 and prior years, in accordance with Title II of the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999 (Pub. L. 105-276, approved October 21, 1998); and
            (iii) Assistance administered by a public housing agency under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, except for assistance provided under part 886 of this title, in accordance with section 26 (42 U.S.C. 1437x);
            (7) Special Projects appropriated under an appropriation act for HUD, such as special projects under the heading “Annual Contributions for Assisted Housing” in Title II of various Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Acts, in accordance with section 305(c) of the Multifamily Housing Property Disposition Reform Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 3547);
            (8) The FHA Multifamily Housing Finance Agency Pilot Program under section 542(c) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, in accordance with section 542(c)(9)(12 U.S.C. 1707 note);
            (9) The Self-Help Homeownership Opportunity Program under section 11 of the Housing Opportunity Program Extension Act of 1996 (Pub. L. 104-120, 110 Stat. 834), in accordance with section 11(m));
            (10) Assistance provided under the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996 (NAHASDA), in accordance with:
            (i) Section 105 for Indian Housing Block Grants and Federal Guarantees or Financing for Tribal Housing Authorities (25 U.S.C. 4115 and 4226); and
            (ii) Section 806 for Native Hawaiian Housing Block Grants (25 U.S.C. 4226);
            (11) Indian Housing Loan Guarantees authorized by section 184 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, in accordance with section 184(k) (12 U.S.C. 1715z-13a(k)); and
            (12) Grants for Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) under the AIDS Housing Opportunity Act, as follows: competitive grants beginning with Fiscal Year 2001 and all formula grants, in accordance with section 856(h) (42 U.S.C. 12905(h)); all grants for Fiscal Year 1999 and prior years, in accordance with section 207(c) of the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999 (Pub. L. 105-276, approved October 21, 1998).

            (c) When HUD assistance is used to help fund a revolving loan fund that is administered by a recipient or another party, the activities initially receiving assistance from the fund are subject to the requirements in this part. Future activities receiving assistance from the revolving loan fund, after the fund has received loan repayments, are subject to the environmental review requirements if the rules of the HUD program that initially provided assistance to the fund continue to treat the activities as subject to the Federal requirements. If the HUD program treats the activities as not being subject to any Federal requirements, then the activities cease to become Federally-funded activities and the provisions of this part do not apply.
            (d) To the extent permitted by applicable laws and the applicable regulations of the Council on Environmental Quality, the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development may, for good cause and with appropriate conditions, approve waivers and exceptions or establish criteria for exceptions from the requirements of this part.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56127, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.2
            Terms, abbreviations and definitions.
            (a) For the purposes of this part, the following definitions supplement the uniform terminology provided in 40 CFR part 1508:
            (1) Activity means an action that a grantee or recipient puts forth as part of an assisted project, regardless of whether its cost is to be borne by the HUD assistance or is an eligible expense under the HUD assistance program.
            (2) Certifying Officer means the official who is authorized to execute the Request for Release of Funds and Certification and has the legal capacity to carry out the responsibilities of § 58.13.
            (3) Extraordinary Circumstances means a situation in which an environmental assessment (EA) or environmental impact statement (EIS) is not normally required, but due to unusual conditions, an EA or EIS is appropriate. Indicators of unusual conditions are:
            (i) Actions that are unique or without precedent;
            (ii) Actions that are substantially similar to those that normally require an EIS;
            (iii) Actions that are likely to alter existing HUD policy or HUD mandates; or
            (iv) Actions that, due to unusual physical conditions on the site or in the vicinity, have the potential for a significant impact on the environment or in which the environment could have a significant impact on users of the facility.
            (4) Project means an activity, or a group of integrally related activities, designed by the recipient to accomplish, in whole or in part, a specific objective.
            (5) Recipient means any of the following entities, when they are eligible recipients or grantees under a program listed in § 58.1(b):
            (i) A State that does not distribute HUD assistance under the program to a unit of general local government;
            (ii) Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and Palau;
            (iii) A unit of general local government;
            (iv) An Indian tribe;
            (v) With respect to Public Housing Programs under § 58.1(b)(6)(i), fiscal year 1999 and prior HOPE VI grants under § 58.1(b)(6)(ii) or Section 8 assistance under § 58.1(b)(6)(iii), a public housing agency;
            (vi) Any direct grantee of HUD for a special project under § 58.1(b)(7);
            (vii) With respect to the FHA Multifamily Housing Finance Agency Program under 58.1(b)(8), a qualified housing finance agency;
            (viii) With respect to the Self-Help Homeownership Opportunity Program under § 58.1(b)(9), any direct grantee of HUD.
            (ix)(A) With respect to NAHASDA assistance under § 58.1(b)(10), the Indian tribe or the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands; and
            (B) With respect to the Section 184 Indian Housing Loan Guarantee program under § 58.1(b)(11), the Indian tribe.
            (x) With respect to the Shelter Plus Care and Supportive Housing Programs under § 58.1(b)(3)(ii), nonprofit organizations and other entities.
            (6) Release of funds. In the case of the FHA Multifamily Housing Finance Agency Program under § 58.1(b)(8), Release of Funds, as used in this part, refers to HUD issuance of a firm approval letter, and Request for Release of Funds refers to a recipient's request for a firm approval letter. In the case of the Section 184 Indian Housing Loan Guarantee program under § 58.1(b)(11), Release of Funds refers to HUD's issuance of a commitment to guarantee a loan, or if there is no commitment, HUD's issuance of a certificate of guarantee.
            
            (7) Responsible Entity. Responsible Entity means:
            (i) With respect to environmental responsibilities under programs listed in § 58.1(b)(1), (2), (3)(i), (4), and (5), a recipient under the program.

            (ii) With respect to environmental responsibilities under the programs listed in § 58.1(b)(3)(ii) and (6) through (12), a state, unit of general local government, Indian tribe or Alaska Native Village, or the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands, when it is the recipient under the program. Under the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4101 et seq.) listed in § 58.1(b)(10)(i), the Indian tribe is the responsible entity whether or not a Tribally Designated Housing Entity is authorized to receive grant amounts on behalf of the tribe. The Indian tribe is also the responsible entity under the Section 184 Indian Housing Loan Guarantee program listed in § 58.1(b)(11). Regional Corporations in Alaska are considered Indian tribes in this part. Non-recipient responsible entities are designated as follows:
            (A) For qualified housing finance agencies, the State or a unit of general local government, Indian tribe or Alaska native village whose jurisdiction contains the project site;
            (B) For public housing agencies, the unit of general local government within which the project is located that exercises land use responsibility, or if HUD determines this infeasible, the county, or if HUD determines this infeasible, the State;
            (C) For non-profit organizations and other entities, the unit of general local government, Indian tribe or Alaska native village within which the project is located that exercises land use responsibility, or if HUD determines this infeasible, the county, or if HUD determines this infeasible, the State;
            (8) Unit Density refers to a change in the number of dwelling units. Where a threshold is identified as a percentage change in density that triggers review requirements, no distinction is made between an increase or a decrease in density.
            (9) Tiering means the evaluation of an action or an activity at various points in the development process as a proposal or event becomes ripe for an Environment Assessment or Review.
            (10) Vacant Building means a habitable structure that has been vacant for more than one year.
            (b) The following abbreviations are used throughout this part:
            (1) CDBG—Community Development Block Grant;
            (2) CEQ—Council on Environmental Quality;
            (3) EA—Environmental Assessment;
            (4) EIS—Environmental Impact Statement;
            (5) EPA—Environmental Protection Agency;
            (6) ERR—Environmental Review Record;
            (7) FONSI—Finding of No Significant Impact;
            (8) HUD—Department of Housing and Urban Development;
            (9) NAHA—Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act of 1990;
            (10) NEPA—National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended;
            (11) NOI/EIS—Notice of Intent to Prepare an EIS;
            (12) NOI/RROF—Notice of Intent to Request Release of Funds;
            (13) ROD—Record of Decision;
            (14) ROF—Release of Funds; and
            (15) RROF—Request for Release of Funds.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56128, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.4
            Assumption authority.
            (a) Assumption authority for responsible entities: General. Responsible entities shall assume the responsibility for environmental review, decision-making, and action that would otherwise apply to HUD under NEPA and other provisions of law that further the purposes of NEPA, as specified in § 58.5. Responsible entities that receive assistance directly from HUD assume these responsibilities by execution of a grant agreement with HUD and/or a legally binding document such as the certification contained on HUD Form 7015.15, certifying to the assumption of environmental responsibilities. When a State distributes funds to a responsible entity, the State must provide for appropriate procedures by which these responsible entities will evidence their assumption of environmental responsibilities.
            (b) Particular responsibilities of the States. (1) States are recipients for purposes of directly undertaking a State project and must assume the environmental review responsibilities for the State's activities and those of any non-governmental entity that may participate in the project. In this case, the State must submit the certification and RROF to HUD for approval.
            (2) States must exercise HUD's responsibilities in accordance with § 58.18, with respect to approval of a unit of local government's environmental certification and RROF for a HUD assisted project funded through the state. Approval by the state of a unit of local government's certification and RROF satisfies the Secretary's responsibilities under NEPA and the related laws cited in § 58.5.
            (c) Particular responsibilities of Indian tribes. An Indian tribe may, but is not required to, assume responsibilities for environmental review, decision-making and action for programs authorized by the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4101 et seq.) (other than title VIII) or section 184 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 1715z-13a). The tribe must make a separate decision regarding assumption of responsibilities for each of these Acts and communicate that decision in writing to HUD. If the tribe assumes these responsibilities, the requirements of this part shall apply. If a tribe formally declines assumption of these responsibilities, they are retained by HUD and the provisions of part 50 of this title apply.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56128, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.5
            Related Federal laws and authorities.
            In accordance with the provisions of law cited in § 58.1(b), the responsible entity must assume responsibilities for environmental review, decision-making and action that would apply to HUD under the following specified laws and authorities. The responsible entity must certify that it has complied with the requirements that would apply to HUD under these laws and authorities and must consider the criteria, standards, policies and regulations of these laws and authorities.
            (a) Historic properties. (1) The National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.), particularly sections 106 and 110 (16 U.S.C. 470 and 470h-2).
            (2) Executive Order 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment, May 13, 1971 (36 FR 8921), 3 CFR 1971-1975 Comp., p. 559, particularly section 2(c).
            (3) Federal historic preservation regulations as follows:
            (i) 36 CFR part 800 with respect to HUD programs other than Urban Development Action Grants (UDAG); and
            (ii) 36 CFR part 801 with respect to UDAG.

            (4) The Reservoir Salvage Act of 1960 as amended by the Archeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 469 et seq.), particularly section 3 (16 U.S.C. 469a-1).
            (b) Floodplain management and wetland protection. (1) Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management, May 24, 1977 (42 FR 26951), 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 117, as interpreted in HUD regulations at 24 CFR part 55, particularly section 2(a) of the order (For an explanation of the relationship between the decision-making process in 24 CFR part 55 and this part, see § 55.10 of this subtitle A.)
            (2) Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands, May 24, 1977 (42 FR 26961), 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 121, as interpreted in HUD regulations at 24 CFR part 55, particularly sections 2 and 5 of the order.
            (c) Coastal Zone Management. The Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.), as amended, particularly section 307(c) and (d) (16 U.S.C. 1456(c) and (d)).
            (d) Sole source aquifers. (1) The Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 201, 300(f) et seq., and 21 U.S.C. 349) as amended; particularly section 1424(e)(42 U.S.C. 300h-3(e)).
            (2) Sole Source Aquifers (Environmental Protection Agency—40 CFR part 149).
            (e) Endangered species. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) as amended, particularly section 7 (16 U.S.C. 1536).
            
            (f) Wild and scenic rivers. The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act of 1968 (16 U.S.C. 1271 et seq.) as amended, particularly section 7(b) and (c) (16 U.S.C. 1278(b) and (c)).
            (g) Air quality. (1) The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et. seq.) as amended; particularly section 176(c) and (d) (42 U.S.C. 7506(c) and (d)).
            (2) Determining Conformity of Federal Actions to State or Federal Implementation Plans (Environmental Protection Agency—40 CFR parts 6, 51, and 93).
            (h) Farmlands protection. (1) Farmland Protection Policy Act of 1981 (7 U.S.C. 4201 et seq.) particularly sections 1540(b) and 1541 (7 U.S.C. 4201(b) and 4202).
            (2) Farmland Protection Policy (Department of Agriculture—7 CFR part 658).
            (i) HUD environmental standards. (1) Applicable criteria and standards specified in part 51 of this title, other than the runway clear zone notification requirement in § 51.303(a)(3).
            (2)(i) Also, it is HUD policy that all properties that are being proposed for use in HUD programs be free of hazardous materials, contamination, toxic chemicals and gases, and radioactive substances, where a hazard could affect the health and safety of occupants or conflict with the intended utilization of the property.
            (ii) The environmental review of multifamily housing with five or more dwelling units (including leasing), or non-residential property, must include the evaluation of previous uses of the site or other evidence of contamination on or near the site, to ensure that the occupants of proposed sites are not adversely affected by any of the hazards listed in paragraph (i)(2)(i) of this section.
            (iii) Particular attention should be given to any proposed site on or in the general proximity of such areas as dumps, landfills, industrial sites, or other locations that contain, or may have contained, hazardous wastes.
            (iv) The responsible entity shall use current techniques by qualified professionals to undertake investigations determined necessary.
            (j) Environmental justice. Executive Order 12898—Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations, February 11, 1994 (59 FR 7629), 3 CFR, 1994 Comp. p. 859.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56128, Sept. 29, 2003; 78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 58.6
            Other requirements.
            In addition to the duties under the laws and authorities specified in § 58.5 for assumption by the responsible entity under the laws cited in § 58.1(b), the responsible entity must comply with the following requirements. Applicability of the following requirements does not trigger the certification and release of funds procedure under this part or preclude exemption of an activity under § 58.34(a)(12) and/or the applicability of § 58.35(b). However, the responsible entity remains responsible for addressing the following requirements in its ERR and meeting these requirements, where applicable, regardless of whether the activity is exempt under § 58.34 or categorically excluded under § 58.35(a) or (b).
            (a)(1) Under the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4001-4128), Federal financial assistance for acquisition and construction purposes (including rehabilitation) may not be used in an area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as having special flood hazards, unless:
            (i) The community in which the area is situated is participating in the National Flood Insurance Program (see 44 CFR parts 59 through 79), or less than one year has passed since the FEMA notification regarding such hazards; and
            (ii) Where the community is participating in the National Flood Insurance Program, flood insurance protection is to be obtained as a condition of the approval of financial assistance to the property owner.

            (2) Where the community is participating in the National Flood Insurance Program and the recipient provides financial assistance for acquisition or construction purposes (including rehabilitation) for property located in an area identified by FEMA as having special flood hazards, the responsible entity is responsible for assuring that flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program is obtained and maintained.
            (3) Paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to Federal formula grants made to a State.
            (4) Flood insurance requirements cannot be fulfilled by self-insurance except as authorized by law for assistance to state-owned projects within states approved by the Federal Insurance Administrator consistent with 44 CFR 75.11.
            (b) Under section 582 of the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994, 42 U.S.C. 5154a, HUD disaster assistance that is made available in a special flood hazard area may not be used to make a payment (including any loan assistance payment) to a person for repair, replacement or restoration for flood damage to any personal, residential or commercial property if:
            (1) The person had previously received Federal flood disaster assistance conditioned on obtaining and maintaining flood insurance; and
            (2) The person failed to obtain and maintain flood insurance.
            (c) Pursuant to the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, as amended by the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (16 U.S.C. 3501), HUD assistance may not be used for most activities proposed in the Coastal Barrier Resources System.
            (d) In all cases involving HUD assistance, subsidy, or insurance for the purchase or sale of an existing property in a Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone, as defined in 24 CFR part 51, the responsible entity shall advise the buyer that the property is in a runway clear zone or clear zone, what the implications of such a location are, and that there is a possibility that the property may, at a later date, be acquired by the airport operator. The buyer must sign a statement acknowledging receipt of this information.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15271, Mar. 30, 1998; 78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
        
        
          Subpart B—General Policy: Responsibilities of Responsible Entities
          
            § 58.10
            Basic environmental responsibility.
            In accordance with the provisions of law cited in § 58.1(b), except as otherwise provided in § 58.4(c), the responsible entity must assume the environmental responsibilities for projects under programs cited in § 58.1(b). In doing so, the responsible entity must comply with the provisions of NEPA and the CEQ regulations contained in 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508, including the requirements set forth in this part.
            [68 FR 56128, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.11
            Legal capacity and performance.
            (a) A responsible entity which believes that it does not have the legal capacity to carry out the environmental responsibilities required by this part must contact the appropriate local HUD Office or the State for further instructions. Determinations of legal capacity will be made on a case-by-case basis.
            (b) If a public housing, special project, HOPWA, Supportive Housing, Shelter Plus Care, or Self-Help Homeownership Opportunity recipient that is not a responsible entity objects to the non-recipient responsible entity conducting the environmental review on the basis of performance, timing, or compatibility of objectives, HUD will review the facts to determine who will perform the environmental review.
            (c) At any time, HUD may reject the use of a responsible entity to conduct the environmental review in a particular case on the basis of performance, timing or compatibility of objectives, or in accordance with § 58.77(d)(1).

            (d) If a responsible entity, other than a recipient, objects to performing an environmental review, or if HUD determines that the responsible entity should not perform the environmental review, HUD may designate another responsible entity to conduct the review in accordance with this part or may itself conduct the environmental review in accordance with the provisions of 24 CFR part 50.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56129, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.12
            Technical and administrative capacity.
            The responsible entity must develop the technical and administrative capability necessary to comply with 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508 and the requirements of this part.
          
          
            § 58.13
            Responsibilities of the certifying officer.
            Under the terms of the certification required by § 58.71, a responsible entity's certifying officer is the “responsible Federal official” as that term is used in section 102 of NEPA and in statutory provisions cited in § 58.1(b). The Certifying Officer is therefore responsible for all the requirements of section 102 of NEPA and the related provisions in 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508, and 24 CFR part 58, including the related Federal authorities listed in § 58.5. The Certifying Officer must also:
            (a) Represent the responsible entity and be subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal courts. The Certifying Officer will not be represented by the Department of Justice in court; and
            (b) Ensure that the responsible entity reviews and comments on all EISs prepared for Federal projects that may have an impact on the recipient's program.
          
          
            § 58.14
            Interaction with State, Federal and non-Federal entities.
            A responsible entity shall consult with appropriate environmental agencies, State, Federal and non-Federal entities and the public in the preparation of an EIS, EA or other environmental reviews undertaken under the related laws and authorities cited in § 58.5 and § 58.6. The responsible entity must also cooperate with other agencies to reduce duplication between NEPA and comparable environmental review requirements of the State (see 40 CFR 1506.2 (b) and (c)). The responsible entity must prepare its EAs and EISs so that they comply with the environmental review requirements of both Federal and State laws unless otherwise specified or provided by law. State, Federal and local agencies may participate or act in a joint lead or cooperating agency capacity in the preparation of joint EISs or joint environmental assessments (see 40 CFR 1501.5(b) and 1501.6). A single EIS or EA may be prepared and adopted by multiple users to the extent that the review addresses the relevant environmental issues and there is a written agreement between the cooperating agencies which sets forth the coordinated and overall responsibilities.
            [63 FR 15271, Mar. 30, 1998]
          
          
            § 58.15
            Tiering.
            Responsible entities may tier their environmental reviews and assessments to eliminate repetitive discussions of the same issues at subsequent levels of review. Tiering is appropriate when there is a requirement to evaluate a policy or proposal in the early stages of development or when site-specific analysis or mitigation is not currently feasible and a more narrow or focused analysis is better done at a later date. The site specific review need only reference or summarize the issues addressed in the broader review. The broader review should identify and evaluate those issues ripe for decision and exclude those issues not relevant to the policy, program or project under consideration. The broader review should also establish the policy, standard or process to be followed in the site specific review. The Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) with respect to the broader assessment shall include a summary of the assessment and identify the significant issues to be considered in site specific reviews. Subsequent site-specific reviews will not require notices or a Request for Release of Funds unless the Certifying Officer determines that there are unanticipated impacts or impacts not adequately addressed in the prior review. A tiering approach can be used for meeting environmental review requirements in areas designated for special focus in local Consolidated Plans. Local and State Governments are encouraged to use the Consolidated Plan process to facilitate environmental reviews.
          
          
            
            § 58.17
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 58.18
            Responsibilities of States assuming HUD environmental responsibilities.
            States that elect to administer a HUD program shall ensure that the program complies with the provisions of this part. The state must:
            (a) Designate the state agency or agencies that will be responsible for carrying out the requirements and administrative responsibilities set forth in subpart H of this part and which will:
            (1) Develop a monitoring and enforcement program for post-review actions on environmental reviews and monitor compliance with any environmental conditions included in the award.
            (2) Receive public notices, RROFs, and certifications from recipients pursuant to §§ 58.70 and 58.71; accept objections from the public and from other agencies (§ 58.73); and perform other related responsibilities regarding releases of funds.
            (b) Fulfill the state role in subpart H relative to the time period set for the receipt and disposition of comments, objections and appeals (if any) on particular projects.
            [68 FR 56129, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
        
        
          Subpart C—General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures
          
            § 58.21
            Time periods.
            All time periods in this part shall be counted in calendar days. The first day of a time period begins at 12:01 a.m. local time on the day following the publication or the mailing and posting date of the notice which initiates the time period.
          
          
            § 58.22
            Limitations on activities pending clearance.
            (a) Neither a recipient nor any participant in the development process, including public or private nonprofit or for-profit entities, or any of their contractors, may commit HUD assistance under a program listed in § 58.1(b) on an activity or project until HUD or the state has approved the recipient's RROF and the related certification from the responsible entity. In addition, until the RROF and the related certification have been approved, neither a recipient nor any participant in the development process may commit non-HUD funds on or undertake an activity or project under a program listed in § 58.1(b) if the activity or project would have an adverse environmental impact or limit the choice of reasonable alternatives.
            (b) If a project or activity is exempt under § 58.34, or is categorically excluded (except in extraordinary circumstances) under § 58.35(b), no RROF is required and the recipient may undertake the activity immediately after the responsible entity has documented its determination as required in § 58.34(b) and § 58.35(d), but the recipient must comply with applicable requirements under § 58.6.
            (c) If a recipient is considering an application from a prospective subrecipient or beneficiary and is aware that the prospective subrecipient or beneficiary is about to take an action within the jurisdiction of the recipient that is prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section, then the recipient will take appropriate action to ensure that the objectives and procedures of NEPA are achieved.
            (d) An option agreement on a proposed site or property is allowable prior to the completion of the environmental review if the option agreement is subject to a determination by the recipient on the desirability of the property for the project as a result of the completion of the environmental review in accordance with this part and the cost of the option is a nominal portion of the purchase price. There is no constraint on the purchase of an option by third parties that have not been selected for HUD funding, have no responsibility for the environmental review and have no say in the approval or disapproval of the project.
            (e) Self-Help Homeownership Opportunity Program (SHOP). In accordance with section 11(d)(2)(A) of the Housing Opportunity Program Extension Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 12805 note), an organization, consortium, or affiliate receiving assistance under the SHOP program may advance nongrant funds to acquire land prior to completion of an environmental review and approval of a Request for Release of Funds (RROF) and certification, notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section. Any advances to acquire land prior to approval of the RROF and certification are made at the risk of the organization, consortium, or affiliate and reimbursement for such advances may depend on the result of the environmental review. This authorization is limited to the SHOP program only and all other forms of HUD assistance are subject to the limitations in paragraph (a) of this section.
            (f) Relocation. Funds may be committed for relocation assistance before the approval of the RROF and related certification for the project provided that the relocation assistance is required by 24 CFR part 42.
            [68 FR 56129, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.23
            Financial assistance for environmental review.
            The costs of environmental reviews, including costs incurred in complying with any of the related laws and authorities cited in § 58.5 and § 58.6, are eligible costs to the extent allowable under the HUD assistance program regulations.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Environmental Review Process: Documentation, Range of Activities, Project Aggregation and Classification
          
            § 58.30
            Environmental review process.
            (a) The environmental review process consists of all the actions that a responsible entity must take to determine compliance with this part. The environmental review process includes all the compliance actions needed for other activities and projects that are not assisted by HUD but are aggregated by the responsible entity in accordance with § 58.32.
            (b) The environmental review process should begin as soon as a recipient determines the projected use of HUD assistance.
          
          
            § 58.32
            Project aggregation.
            (a) A responsible entity must group together and evaluate as a single project all individual activities which are related either on a geographical or functional basis, or are logical parts of a composite of contemplated actions.

            (b) In deciding the most appropriate basis for aggregation when evaluating activities under more than one program, the responsible entity may choose: functional aggregation when a specific type of activity (e.g., water improvements) is to take place in several separate locales or jurisdictions; geographic aggregation when a mix of dissimilar but related activities is to be concentrated in a fairly specific project area (e.g., a combination of water, sewer and street improvements and economic development activities); or a combination of aggregation approaches, which, for various project locations, considers the impacts arising from each functional activity and its interrelationship with other activities.
            (c) The purpose of project aggregation is to group together related activities so that the responsible entity can:
            (1) Address adequately and analyze, in a single environmental review, the separate and combined impacts of activities that are similar, connected and closely related, or that are dependent upon other activities and actions. (See 40 CFR 1508.25(a)).
            (2) Consider reasonable alternative courses of action.
            (3) Schedule the activities to resolve conflicts or mitigate the individual, combined and/or cumulative effects.
            (4) Prescribe mitigation measures and safeguards including project alternatives and modifications to individual activities.
            (d) Multi-year project aggregation—(1) Release of funds. When a recipient's planning and program development provide for activities to be implemented over two or more years, the responsible entity's environmental review should consider the relationship among all component activities of the multi-year project regardless of the source of funds and address and evaluate their cumulative environmental effects. The estimated range of the aggregated activities and the estimated cost of the total project must be listed and described by the responsible entity in the environmental review and included in the RROF. The release of funds will cover the entire project period.
            (2) When one or more of the conditions described in § 58.47 exists, the recipient or other responsible entity must re-evaluate the environmental review.
          
          
            § 58.33
            Emergencies.
            (a) In the cases of emergency, disaster or imminent threat to health and safety which warrant the taking of an action with significant environmental impact, the provisions of 40 CFR 1506.11 shall apply.
            (b) If funds are needed on an emergency basis and adherence to separate comment periods would prevent the giving of assistance during a Presidentially declared disaster, or during a local emergency that has been declared by the chief elected official of the responsible entity who has proclaimed that there is an immediate need for public action to protect the public safety, the combined Notice of FONSI and Notice of Intent to Request Release of Funds (NOI/RROF) may be disseminated and/or published simultaneously with the submission of the RROF. The combined Notice of FONSI and NOI/RROF shall state that the funds are needed on an emergency basis due to a declared disaster and that the comment periods have been combined. The Notice shall also invite commenters to submit their comments to both HUD and the responsible entity issuing the notice to ensure that these comments will receive full consideration.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56129, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.34
            Exempt activities.
            (a) Except for the applicable requirements of § 58.6, the responsible entity does not have to comply with the requirements of this part or undertake any environmental review, consultation or other action under NEPA and the other provisions of law or authorities cited in § 58.5 for the activities exempt by this section or projects consisting solely of the following exempt activities:
            (1) Environmental and other studies, resource identification and the development of plans and strategies;
            (2) Information and financial services;
            (3) Administrative and management activities;
            (4) Public services that will not have a physical impact or result in any physical changes, including but not limited to services concerned with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug abuse, education, counseling, energy conservation and welfare or recreational needs;
            (5) Inspections and testing of properties for hazards or defects;
            (6) Purchase of insurance;
            (7) Purchase of tools;
            (8) Engineering or design costs;
            (9) Technical assistance and training;
            (10) Assistance for temporary or permanent improvements that do not alter environmental conditions and are limited to protection, repair, or restoration activities necessary only to control or arrest the effects from disasters or imminent threats to public safety including those resulting from physical deterioration;
            (11) Payment of principal and interest on loans made or obligations guaranteed by HUD;
            (12) Any of the categorical exclusions listed in § 58.35(a) provided that there are no circumstances which require compliance with any other Federal laws and authorities cited in § 58.5.
            (b) A recipient does not have to submit an RROF and certification, and no further approval from HUD or the State will be needed by the recipient for the drawdown of funds to carry out exempt activities and projects. However, the responsible entity must document in writing its determination that each activity or project is exempt and meets the conditions specified for such exemption under this section.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15271, Mar. 30, 1998]
          
          
            § 58.35
            Categorical exclusions.

            Categorical exclusion refers to a category of activities for which no environmental impact statement or environmental assessment and finding of no significant impact under NEPA is required, except in extraordinary circumstances (see § 58.2(a)(3)) in which a normally excluded activity may have a significant impact. Compliance with the other applicable Federal environmental laws and authorities listed in § 58.5 is required for any categorical exclusion listed in paragraph (a) of this section.
            (a) Categorical exclusions subject to § 58.5. The following activities are categorically excluded under NEPA, but may be subject to review under authorities listed in § 58.5:
            (1) Acquisition, repair, improvement, reconstruction, or rehabilitation of public facilities and improvements (other than buildings) when the facilities and improvements are in place and will be retained in the same use without change in size or capacity of more than 20 percent (e.g., replacement of water or sewer lines, reconstruction of curbs and sidewalks, repaving of streets).
            (2) Special projects directed to the removal of material and architectural barriers that restrict the mobility of and accessibility to elderly and handicapped persons.
            (3) Rehabilitation of buildings and improvements when the following conditions are met:
            (i) In the case of a building for residential use (with one to four units), the density is not increased beyond four units, and the land use is not changed;
            (ii) In the case of multifamily residential buildings:
            (A) Unit density is not changed more than 20 percent;
            (B) The project does not involve changes in land use from residential to non-residential; and
            (C) The estimated cost of rehabilitation is less than 75 percent of the total estimated cost of replacement after rehabilitation.
            (iii) In the case of non-residential structures, including commercial, industrial, and public buildings:
            (A) The facilities and improvements are in place and will not be changed in size or capacity by more than 20 percent; and
            (B) The activity does not involve a change in land use, such as from non-residential to residential, commercial to industrial, or from one industrial use to another.
            (4)(i) An individual action on up to four dwelling units where there is a maximum of four units on any one site. The units can be four one-unit buildings or one four-unit building or any combination in between; or
            (ii) An individual action on a project of five or more housing units developed on scattered sites when the sites are more than 2,000 feet apart and there are not more than four housing units on any one site.
            (iii) Paragraphs (a)(4)(i) and (ii) of this section do not apply to rehabilitation of a building for residential use (with one to four units) (see paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section).
            (5) Acquisition (including leasing) or disposition of, or equity loans on an existing structure, or acquisition (including leasing) of vacant land provided that the structure or land acquired, financed, or disposed of will be retained for the same use.
            (6) Combinations of the above activities.
            (b) Categorical exclusions not subject to § 58.5. The Department has determined that the following categorically excluded activities would not alter any conditions that would require a review or compliance determination under the Federal laws and authorities cited in § 58.5. When the following kinds of activities are undertaken, the responsible entity does not have to publish a NOI/RROF or execute a certification and the recipient does not have to submit a RROF to HUD (or the State) except in the circumstances described in paragraph (c) of this section. Following the award of the assistance, no further approval from HUD or the State will be needed with respect to environmental requirements, except where paragraph (c) of this section applies. The recipient remains responsible for carrying out any applicable requirements under § 58.6.
            (1) Tenant-based rental assistance;

            (2) Supportive services including, but not limited to, health care, housing services, permanent housing placement, day care, nutritional services, short-term payments for rent/mortgage/utility costs, and assistance in gaining access to local, State, and Federal government benefits and services;
            (3) Operating costs including maintenance, security, operation, utilities, furnishings, equipment, supplies, staff training and recruitment and other incidental costs;
            (4) Economic development activities, including but not limited to, equipment purchase, inventory financing, interest subsidy, operating expenses and similar costs not associated with construction or expansion of existing operations;
            (5) Activities to assist homebuyers to purchase existing dwelling units or dwelling units under construction, including closing costs and down payment assistance, interest buydowns, and similar activities that result in the transfer of title.
            (6) Affordable housing pre-development costs including legal, consulting, developer and other costs related to obtaining site options, project financing, administrative costs and fees for loan commitments, zoning approvals, and other related activities which do not have a physical impact.
            (7) Approval of supplemental assistance (including insurance or guarantee) to a project previously approved under this part, if the approval is made by the same responsible entity that conducted the environmental review on the original project and re-evaluation of the environmental findings is not required under § 58.47.
            (c) Circumstances requiring NEPA review. If a responsible entity determines that an activity or project identified in paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, because of extraordinary circumstances and conditions at or affecting the location of the activity or project, may have a significant environmental effect, it shall comply with all the requirements of this part.
            (d) The Environmental Review Record (ERR) must contain a well organized written record of the process and determinations made under this section.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15272, Mar. 30, 1998; 68 FR 56129, Sept. 29, 2003; 78 FR 68734, Nov. 15, 2013]
          
          
            § 58.36
            Environmental assessments.
            If a project is not exempt or categorically excluded under §§ 58.34 and 58.35, the responsible entity must prepare an EA in accordance with subpart E of this part. If it is evident without preparing an EA that an EIS is required under § 58.37, the responsible entity should proceed directly to an EIS.
          
          
            § 58.37
            Environmental impact statement determinations.
            (a) An EIS is required when the project is determined to have a potentially significant impact on the human environment.
            (b) An EIS is required under any of the following circumstances, except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section:
            (1) The project would provide a site or sites for, or result in the construction of, hospitals or nursing homes containing a total of 2,500 or more beds.
            (2) The project would remove, demolish, convert or substantially rehabilitate 2,500 or more existing housing units (but not including rehabilitation projects categorically excluded under § 58.35), or would result in the construction or installation of 2,500 or more housing units, or would provide sites for 2,500 or more housing units.
            (3) The project would provide enough additional water and sewer capacity to support 2,500 or more additional housing units. The project does not have to be specifically intended for residential use nor does it have to be totally new construction. If the project is designed to provide upgraded service to existing development as well as to serve new development, only that portion of the increased capacity which is intended to serve new development should be counted.

            (c) If, on the basis of an EA, a responsible entity determines that the thresholds in paragraph (b) of this section are the sole reason for the EIS, the responsible entity may prepare a FONSI pursuant to 40 CFR 1501.4. In such cases, the FONSI must be made available for public review for at least 30 days before the responsible entity makes the final determination whether to prepare an EIS.
            
            (d) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, an EIS is not required where § 58.53 is applicable.
            (e) Recommended EIS Format. The responsible entity must use the EIS format recommended by the CEQ regulations (40 CFR 1502.10) unless a determination is made on a particular project that there is a compelling reason to do otherwise. In such a case, the EIS format must meet the minimum requirements prescribed in 40 CFR 1502.10.
          
          
            § 58.38
            Environmental review record.
            The responsible entity must maintain a written record of the environmental review undertaken under this part for each project. This document will be designated the “Environmental Review Record” (ERR) and shall be available for public review. The Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer (DECO) shall establish a prescribed format that the responsible entity shall use to prepare the ERR. The DECO may prescribe alternative formats as necessary to meet specific program needs.
            (a) ERR Documents. The ERR shall contain all the environmental review documents, public notices and written determinations or environmental findings required by this part as evidence of review, decisionmaking and actions pertaining to a particular project of a recipient. The document shall:
            (1) Describe the project and the activities that the recipient has determined to be part of the project;
            (2) Evaluate the effects of the project or the activities on the human environment;
            (3) Document compliance with applicable statutes and authorities, in particular those cited in § 58.5 and 58.6; and
            (4) Record the written determinations and other review findings required by this part (e.g., exempt and categorically excluded projects determinations, findings of no significant impact).
            (b) Other documents and information. The ERR shall also contain verifiable source documents and relevant base data used or cited in EAs, EISs or other project review documents. These documents may be incorporated by reference into the ERR provided that each source document is identified and available for inspection by interested parties. Proprietary material and special studies prepared for the recipient that are not otherwise generally available for public review shall not be incorporated by reference but shall be included in the ERR.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 79 FR 49229, Aug. 20, 2014]
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Environmental Review Process: Environmental Assessments (EA's)
          
            § 58.40
            Preparing the environmental assessment.
            The DECO shall establish a prescribed format that the responsible entity shall use to prepare the EA. The DECO may prescribe alternative formats as necessary to meet specific program needs. In preparing an EA for a particular proposed project or other action, the responsible entity must:
            (a) Determine existing conditions and describe the character, features and resources of the project area and its surroundings; identify the trends that are likely to continue in the absence of the project.
            (b) Identify all potential environmental impacts, whether beneficial or adverse, and the conditions that would change as a result of the project.
            (c) Identify, analyze and evaluate all impacts to determine the significance of their effects on the human environment and whether the project will require further compliance under related laws and authorities cited in § 58.5 and § 58.6.
            (d) Examine and recommend feasible ways in which the project or external factors relating to the project could be modified in order to eliminate or minimize adverse environmental impacts.
            (e) Discuss the need for the proposal, appropriate alternatives where the proposal involves unresolved conflicts concerning alternative uses of available resources, the environmental impacts of the proposed action and alternatives, and a listing of agencies and persons consulted.

            (f) Complete all environmental review requirements necessary for the project's compliance with applicable authorities cited in §§ 58.5 and 58.6.
            (g) Based on steps set forth in paragraph (a) through (f) of this section, make one of the following findings:
            (1) A Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI), in which the responsible entity determines that the project is not an action that will result in a significant impact on the quality of the human environment. The responsible entity may then proceed to § 58.43.
            (2) A finding of significant impact, in which the project is deemed to be an action which may significantly affect the quality of the human environment. The responsible entity must then proceed with its environmental review under subpart F or G of this part.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 79 FR 49229, Aug. 20, 2014]
          
          
            § 58.43
            Dissemination and/or publication of the findings of no significant impact.
            (a) If the responsible entity makes a finding of no significant impact, it must prepare a FONSI notice, using the current HUD-recommended format or an equivalent format. As a minimum, the responsible entity must send the FONSI notice to individuals and groups known to be interested in the activities, to the local news media, to the appropriate tribal, local, State and Federal agencies; to the Regional Offices of the Environmental Protection Agency having jurisdiction and to the HUD Field Office (or the State where applicable). The responsible entity may also publish the FONSI notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the affected community. If the notice is not published, it must also be prominently displayed in public buildings, such as the local Post Office and within the project area or in accordance with procedures established as part of the citizen participation process.
            (b) The responsible entity may disseminate or publish a FONSI notice at the same time it disseminates or publishes the NOI/RROF required by § 58.70. If the notices are released as a combined notice, the combined notice shall:
            (1) Clearly indicate that it is intended to meet two separate procedural requirements; and
            (2) Advise the public to specify in their comments which “notice” their comments address.
            (c) The responsible entity must consider the comments and make modifications, if appropriate, in response to the comments, before it completes its environmental certification and before the recipient submits its RROF. If funds will be used in Presidentially declared disaster areas, modifications resulting from public comment, if appropriate, must be made before proceeding with the expenditure of funds.
          
          
            § 58.45
            Public comment periods.
            Required notices must afford the public the following minimum comment periods, counted in accordance with § 58.21:
            
              
                (a) Notice of Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)
                15 days when published or, if no publication, 18 days when mailing and posting
              
              
                (b) Notice of Intent to Request Release of Funds (NOI-RROF)
                7 days when published or, if no publication, 10 days when mailing and posting
              
              
                (c) Concurrent or combined notices
                15 days when published or, if no publication, 18 days when mailing and posting
              
            
            [68 FR 56130, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.46
            Time delays for exceptional circumstances.
            The responsible entity must make the FONSI available for public comments for 30 days before the recipient files the RROF when:
            (a) There is a considerable interest or controversy concerning the project;
            (b) The proposed project is similar to other projects that normally require the preparation of an EIS; or
            (c) The project is unique and without precedent.
          
          
            § 58.47
            Re-evaluation of environmental assessments and other environmental findings.
            (a) A responsible entity must re-evaluate its environmental findings to determine if the original findings are still valid, when:
            (1) The recipient proposes substantial changes in the nature, magnitude or extent of the project, including adding new activities not anticipated in the original scope of the project;

            (2) There are new circumstances and environmental conditions which may affect the project or have a bearing on its impact, such as concealed or unexpected conditions discovered during the implementation of the project or activity which is proposed to be continued; or
            (3) The recipient proposes the selection of an alternative not in the original finding.
            (b)(1) If the original findings are still valid but the data or conditions upon which they were based have changed, the responsible entity must affirm the original findings and update its ERR by including this re-evaluation and its determination based on its findings. Under these circumstances, if a FONSI notice has already been published, no further publication of a FONSI notice is required.
            (2) If the responsible entity determines that the original findings are no longer valid, it must prepare an EA or an EIS if its evaluation indicates potentially significant impacts.
            (3) Where the recipient is not the responsible entity, the recipient must inform the responsible entity promptly of any proposed substantial changes under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, new circumstances or environmental conditions under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, or any proposals to select a different alternative under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, and must then permit the responsible entity to re-evaluate the findings before proceeding.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15272, Mar. 30, 1998]
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Environmental Review Process: Environmental Impact Statement Determinations
          
            § 58.52
            Adoption of other agencies' EISs.
            The responsible entity may adopt a draft or final EIS prepared by another agency provided that the EIS was prepared in accordance with 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508. If the responsible entity adopts an EIS prepared by another agency, the procedure in 40 CFR 1506.3 shall be followed. An adopted EIS may have to be revised and modified to adapt it to the particular environmental conditions and circumstances of the project if these are different from the project reviewed in the EIS. In such cases the responsible entity must prepare, circulate, and file a supplemental draft EIS in the manner prescribed in § 58.60(d) and otherwise comply with the clearance and time requirements of the EIS process, except that scoping requirements under 40 CFR 1501.7 shall not apply. The agency that prepared the original EIS should be informed that the responsible entity intends to amend and adopt the EIS. The responsible entity may adopt an EIS when it acts as a cooperating agency in its preparation under 40 CFR 1506.3. The responsible entity is not required to re-circulate or file the EIS, but must complete the clearance process for the RROF. The decision to adopt an EIS shall be made a part of the project ERR.
          
          
            § 58.53
            Use of prior environmental impact statements.
            Where any final EIS has been listed in the Federal Register for a project pursuant to this part, or where an areawide or similar broad scale final EIS has been issued and the EIS anticipated a subsequent project requiring an environmental clearance, then no new EIS is required for the subsequent project if all the following conditions are met:
            (a) The ERR contains a decision based on a finding pursuant to § 58.40 that the proposed project is not a new major Federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. The decision shall include:
            (1) References to the prior EIS and its evaluation of the environmental factors affecting the proposed subsequent action subject to NEPA;
            (2) An evaluation of any environmental factors which may not have been previously assessed, or which may have significantly changed;

            (3) An analysis showing that the proposed project is consistent with the location, use, and density assumptions for the site and with the timing and capacity of the circulation, utility, and other supporting infrastructure assumptions in the prior EIS;
            
            (4) Documentation showing that where the previous EIS called for mitigating measures or other corrective action, these are completed to the extent reasonable given the current state of development.
            (b) The prior final EIS has been filed within five (5) years, and updated as follows:
            (1) The EIS has been updated to reflect any significant revisions made to the assumptions under which the original EIS was prepared;
            (2) The EIS has been updated to reflect new environmental issues and data or legislation and implementing regulations which may have significant environmental impact on the project area covered by the prior EIS.
            (c) There is no litigation pending in connection with the prior EIS, and no final judicial finding of inadequacy of the prior EIS has been made.
          
        
        
          Subpart G—Environmental Review Process: Procedures for Draft, Final and Supplemental Environmental Impact Statements
          
            § 58.55
            Notice of intent to prepare an EIS.
            As soon as practicable after the responsible entity decides to prepare an EIS, it must publish a NOI/EIS, using the HUD recommended format and disseminate it in the same manner as required by 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508.
          
          
            § 58.56
            Scoping process.
            The determination on whether or not to hold a scoping meeting will depend on the same circumstances and factors as for the holding of public hearings under § 58.59. The responsible entity must wait at least 15 days after disseminating or publishing the NOI/EIS before holding a scoping meeting.
          
          
            § 58.57
            Lead agency designation.
            If there are several agencies ready to assume the lead role, the responsible entity must make its decision based on the criteria in 40 CFR 1501.5(c). If the responsible entity and a Federal agency are unable to reach agreement, then the responsible entity must notify HUD (or the State, where applicable). HUD (or the State) will assist in obtaining a determination based on the procedure set forth in 40 CFR 1501.5(e).
          
          
            § 58.59
            Public hearings and meetings.
            (a) Factors to consider. In determining whether or not to hold public hearings in accordance with 40 CFR 1506.6, the responsible entity must consider the following factors:
            (1) The magnitude of the project in terms of economic costs, the geographic area involved, and the uniqueness or size of commitment of resources involved.
            (2) The degree of interest in or controversy concerning the project.
            (3) The complexity of the issues and the likelihood that information will be presented at the hearing which will be of assistance to the responsible entity.
            (4) The extent to which public involvement has been achieved through other means.
            (b) Procedure. All public hearings must be preceded by a notice of public hearing, which must be published in the local news media 15 days before the hearing date. The Notice must:
            (1) State the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing or meeting.
            (2) Describe the project, its estimated costs, and the project area.
            (3) State that persons desiring to be heard on environmental issues will be afforded the opportunity to be heard.
            (4) State the responsible entity's name and address and the name and address of its Certifying Officer.
            (5) State what documents are available, where they can be obtained, and any charges that may apply.
          
          
            § 58.60
            Preparation and filing of environmental impact statements.
            (a) The responsible entity must prepare the draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) and the final environmental impact statements (FEIS) using the current HUD recommended format or its equivalent.
            (b) The responsible entity must file and distribute the (DEIS) and the (FEIS) in the following manner:
            (1) Five copies to EPA Headquarters;
            (2) Five copies to EPA Regional Office;
            
            (3) Copies made available in the responsible entity's and the recipient's office;
            (4) Copies or summaries made available to persons who request them; and
            (5) FEIS only—one copy to State, HUD Field Office, and HUD Headquarters library.
            (c) The responsible entity may request waivers from the time requirements specified for the draft and final EIS as prescribed in 40 CFR 1506.6.
            (d) When substantial changes are proposed in a project or when significant new circumstances or information becomes available during an environmental review, the recipient may prepare a supplemental EIS as prescribed in 40 CFR 1502.9.
            (e) The responsible entity must prepare a Record of Decision (ROD) as prescribed in 40 CFR 1505.2.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15272, Mar. 30, 1998]
          
        
        
          Subpart H—Release of Funds for Particular Projects
          
            § 58.70
            Notice of intent to request release of funds.
            The NOI/RROF must be disseminated and/or published in the manner prescribed by § 58.43 and § 58.45 before the certification is signed by the responsible entity.
          
          
            § 58.71
            Request for release of funds and certification.
            (a) The RROF and certification shall be sent to the appropriate HUD Field Office (or the State, if applicable), except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. This request shall be executed by the Certifying Officer. The request shall describe the specific project and activities covered by the request and contain the certification required under the applicable statute cited in § 58.1(b). The RROF and certification must be in a form specified by HUD.
            (b) When the responsible entity is conducting an environmental review on behalf of a recipient, as provided for in § 58.10, the recipient must provide the responsible entity with all available project and environmental information and refrain from undertaking any physical activities or choice limiting actions until HUD (or the State, if applicable) has approved its request for release of funds. The certification form executed by the responsible entity's certifying officer shall be sent to the recipient that is to receive the assistance along with a description of any special environmental conditions that must be adhered to in carrying out the project. The recipient is to submit the RROF and the certification of the responsible entity to HUD (or the State, if applicable) requesting the release of funds. The recipient must agree to abide by the special conditions, procedures and requirements of the environmental review, and to advise the responsible entity of any proposed change in the scope of the project or any change in environmental conditions.
            (c) If the responsible entity determines that some of the activities are exempt under applicable provisions of this part, the responsible entity shall advise the recipient that it may commit funds for these activities as soon as programmatic authorization is received. This finding shall be documented in the ERR maintained by the responsible entity and in the recipient's project files.
          
          
            § 58.72
            HUD or State actions on RROFs and certifications.
            The actions which HUD (or a State) may take with respect to a recipient's environmental certification and RROF are as follows:
            (a) In the absence of any receipt of objection to the contrary, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, HUD (or the State) will assume the validity of the certification and RROF and will approve these documents after expiration of the 15-day period prescribed by statute.
            (b) HUD (or the state) may disapprove a certification and RROF if it has knowledge that the responsible entity or other participants in the development process have not complied with the items in § 58.75, or that the RROF and certification are inaccurate.

            (c) In cases in which HUD has approved a certification and RROF but subsequently learns (e.g., through monitoring) that the recipient violated § 58.22 or the recipient or responsible entity otherwise failed to comply with a clearly applicable environmental authority, HUD shall impose appropriate remedies and sanctions in accord with the law and regulations for the program under which the violation was found.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56130, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.73
            Objections to release of funds.
            HUD (or the State) will not approve the ROF for any project before 15 calendar days have elapsed from the time of receipt of the RROF and the certification or from the time specified in the notice published pursuant to § 58.70, whichever is later. Any person or agency may object to a recipient's RROF and the related certification. However, the objections must meet the conditions and procedures set forth in subpart H of this part. HUD (or the State) can refuse the RROF and certification on any grounds set forth in § 58.75. All decisions by HUD (or the State) regarding the RROF and the certification shall be final.
          
          
            § 58.74
            Time for objecting.
            All objections must be received by HUD (or the State) within 15 days from the time HUD (or the State) receives the recipient's RROF and the related certification, or within the time period specified in the notice, whichever is later.
          
          
            § 58.75
            Permissible bases for objections.
            HUD (or the State), will consider objections claiming a responsible entity's noncompliance with this part based only on any of the following grounds:
            (a) The certification was not in fact executed by the responsible entity's Certifying Officer.
            (b) The responsible entity has failed to make one of the two findings pursuant to § 58.40 or to make the written determination required by §§ 58.35, 58.47 or 58.53 for the project, as applicable.
            (c) The responsible entity has omitted one or more of the steps set forth at subpart E of this part for the preparation, publication and completion of an EA.
            (d) The responsible entity has omitted one or more of the steps set forth at subparts F and G of this part for the conduct, preparation, publication and completion of an EIS.
            (e) The recipient or other participants in the development process have committed funds, incurred costs or undertaken activities not authorized by this part before release of funds and approval of the environmental certification by HUD (or the state).
            (f) Another Federal agency acting pursuant to 40 CFR part 1504 has submitted a written finding that the project is unsatisfactory from the standpoint of environmental quality.
            [61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 56130, Sept. 29, 2003]
          
          
            § 58.76
            Procedure for objections.
            A person or agency objecting to a responsible entity's RROF and certification shall submit objections in writing to HUD (or the State). The objections shall:
            (a) Include the name, address and telephone number of the person or agency submitting the objection, and be signed by the person or authorized official of an agency.
            (b) Be dated when signed.
            (c) Describe the basis for objection and the facts or legal authority supporting the objection.
            (d) State when a copy of the objection was mailed or delivered to the responsible entity's Certifying Officer.
          
          
            § 58.77
            Effect of approval of certification.
            (a) Responsibilities of HUD and States. HUD's (or, where applicable, the State's) approval of the certification shall be deemed to satisfy the responsibilities of the Secretary under NEPA and related provisions of law cited at § 58.5 insofar as those responsibilities relate to the release of funds as authorized by the applicable provisions of law cited in § 58.1(b).
            (b) Public and agency redress. Persons and agencies seeking redress in relation to environmental reviews covered by an approved certification shall deal with the responsible entity and not with HUD. It is HUD's policy to refer all inquiries and complaints to the responsible entity and its Certifying Officer. Similarly, the State (where applicable) may direct persons and agencies seeking redress in relation to environmental reviews covered by an approved certification to deal with the responsible entity, and not the State, and may refer inquiries and complaints to the responsible entity and its Certifying Officer. Remedies for noncompliance are set forth in program regulations.
            (c) Implementation of environmental review decisions. Projects of a recipient will require post-review monitoring and other inspection and enforcement actions by the recipient and the State or HUD (using procedures provided for in program regulations) to assure that decisions adopted through the environmental review process are carried out during project development and implementation.
            (d) Responsibility for monitoring and training. (1) At least once every three years, HUD intends to conduct in-depth monitoring and exercise quality control (through training and consultation) over the environmental activities performed by responsible entities under this part. Limited monitoring of these environmental activities will be conducted during each program monitoring site visit. If through limited or in-depth monitoring of these environmental activities or by other means, HUD becomes aware of any environmental deficiencies, HUD may take one or more of the following actions:
            (i) In the case of problems found during limited monitoring, HUD may schedule in-depth monitoring at an earlier date or may schedule in-depth monitoring more frequently;
            (ii) HUD may require attendance by staff of the responsible entity at HUD-sponsored or approved training, which will be provided periodically at various locations around the country;
            (iii) HUD may refuse to accept the certifications of environmental compliance on subsequent grants;
            (iv) HUD may suspend or terminate the responsible entity's assumption of the environmental review responsibility;
            (v) HUD may initiate sanctions, corrective actions, or other remedies specified in program regulations or agreements or contracts with the recipient.
            (2) HUD's responsibilities and action under paragraph (d)(1) of this section shall not be construed to limit or reduce any responsibility assumed by a responsible entity with respect to any particular release of funds under this part. Whether or not HUD takes action under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the Certifying Officer remains the responsible Federal official under § 58.13 with respect to projects and activities for which the Certifying Officer has submitted a certification under this part.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 60
        PART 60—PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS
        
          Sec.
          60.101
          To what does this policy apply?
          60.102
          Definitions for purposes of this policy.
          60.103
          Assuring compliance with this policy—research conducted or supported by any Federal department or agency.
          60.104
          Exempt research.
          60.105
          [Reserved]
          60.106
          [Reserved]
          60.107
          IRB membership.
          60.108
          IRB functions and operations.
          60.109
          IRB review of research.
          60.110
          Expedited review procedures for certain kinds of research involving no more than minimal risk, and for minor changes in approved research.
          60.111
          Criteria for IRB approval of research.
          60.112
          Review by institution.
          60.113
          Suspension or termination of IRB approval of research.
          60.114
          Cooperative research.
          60.115
          IRB records.
          60.116
          General requirements for informed consent.
          60.117
          Documentation of informed consent.
          60.118
          Applications and proposals lacking definite plans for involvement of human subjects.
          60.119
          Research undertaken without the intention of involving human subjects.
          60.120
          Evaluation and disposition of applications and proposals for research to be conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency.
          60.121
          [Reserved]
          60.122
          Use of Federal funds.
          60.123
          Early termination of research support: Evaluation of applications and proposals.
          60.124
          Conditions.
        
        
          Authority:
          5 U.S.C. 301; 42 U.S.C. 300v-1(b) and 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          82 FR 7271, Jan. 19, 2017, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          
          § 60.101
          To what does this policy apply?
          (a) Except as detailed in § 60.104, this policy applies to all research involving human subjects conducted, supported, or otherwise subject to regulation by any Federal department or agency that takes appropriate administrative action to make the policy applicable to such research. This includes research conducted by Federal civilian employees or military personnel, except that each department or agency head may adopt such procedural modifications as may be appropriate from an administrative standpoint. It also includes research conducted, supported, or otherwise subject to regulation by the Federal Government outside the United States. Institutions that are engaged in research described in this paragraph and institutional review boards (IRBs) reviewing research that is subject to this policy must comply with this policy.
          (b) [Reserved]
          (c) Department or agency heads retain final judgment as to whether a particular activity is covered by this policy and this judgment shall be exercised consistent with the ethical principles of the Belmont Report.62
            
          
          
            
              62 The National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.- Belmont Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1979.
          
          (d) Department or agency heads may require that specific research activities or classes of research activities conducted, supported, or otherwise subject to regulation by the Federal department or agency but not otherwise covered by this policy comply with some or all of the requirements of this policy.
          (e) Compliance with this policy requires compliance with pertinent federal laws or regulations that provide additional protections for human subjects.
          (f) This policy does not affect any state or local laws or regulations (including tribal law passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe) that may otherwise be applicable and that provide additional protections for human subjects.
          (g) This policy does not affect any foreign laws or regulations that may otherwise be applicable and that provide additional protections to human subjects of research.

          (h) When research covered by this policy takes place in foreign countries, procedures normally followed in the foreign countries to protect human subjects may differ from those set forth in this policy. In these circumstances, if a department or agency head determines that the procedures prescribed by the institution afford protections that are at least equivalent to those provided in this policy, the department or agency head may approve the substitution of the foreign procedures in lieu of the procedural requirements provided in this policy. Except when otherwise required by statute, Executive Order, or the department or agency head, notices of these actions as they occur will be published in the Federal Register or will be otherwise published as provided in department or agency procedures.
          (i) Unless otherwise required by law, department or agency heads may waive the applicability of some or all of the provisions of this policy to specific research activities or classes of research activities otherwise covered by this policy, provided the alternative procedures to be followed are consistent with the principles of the Belmont Report.63

             Except when otherwise required by statute or Executive Order, the department or agency head shall forward advance notices of these actions to the Office for Human Research Protections, Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), or any successor office, or to the equivalent office within the appropriate Federal department or agency, and shall also publish them in the Federal Register or in such other manner as provided in department or agency procedures. The waiver notice must include a statement that identifies the conditions under which the waiver will be applied and a justification as to why the waiver is appropriate for the research, including how the decision is consistent with the principles of the Belmont Report.
          
            
              63 Id.
            
          
          (j) Federal guidance on the requirements of this policy shall be issued only after consultation, for the purpose of harmonization (to the extent appropriate), with other Federal departments and agencies that have adopted this policy, unless such consultation is not feasible.
          (k) [Reserved]
          (l) Compliance dates and transition provisions:
          (1) Pre-2018 Requirements. For purposes of this section, the pre-2018 Requirements means this subpart as published in the 2016 edition of the Code of Federal Regulations.
          (2) 2018 Requirements. For purposes of this section, the 2018 Requirements means the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects requirements contained in this part. The general compliance date for the 2018 Requirements is January 21, 2019. The compliance date for § 60.114(b) (cooperative research) of the 2018 Requirements is January 20, 2020.
          (3) Research subject to pre-2018 requirements. The pre-2018 Requirements shall apply to the following research, unless the research is transitioning to comply with the 2018 Requirements in accordance with paragraph (l)(4) of this section:
          (i) Research initially approved by an IRB under the pre-2018 Requirements before January 21, 2019;
          (ii) Research for which IRB review was waived pursuant to § 60.101(i) of the pre-2018 Requirements before January 21, 2019; and
          (iii) Research for which a determination was made that the research was exempt under § 60.101(b) of the pre-2018 Requirements before January 21, 2019.
          (4) Transitioning research. If, on or after July 19, 2018, an institution planning or engaged in research otherwise covered by paragraph (l)(3) of this section determines that such research instead will transition to comply with the 2018 Requirements, the institution or an IRB must document and date such determination.
          (i) If the determination to transition is documented between July 19, 2018, and January 20, 2019, the research shall:
          (A) Beginning on the date of such documentation through January 20, 2019, comply with the pre-2018 Requirements, except that the research shall comply with the following:
          (1) Section 60.102(l) of the 2018 Requirements (definition of research) (instead of § 60.102(d) of the pre-2018 Requirements);
          (2) Section 60.103(d) of the 2018 Requirements (revised certification requirement that eliminates IRB review of application or proposal) (instead of § 60.103(f) of the pre-2018 Requirements); and
          (3) Section 60.109(f)(1)(i) and (iii) of the 2018 Requirements (exceptions to mandated continuing review) (instead of § 60.103(b), as related to the requirement for continuing review, and in addition to § 60.109, of the pre-2018 Requirements); and
          (B) Beginning on January 21, 2019, comply with the 2018 Requirements.
          (ii) If the determination to transition is documented on or after January 21, 2019, the research shall, beginning on the date of such documentation, comply with the 2018 Requirements.
          (5) Research subject to 2018 Requirements. The 2018 Requirements shall apply to the following research:
          (i) Research initially approved by an IRB on or after January 21, 2019;
          (ii) Research for which IRB review is waived pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section on or after January 21, 2019; and
          (iii) Research for which a determination is made that the research is exempt on or after January 21, 2019.
          (m) Severability: Any provision of this part held to be invalid or unenforceable by its terms, or as applied to any person or circumstance, shall be construed so as to continue to give maximum effect to the provision permitted by law, unless such holding shall be one of utter invalidity or unenforceability, in which event the provision shall be severable from this part and shall not affect the remainder thereof or the application of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other dissimilar circumstances.
          [82 FR 7271, Jan. 19, 2017, as amended at 83 FR 3591, Jan. 28, 2018; 83 FR 28514, June 19, 2018]
        
        
          
          § 60.102
          Definitions for purposes of this policy.
          (a) Certification means the official notification by the institution to the supporting Federal department or agency component, in accordance with the requirements of this policy, that a research project or activity involving human subjects has been reviewed and approved by an IRB in accordance with an approved assurance.
          (b) Clinical trial means a research study in which one or more human subjects are prospectively assigned to one or more interventions (which may include placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects of the interventions on biomedical or behavioral health-related outcomes.
          (c) Department or agency head means the head of any Federal department or agency, for example, the Secretary of HHS, and any other officer or employee of any Federal department or agency to whom the authority provided by these regulations to the department or agency head has been delegated.
          (d) Federal department or agency refers to a federal department or agency (the department or agency itself rather than its bureaus, offices or divisions) that takes appropriate administrative action to make this policy applicable to the research involving human subjects it conducts, supports, or otherwise regulates (e.g., the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the U.S. Department of Defense, or the Central Intelligence Agency).
          (e)(1) Human subject means a living individual about whom an investigator (whether professional or student) conducting research:
          (i) Obtains information or biospecimens through intervention or interaction with the individual, and uses, studies, or analyzes the information or biospecimens; or (ii) Obtains, uses, studies, analyzes, or generates identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens.
          (2) Intervention includes both physical procedures by which information or biospecimens are gathered (e.g., venipuncture) and manipulations of the subject or the subject's environment that are performed for research purposes.
          (3) Interaction includes communication or interpersonal contact between investigator and subject.
          (4) Private information includes information about behavior that occurs in a context in which an individual can reasonably expect that no observation or recording is taking place, and information that has been provided for specific purposes by an individual and that the individual can reasonably expect will not be made public (e.g., a medical record).
          (5) Identifiable private information is private information for which the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained by the investigator or associated with the information.
          (6) An identifiable biospecimen is a biospecimen for which the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained by the investigator or associated with the biospecimen.
          (7) Federal departments or agencies implementing this policy shall:
          (i) Upon consultation with appropriate experts (including experts in data matching and re-identification), reexamine the meaning of “identifiable private information,” as defined in paragraph (e)(5) of this section, and “identifiable biospecimen,” as defined in paragraph (e)(6) of this section. This reexamination shall take place within 1 year and regularly thereafter (at least every 4 years). This process will be conducted by collaboration among the Federal departments and agencies implementing this policy. If appropriate and permitted by law, such Federal departments and agencies may alter the interpretation of these terms, including through the use of guidance.

          (ii) Upon consultation with appropriate experts, assess whether there are analytic technologies or techniques that should be considered by investigators to generate “identifiable private information,” as defined in paragraph (e)(5) of this section, or an “identifiable biospecimen,” as defined in paragraph (e)(6) of this section. This assessment shall take place within 1 year and regularly thereafter (at least every 4 years). This process will be conducted by collaboration among the Federal departments and agencies implementing this policy. Any such technologies or techniques will be included on a list of technologies or techniques that produce identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens. This list will be published in the Federal Register after notice and an opportunity for public comment. The Secretary, HHS, shall maintain the list on a publicly accessible Web site.
          (f) Institution means any public or private entity, or department or agency (including federal, state, and other agencies).
          (g) IRB means an institutional review board established in accord with and for the purposes expressed in this policy.
          (h) IRB approval means the determination of the IRB that the research has been reviewed and may be conducted at an institution within the constraints set forth by the IRB and by other institutional and federal requirements.
          (i) Legally authorized representative means an individual or judicial or other body authorized under applicable law to consent on behalf of a prospective subject to the subject's participation in the procedure(s) involved in the research. If there is no applicable law addressing this issue, legally authorized representative means an individual recognized by institutional policy as acceptable for providing consent in the nonresearch context on behalf of the prospective subject to the subject's participation in the procedure(s) involved in the research.
          (j) Minimal risk means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.
          (k) Public health authority means an agency or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision of a state or territory, an Indian tribe, or a foreign government, or a person or entity acting under a grant of authority from or contract with such public agency, including the employees or agents of such public agency or its contractors or persons or entities to whom it has granted authority, that is responsible for public health matters as part of its official mandate.
          (l) Research means a systematic investigation, including research development, testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge. Activities that meet this definition constitute research for purposes of this policy, whether or not they are conducted or supported under a program that is considered research for other purposes. For example, some demonstration and service programs may include research activities. For purposes of this part, the following activities are deemed not to be research:
          (1) Scholarly and journalistic activities (e.g., oral history, journalism, biography, literary criticism, legal research, and historical scholarship), including the collection and use of information, that focus directly on the specific individuals about whom the information is collected.
          (2) Public health surveillance activities, including the collection and testing of information or biospecimens, conducted, supported, requested, ordered, required, or authorized by a public health authority. Such activities are limited to those necessary to allow a public health authority to identify, monitor, assess, or investigate potential public health signals, onsets of disease outbreaks, or conditions of public health importance (including trends, signals, risk factors, patterns in diseases, or increases in injuries from using consumer products). Such activities include those associated with providing timely situational awareness and priority setting during the course of an event or crisis that threatens public health (including natural or man-made disasters).
          (3) Collection and analysis of information, biospecimens, or records by or for a criminal justice agency for activities authorized by law or court order solely for criminal justice or criminal investigative purposes.

          (4) Authorized operational activities (as determined by each agency) in support of intelligence, homeland security, defense, or other national security missions.
          
          (m) Written, or in writing, for purposes of this part, refers to writing on a tangible medium (e.g., paper) or in an electronic format.
        
        
          § 60.103
          Assuring compliance with this policy—research conducted or supported by any Federal department or agency.
          (a) Each institution engaged in research that is covered by this policy, with the exception of research eligible for exemption under § 60.104, and that is conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency, shall provide written assurance satisfactory to the department or agency head that it will comply with the requirements of this policy. In lieu of requiring submission of an assurance, individual department or agency heads shall accept the existence of a current assurance, appropriate for the research in question, on file with the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office, and approved for Federal-wide use by that office. When the existence of an HHS-approved assurance is accepted in lieu of requiring submission of an assurance, reports (except certification) required by this policy to be made to department and agency heads shall also be made to the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office. Federal departments and agencies will conduct or support research covered by this policy only if the institution has provided an assurance that it will comply with the requirements of this policy, as provided in this section, and only if the institution has certified to the department or agency head that the research has been reviewed and approved by an IRB (if such certification is required by § 60.103(d)).
          (b) The assurance shall be executed by an individual authorized to act for the institution and to assume on behalf of the institution the obligations imposed by this policy and shall be filed in such form and manner as the department or agency head prescribes.
          (c) The department or agency head may limit the period during which any assurance shall remain effective or otherwise condition or restrict the assurance.
          (d) Certification is required when the research is supported by a Federal department or agency and not otherwise waived under § 60.101(i) or exempted under § 60.104. For such research, institutions shall certify that each proposed research study covered by the assurance and this section has been reviewed and approved by the IRB. Such certification must be submitted as prescribed by the Federal department or agency component supporting the research. Under no condition shall research covered by this section be initiated prior to receipt of the certification that the research has been reviewed and approved by the IRB.

          (e) For nonexempt research involving human subjects covered by this policy (or exempt research for which limited IRB review takes place pursuant to § 60.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), or (d)(7) or (8)) that takes place at an institution in which IRB oversight is conducted by an IRB that is not operated by the institution, the institution and the organization operating the IRB shall document the institution's reliance on the IRB for oversight of the research and the responsibilities that each entity will undertake to ensure compliance with the requirements of this policy (e.g., in a written agreement between the institution and the IRB, by implementation of an institution-wide policy directive providing the allocation of responsibilities between the institution and an IRB that is not affiliated with the institution, or as set forth in a research protocol).
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.104
          Exempt research.
          (a) Unless otherwise required by law or by department or agency heads, research activities in which the only involvement of human subjects will be in one or more of the categories in paragraph (d) of this section are exempt from the requirements of this policy, except that such activities must comply with the requirements of this section and as specified in each category.

          (b) Use of the exemption categories for research subject to the requirements of subparts B, C, and D: Application of the exemption categories to research subject to the requirements of 45 CFR part 46, subparts B, C, and D, is as follows:
          (1) Subpart B. Each of the exemptions at this section may be applied to research subject to subpart B if the conditions of the exemption are met.
          (2) Subpart C. The exemptions at this section do not apply to research subject to subpart C, except for research aimed at involving a broader subject population that only incidentally includes prisoners.
          (3) Subpart D. The exemptions at paragraphs (d)(1), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8) of this section may be applied to research subject to subpart D if the conditions of the exemption are met. Paragraphs (d)(2)(i) and (ii) of this section only may apply to research subject to subpart D involving educational tests or the observation of public behavior when the investigator(s) do not participate in the activities being observed. Paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section may not be applied to research subject to subpart D.
          (c) [Reserved]
          (d) Except as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the following categories of human subjects research are exempt from this policy:
          (1) Research, conducted in established or commonly accepted educational settings, that specifically involves normal educational practices that are not likely to adversely impact students' opportunity to learn required educational content or the assessment of educators who provide instruction. This includes most research on regular and special education instructional strategies, and research on the effectiveness of or the comparison among instructional techniques, curricula, or classroom management methods.
          (2) Research that only includes interactions involving educational tests (cognitive, diagnostic, aptitude, achievement), survey procedures, interview procedures, or observation of public behavior (including visual or auditory recording) if at least one of the following criteria is met:
          (i) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects cannot readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects;
          (ii) Any disclosure of the human subjects' responses outside the research would not reasonably place the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' financial standing, employability, educational advancement, or reputation; or
          (iii) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects can readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects, and an IRB conducts a limited IRB review to make the determination required by § 60.111(a)(7).
          (3)(i) Research involving benign behavioral interventions in conjunction with the collection of information from an adult subject through verbal or written responses (including data entry) or audiovisual recording if the subject prospectively agrees to the intervention and information collection and at least one of the following criteria is met:
          (A) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects cannot readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects;
          (B) Any disclosure of the human subjects' responses outside the research would not reasonably place the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' financial standing, employability, educational advancement, or reputation; or
          (C) The information obtained is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects can readily be ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects, and an IRB conducts a limited IRB review to make the determination required by § 60.111(a)(7).

          (ii) For the purpose of this provision, benign behavioral interventions are brief in duration, harmless, painless, not physically invasive, not likely to have a significant adverse lasting impact on the subjects, and the investigator has no reason to think the subjects will find the interventions offensive or embarrassing. Provided all such criteria are met, examples of such benign behavioral interventions would include having the subjects play an online game, having them solve puzzles under various noise conditions, or having them decide how to allocate a nominal amount of received cash between themselves and someone else.
          (iii) If the research involves deceiving the subjects regarding the nature or purposes of the research, this exemption is not applicable unless the subject authorizes the deception through a prospective agreement to participate in research in circumstances in which the subject is informed that he or she will be unaware of or misled regarding the nature or purposes of the research.
          (4) Secondary research for which consent is not required: Secondary research uses of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, if at least one of the following criteria is met:
          (i) The identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens are publicly available;
          (ii) Information, which may include information about biospecimens, is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects cannot readily be ascertained directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects, the investigator does not contact the subjects, and the investigator will not re-identify subjects;
          (iii) The research involves only information collection and analysis involving the investigator's use of identifiable health information when that use is regulated under 45 CFR parts 160 and 164, subparts A and E, for the purposes of “health care operations” or “research” as those terms are defined at 45 CFR 164.501 or for “public health activities and purposes” as described under 45 CFR 164.512(b); or

          (iv) The research is conducted by, or on behalf of, a Federal department or agency using government-generated or government-collected information obtained for nonresearch activities, if the research generates identifiable private information that is or will be maintained on information technology that is subject to and in compliance with section 208(b) of the E-Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. 3501 note, if all of the identifiable private information collected, used, or generated as part of the activity will be maintained in systems of records subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, and, if applicable, the information used in the research was collected subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.
          
          (5) Research and demonstration projects that are conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency, or otherwise subject to the approval of department or agency heads (or the approval of the heads of bureaus or other subordinate agencies that have been delegated authority to conduct the research and demonstration projects), and that are designed to study, evaluate, improve, or otherwise examine public benefit or service programs, including procedures for obtaining benefits or services under those programs, possible changes in or alternatives to those programs or procedures, or possible changes in methods or levels of payment for benefits or services under those programs. Such projects include, but are not limited to, internal studies by Federal employees, and studies under contracts or consulting arrangements, cooperative agreements, or grants. Exempt projects also include waivers of otherwise mandatory requirements using authorities such as sections 1115 and 1115A of the Social Security Act, as amended.
          (i) Each Federal department or agency conducting or supporting the research and demonstration projects must establish, on a publicly accessible Federal Web site or in such other manner as the department or agency head may determine, a list of the research and demonstration projects that the Federal department or agency conducts or supports under this provision. The research or demonstration project must be published on this list prior to commencing the research involving human subjects.
          (ii) [Reserved]
          (6) Taste and food quality evaluation and consumer acceptance studies:
          (i) If wholesome foods without additives are consumed, or

          (ii) If a food is consumed that contains a food ingredient at or below the level and for a use found to be safe, or agricultural chemical or environmental contaminant at or below the level found to be safe, by the Food and Drug Administration or approved by the Environmental Protection Agency or the Food Safety and Inspection Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
          (7) Storage or maintenance for secondary research for which broad consent is required: Storage or maintenance of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens for potential secondary research use if an IRB conducts a limited IRB review and makes the determinations required by § 60.111(a)(8).
          (8) Secondary research for which broad consent is required: Research involving the use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens for secondary research use, if the following criteria are met:
          (i) Broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens was obtained in accordance with § 60.116(a)(1) through (4), (a)(6), and (d);
          (ii) Documentation of informed consent or waiver of documentation of consent was obtained in accordance with § 60.117;
          (iii) An IRB conducts a limited IRB review and makes the determination required by § 60.111(a)(7) and makes the determination that the research to be conducted is within the scope of the broad consent referenced in paragraph (d)(8)(i) of this section; and (iv) The investigator does not include returning individual research results to subjects as part of the study plan. This provision does not prevent an investigator from abiding by any legal requirements to return individual research results.
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.105
          [Reserved]
        
        
          § 60.106
          [Reserved]
        
        
          § 60.107
          IRB membership.
          (a) Each IRB shall have at least five members, with varying backgrounds to promote complete and adequate review of research activities commonly conducted by the institution. The IRB shall be sufficiently qualified through the experience and expertise of its members (professional competence), and the diversity of its members, including race, gender, and cultural backgrounds and sensitivity to such issues as community attitudes, to promote respect for its advice and counsel in safeguarding the rights and welfare of human subjects. The IRB shall be able to ascertain the acceptability of proposed research in terms of institutional commitments (including policies and resources) and regulations, applicable law, and standards of professional conduct and practice. The IRB shall therefore include persons knowledgeable in these areas. If an IRB regularly reviews research that involves a category of subjects that is vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, such as children, prisoners, individuals with impaired decision-making capacity, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons, consideration shall be given to the inclusion of one or more individuals who are knowledgeable about and experienced in working with these categories of subjects.
          (b) Each IRB shall include at least one member whose primary concerns are in scientific areas and at least one member whose primary concerns are in nonscientific areas.
          (c) Each IRB shall include at least one member who is not otherwise affiliated with the institution and who is not part of the immediate family of a person who is affiliated with the institution.
          (d) No IRB may have a member participate in the IRB's initial or continuing review of any project in which the member has a conflicting interest, except to provide information requested by the IRB.
          (e) An IRB may, in its discretion, invite individuals with competence in special areas to assist in the review of issues that require expertise beyond or in addition to that available on the IRB. These individuals may not vote with the IRB.
        
        
          § 60.108
          IRB functions and operations.

          (a) In order to fulfill the requirements of this policy each IRB shall:
          
          (1) Have access to meeting space and sufficient staff to support the IRB's review and recordkeeping duties;
          (2) Prepare and maintain a current list of the IRB members identified by name; earned degrees; representative capacity; indications of experience such as board certifications or licenses sufficient to describe each member's chief anticipated contributions to IRB deliberations; and any employment or other relationship between each member and the institution, for example, full-time employee, part-time employee, member of governing panel or board, stockholder, paid or unpaid consultant;
          (3) Establish and follow written procedures for:
          (i) Conducting its initial and continuing review of research and for reporting its findings and actions to the investigator and the institution;
          (ii) Determining which projects require review more often than annually and which projects need verification from sources other than the investigators that no material changes have occurred since previous IRB review; and
          (iii) Ensuring prompt reporting to the IRB of proposed changes in a research activity, and for ensuring that investigators will conduct the research activity in accordance with the terms of the IRB approval until any proposed changes have been reviewed and approved by the IRB, except when necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to the subject.
          (4) Establish and follow written procedures for ensuring prompt reporting to the IRB; appropriate institutional officials; the department or agency head; and the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office, or the equivalent office within the appropriate Federal department or agency of
          (i) Any unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others or any serious or continuing noncompliance with this policy or the requirements or determinations of the IRB; and
          (ii) Any suspension or termination of IRB approval.
          (b) Except when an expedited review procedure is used (as described in § 60.110), an IRB must review proposed research at convened meetings at which a majority of the members of the IRB are present, including at least one member whose primary concerns are in nonscientific areas. In order for the research to be approved, it shall receive the approval of a majority of those members present at the meeting.
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.109
          IRB review of research.
          (a) An IRB shall review and have authority to approve, require modifications in (to secure approval), or disapprove all research activities covered by this policy, including exempt research activities under § 60.104 for which limited IRB review is a condition of exemption (under § 60.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), and (d)(7), and (8)).
          (b) An IRB shall require that information given to subjects (or legally authorized representatives, when appropriate) as part of informed consent is in accordance with § 60.116. The IRB may require that information, in addition to that specifically mentioned in § 60.116, be given to the subjects when in the IRB's judgment the information would meaningfully add to the protection of the rights and welfare of subjects.
          (c) An IRB shall require documentation of informed consent or may waive documentation in accordance with § 60.117.
          (d) An IRB shall notify investigators and the institution in writing of its decision to approve or disapprove the proposed research activity, or of modifications required to secure IRB approval of the research activity. If the IRB decides to disapprove a research activity, it shall include in its written notification a statement of the reasons for its decision and give the investigator an opportunity to respond in person or in writing.
          (e) An IRB shall conduct continuing review of research requiring review by the convened IRB at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk, not less than once per year, except as described in § 60.109(f).

          (f)(1) Unless an IRB determines otherwise, continuing review of research is not required in the following circumstances:
          (i) Research eligible for expedited review in accordance with § 60.110;
          (ii) Research reviewed by the IRB in accordance with the limited IRB review described in § 60.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), or (d)(7) or (8);
          (iii) Research that has progressed to the point that it involves only one or both of the following, which are part of the IRB-approved study:
          (A) Data analysis, including analysis of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, or
          (B) Accessing follow-up clinical data from procedures that subjects would undergo as part of clinical care.
          (2) [Reserved.]
          (g) An IRB shall have authority to observe or have a third party observe the consent process and the research.
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.110
          Expedited review procedures for certain kinds of research involving no more than minimal risk, and for minor changes in approved research.

          (a) The Secretary of HHS has established, and published as a Notice in the Federal Register, a list of categories of research that may be reviewed by the IRB through an expedited review procedure. The Secretary will evaluate the list at least every 8 years and amend it, as appropriate, after consultation with other federal departments and agencies and after publication in the Federal Register for public comment. A copy of the list is available from the Office for Human Research Protections, HHS, or any successor office.
          (b)(1) An IRB may use the expedited review procedure to review the following:
          (i) Some or all of the research appearing on the list described in paragraph (a) of this section, unless the reviewer determines that the study involves more than minimal risk;
          (ii) Minor changes in previously approved research during the period for which approval is authorized; or
          (iii) Research for which limited IRB review is a condition of exemption under § 60.104(d)(2)(iii), (d)(3)(i)(C), and (d)(7) and (8).
          (2) Under an expedited review procedure, the review may be carried out by the IRB chairperson or by one or more experienced reviewers designated by the chairperson from among members of the IRB. In reviewing the research, the reviewers may exercise all of the authorities of the IRB except that the reviewers may not disapprove the research. A research activity may be disapproved only after review in accordance with the nonexpedited procedure set forth in § 60.108(b).
          (c) Each IRB that uses an expedited review procedure shall adopt a method for keeping all members advised of research proposals that have been approved under the procedure.
          (d) The department or agency head may restrict, suspend, terminate, or choose not to authorize an institution's or IRB's use of the expedited review procedure.
        
        
          § 60.111
          Criteria for IRB approval of research.
          (a) In order to approve research covered by this policy the IRB shall determine that all of the following requirements are satisfied:
          (1) Risks to subjects are minimized:
          (i) By using procedures that are consistent with sound research design and that do not unnecessarily expose subjects to risk, and
          (ii) Whenever appropriate, by using procedures already being performed on the subjects for diagnostic or treatment purposes.

          (2) Risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits, if any, to subjects, and the importance of the knowledge that may reasonably be expected to result. In evaluating risks and benefits, the IRB should consider only those risks and benefits that may result from the research (as distinguished from risks and benefits of therapies subjects would receive even if not participating in the research). The IRB should not consider possible long-range effects of applying knowledge gained in the research (e.g., the possible effects of the research on public policy) as among those research risks that fall within the purview of its responsibility.
          
          (3) Selection of subjects is equitable. In making this assessment the IRB should take into account the purposes of the research and the setting in which the research will be conducted. The IRB should be particularly cognizant of the special problems of research that involves a category of subjects who are vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, such as children, prisoners, individuals with impaired decision-making capacity, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons.
          (4) Informed consent will be sought from each prospective subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, in accordance with, and to the extent required by, § 60.116.
          (5) Informed consent will be appropriately documented or appropriately waived in accordance with § 60.117.
          (6) When appropriate, the research plan makes adequate provision for monitoring the data collected to ensure the safety of subjects.
          (7) When appropriate, there are adequate provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the confidentiality of data.
          (i) The Secretary of HHS will, after consultation with the Office of Management and Budget's privacy office and other Federal departments and agencies that have adopted this policy, issue guidance to assist IRBs in assessing what provisions are adequate to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the confidentiality of data.
          (ii) [Reserved]
          (8) For purposes of conducting the limited IRB review required by § 60.104(d)(7)), the IRB need not make the determinations at paragraphs (a)(1) through (7) of this section, and shall make the following determinations:
          (i) Broad consent for storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens is obtained in accordance with the requirements of § 60.116(a)(1)-(4), (a)(6), and (d);
          (ii) Broad consent is appropriately documented or waiver of documentation is appropriate, in accordance with § 60.117; and
          (iii) If there is a change made for research purposes in the way the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens are stored or maintained, there are adequate provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the confidentiality of data.
          (b) When some or all of the subjects are likely to be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, such as children, prisoners, individuals with impaired decision-making capacity, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons, additional safeguards have been included in the study to protect the rights and welfare of these subjects.
        
        
          § 60.112
          Review by Institution
          Research covered by this policy that has been approved by an IRB may be subject to further appropriate review and approval or disapproval by officials of the institution. However, those officials may not approve the research if it has not been approved by an IRB.
        
        
          § 60.113
          Suspension or Termination of IRB Approval of Research.
          An IRB shall have authority to suspend or terminate approval of research that is not being conducted in accordance with the IRB's requirements or that has been associated with unexpected serious harm to subjects. Any suspension or termination of approval shall include a statement of the reasons for the IRB's action and shall be reported promptly to the investigator, appropriate institutional officials, and the department or agency head.
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.114
          Cooperative Research.
          (a) Cooperative research projects are those projects covered by this policy that involve more than one institution. In the conduct of cooperative research projects, each institution is responsible for safeguarding the rights and welfare of human subjects and for complying with this policy.

          (b)(1) Any institution located in the United States that is engaged in cooperative research must rely upon approval by a single IRB for that portion of the research that is conducted in the United States. The reviewing IRB will be identified by the Federal department or agency supporting or conducting the research or proposed by the lead institution subject to the acceptance of the Federal department or agency supporting the research.
          (2) The following research is not subject to this provision:
          (i) Cooperative research for which more than single IRB review is required by law (including tribal law passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe); or
          (ii) Research for which any Federal department or agency supporting or conducting the research determines and documents that the use of a single IRB is not appropriate for the particular context.
          (c) For research not subject to paragraph (b) of this section, an institution participating in a cooperative project may enter into a joint review arrangement, rely on the review of another IRB, or make similar arrangements for avoiding duplication of effort.
        
        
          § 60.115
          IRB Records.
          (a) An institution, or when appropriate an IRB, shall prepare and maintain adequate documentation of IRB activities, including the following:
          (1) Copies of all research proposals reviewed, scientific evaluations, if any, that accompany the proposals, approved sample consent forms, progress reports submitted by investigators, and reports of injuries to subjects.
          (2) Minutes of IRB meetings, which shall be in sufficient detail to show attendance at the meetings; actions taken by the IRB; the vote on these actions including the number of members voting for, against, and abstaining; the basis for requiring changes in or disapproving research; and a written summary of the discussion of controverted issues and their resolution.
          (3) Records of continuing review activities, including the rationale for conducting continuing review of research that otherwise would not require continuing review as described in § 60.109(f)(1).
          (4) Copies of all correspondence between the IRB and the investigators.
          (5) A list of IRB members in the same detail as described in § 60.108(a)(2).
          (6) Written procedures for the IRB in the same detail as described in § 60.108(a)(3) and (4).
          (7) Statements of significant new findings provided to subjects, as required by § 60.116(c)(5).
          (8) The rationale for an expedited reviewer's determination under § 60.110(b)(1)(i) that research appearing on the expedited review list described in § 60.110(a) is more than minimal risk.
          (9) Documentation specifying the responsibilities that an institution and an organization operating an IRB each will undertake to ensure compliance with the requirements of this policy, as described in § 60.103(e).
          (b) The records required by this policy shall be retained for at least 3 years, and records relating to research that is conducted shall be retained for at least 3 years after completion of the research. The institution or IRB may maintain the records in printed form, or electronically. All records shall be accessible for inspection and copying by authorized representatives of the Federal department or agency at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner.
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.116
          General Requirements for Informed Consent.
          (a) General. General requirements for informed consent, whether written or oral, are set forth in this paragraph and apply to consent obtained in accordance with the requirements set forth in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section. Broad consent may be obtained in lieu of informed consent obtained in accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section only with respect to the storage, maintenance, and secondary research uses of identifiable private information and identifiable biospecimens. Waiver or alteration of consent in research involving public benefit and service programs conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local officials is described in paragraph (e) of this section. General waiver or alteration of informed consent is described in paragraph (f) of this section. Except as provided elsewhere in this policy:

          (1) Before involving a human subject in research covered by this policy, an investigator shall obtain the legally effective informed consent of the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative.
          (2) An investigator shall seek informed consent only under circumstances that provide the prospective subject or the legally authorized representative sufficient opportunity to discuss and consider whether or not to participate and that minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence.
          (3) The information that is given to the subject or the legally authorized representative shall be in language understandable to the subject or the legally authorized representative.
          (4) The prospective subject or the legally authorized representative must be provided with the information that a reasonable person would want to have in order to make an informed decision about whether to participate, and an opportunity to discuss that information.
          (5) Except for broad consent obtained in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section:
          (i) Informed consent must begin with a concise and focused presentation of the key information that is most likely to assist a prospective subject or legally authorized representative in understanding the reasons why one might or might not want to participate in the research. This part of the informed consent must be organized and presented in a way that facilitates comprehension.
          (ii) Informed consent as a whole must present information in sufficient detail relating to the research, and must be organized and presented in a way that does not merely provide lists of isolated facts, but rather facilitates the prospective subject's or legally authorized representative's understanding of the reasons why one might or might not want to participate.
          (6) No informed consent may include any exculpatory language through which the subject or the legally authorized representative is made to waive or appear to waive any of the subject's legal rights, or releases or appears to release the investigator, the sponsor, the institution, or its agents from liability for negligence.
          (b) Basic elements of informed consent. Except as provided in paragraph (d), (e), or (f) of this section, in seeking informed consent the following information shall be provided to each subject or the legally authorized representative:
          (1) A statement that the study involves research, an explanation of the purposes of the research and the expected duration of the subject's participation, a description of the procedures to be followed, and identification of any procedures that are experimental;
          (2) A description of any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the subject;
          (3) A description of any benefits to the subject or to others that may reasonably be expected from the research;
          (4) A disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or courses of treatment, if any, that might be advantageous to the subject;
          (5) A statement describing the extent, if any, to which confidentiality of records identifying the subject will be maintained;
          (6) For research involving more than minimal risk, an explanation as to whether any compensation and an explanation as to whether any medical treatments are available if injury occurs and, if so, what they consist of, or where further information may be obtained;
          (7) An explanation of whom to contact for answers to pertinent questions about the research and research subjects' rights, and whom to contact in the event of a research-related injury to the subject;
          (8) A statement that participation is voluntary, refusal to participate will involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled, and the subject may discontinue participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled; and
          (9) One of the following statements about any research that involves the collection of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens:

          (i) A statement that identifiers might be removed from the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens and that, after such removal, the information or biospecimens could be used for future research studies or distributed to another investigator for future research studies without additional informed consent from the subject or the legally authorized representative, if this might be a possibility; or
          (ii) A statement that the subject's information or biospecimens collected as part of the research, even if identifiers are removed, will not be used or distributed for future research studies.
          (c) Additional elements of informed consent. Except as provided in paragraph (d), (e), or (f) of this section, one or more of the following elements of information, when appropriate, shall also be provided to each subject or the legally authorized representative:
          (1) A statement that the particular treatment or procedure may involve risks to the subject (or to the embryo or fetus, if the subject is or may become pregnant) that are currently unforeseeable;
          (2) Anticipated circumstances under which the subject's participation may be terminated by the investigator without regard to the subject's or the legally authorized representative's consent;
          (3) Any additional costs to the subject that may result from participation in the research;
          (4) The consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from the research and procedures for orderly termination of participation by the subject;
          (5) A statement that significant new findings developed during the course of the research that may relate to the subject's willingness to continue participation will be provided to the subject;
          (6) The approximate number of subjects involved in the study;
          (7) A statement that the subject's biospecimens (even if identifiers are removed) may be used for commercial profit and whether the subject will or will not share in this commercial profit;
          (8) A statement regarding whether clinically relevant research results, including individual research results, will be disclosed to subjects, and if so, under what conditions; and

          (9) For research involving biospecimens, whether the research will (if known) or might include whole genome sequencing (i.e., sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or exome sequence of that specimen).
          (d) Elements of broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens. Broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens (collected for either research studies other than the proposed research or nonresearch purposes) is permitted as an alternative to the informed consent requirements in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. If the subject or the legally authorized representative is asked to provide broad consent, the following shall be provided to each subject or the subject's legally authorized representative:
          (1) The information required in paragraphs (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(5), and (b)(8) and, when appropriate, (c)(7) and (9) of this section;
          (2) A general description of the types of research that may be conducted with the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens. This description must include sufficient information such that a reasonable person would expect that the broad consent would permit the types of research conducted;
          (3) A description of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens that might be used in research, whether sharing of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens might occur, and the types of institutions or researchers that might conduct research with the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens;
          (4) A description of the period of time that the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens may be stored and maintained (which period of time could be indefinite), and a description of the period of time that the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens may be used for research purposes (which period of time could be indefinite);

          (5) Unless the subject or legally authorized representative will be provided details about specific research studies, a statement that they will not be informed of the details of any specific research studies that might be conducted using the subject's identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, including the purposes of the research, and that they might have chosen not to consent to some of those specific research studies;
          (6) Unless it is known that clinically relevant research results, including individual research results, will be disclosed to the subject in all circumstances, a statement that such results may not be disclosed to the subject; and
          (7) An explanation of whom to contact for answers to questions about the subject's rights and about storage and use of the subject's identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, and whom to contact in the event of a research-related harm.
          (e) Waiver or alteration of consent in research involving public benefit and service programs conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local officials—(1) Waiver. An IRB may waive the requirement to obtain informed consent for research under paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (e)(3) of this section. If an individual was asked to provide broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens in accordance with the requirements at paragraph (d) of this section, and refused to consent, an IRB cannot waive consent for the storage, maintenance, or secondary research use of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens.
          (2) Alteration. An IRB may approve a consent procedure that omits some, or alters some or all, of the elements of informed consent set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (e)(3) of this section. An IRB may not omit or alter any of the requirements described in paragraph (a) of this section. If a broad consent procedure is used, an IRB may not omit or alter any of the elements required under paragraph (d) of this section.
          (3) Requirements for waiver and alteration. In order for an IRB to waive or alter consent as described in this subsection, the IRB must find and document that:
          (i) The research or demonstration project is to be conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local government officials and is designed to study, evaluate, or otherwise examine:
          (A) Public benefit or service programs;
          (B) Procedures for obtaining benefits or services under those programs;
          (C) Possible changes in or alternatives to those programs or procedures; or
          (D) Possible changes in methods or levels of payment for benefits or services under those programs; and
          (ii) The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration.
          (f) General waiver or alteration of consent—(1) Waiver. An IRB may waive the requirement to obtain informed consent for research under paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (f)(3) of this section. If an individual was asked to provide broad consent for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens in accordance with the requirements at paragraph (d) of this section, and refused to consent, an IRB cannot waive consent for the storage, maintenance, or secondary research use of the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens.
          (2) Alteration. An IRB may approve a consent procedure that omits some, or alters some or all, of the elements of informed consent set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section provided the IRB satisfies the requirements of paragraph (f)(3) of this section. An IRB may not omit or alter any of the requirements described in paragraph (a) of this section. If a broad consent procedure is used, an IRB may not omit or alter any of the elements required under paragraph (d) of this section.
          (3) Requirements for waiver and alteration. In order for an IRB to waive or alter consent as described in this subsection, the IRB must find and document that:
          
          (i) The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects;
          (ii) The research could not practicably be carried out without the requested waiver or alteration;
          (iii) If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, the research could not practicably be carried out without using such information or biospecimens in an identifiable format;
          (iv) The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects; and
          (v) Whenever appropriate, the subjects or legally authorized representatives will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation.
          (g) Screening, recruiting, or determining eligibility. An IRB may approve a research proposal in which an investigator will obtain information or biospecimens for the purpose of screening, recruiting, or determining the eligibility of prospective subjects without the informed consent of the prospective subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, if either of the following conditions are met:
          (1) The investigator will obtain information through oral or written communication with the prospective subject or legally authorized representative, or
          (2) The investigator will obtain identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens by accessing records or stored identifiable biospecimens.
          (h) Posting of clinical trial consent form. (1) For each clinical trial conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency, one IRB-approved informed consent form used to enroll subjects must be posted by the awardee or the Federal department or agency component conducting the trial on a publicly available Federal Web site that will be established as a repository for such informed consent forms.

          (2) If the Federal department or agency supporting or conducting the clinical trial determines that certain information should not be made publicly available on a Federal Web site (e.g. confidential commercial information), such Federal department or agency may permit or require redactions to the information posted.
          (3) The informed consent form must be posted on the Federal Web site after the clinical trial is closed to recruitment, and no later than 60 days after the last study visit by any subject, as required by the protocol.
          (i) Preemption. The informed consent requirements in this policy are not intended to preempt any applicable Federal, state, or local laws (including tribal laws passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe) that require additional information to be disclosed in order for informed consent to be legally effective.
          (j) Emergency medical care. Nothing in this policy is intended to limit the authority of a physician to provide emergency medical care, to the extent the physician is permitted to do so under applicable Federal, state, or local law (including tribal law passed by the official governing body of an American Indian or Alaska Native tribe).
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.117
          Documentation of informed consent.
          (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, informed consent shall be documented by the use of a written informed consent form approved by the IRB and signed (including in an electronic format) by the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative. A written copy shall be given to the person signing the informed consent form.
          (b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the informed consent form may be either of the following:
          (1) A written informed consent form that meets the requirements of § 60.116. The investigator shall give either the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative adequate opportunity to read the informed consent form before it is signed; alternatively, this form may be read to the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative.

          (2) A short form written informed consent form stating that the elements of informed consent required by § 60.116 have been presented orally to the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, and that the key information required by § 60.116(a)(5)(i) was presented first to the subject, before other information, if any, was provided. The IRB shall approve a written summary of what is to be said to the subject or the legally authorized representative. When this method is used, there shall be a witness to the oral presentation. Only the short form itself is to be signed by the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative. However, the witness shall sign both the short form and a copy of the summary, and the person actually obtaining consent shall sign a copy of the summary. A copy of the summary shall be given to the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative, in addition to a copy of the short form.
          (c)(1) An IRB may waive the requirement for the investigator to obtain a signed informed consent form for some or all subjects if it finds any of the following:
          (i) That the only record linking the subject and the research would be the informed consent form and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each subject (or legally authorized representative) will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the research, and the subject's wishes will govern;
          (ii) That the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context; or
          (iii) If the subjects or legally authorized representatives are members of a distinct cultural group or community in which signing forms is not the norm, that the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and provided there is an appropriate alternative mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained.
          (2) In cases in which the documentation requirement is waived, the IRB may require the investigator to provide subjects or legally authorized representatives with a written statement regarding the research.
          (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 0990-0260)
        
        
          § 60.118
          Applications and proposals lacking definite plans for involvement of human subjects.
          Certain types of applications for grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts are submitted to Federal departments or agencies with the knowledge that subjects may be involved within the period of support, but definite plans would not normally be set forth in the application or proposal. These include activities such as institutional type grants when selection of specific projects is the institution's responsibility; research training grants in which the activities involving subjects remain to be selected; and projects in which human subjects' involvement will depend upon completion of instruments, prior animal studies, or purification of compounds. Except for research waived under § 60.101(i) or exempted under § 60.104, no human subjects may be involved in any project supported by these awards until the project has been reviewed and approved by the IRB, as provided in this policy, and certification submitted, by the institution, to the Federal department or agency component supporting the research.
        
        
          § 60.119
          Research undertaken without the intention of involving human subjects.
          Except for research waived under § 60.101(i) or exempted under § 60.104, in the event research is undertaken without the intention of involving human subjects, but it is later proposed to involve human subjects in the research, the research shall first be reviewed and approved by an IRB, as provided in this policy, a certification submitted by the institution to the Federal department or agency component supporting the research, and final approval given to the proposed change by the Federal department or agency component.
        
        
          § 60.120
          Evaluation and disposition of applications and proposals for research to be conducted or supported by a Federal department or agency.

          (a) The department or agency head will evaluate all applications and proposals involving human subjects submitted to the Federal department or agency through such officers and employees of the Federal department or agency and such experts and consultants as the department or agency head determines to be appropriate. This evaluation will take into consideration the risks to the subjects, the adequacy of protection against these risks, the potential benefits of the research to the subjects and others, and the importance of the knowledge gained or to be gained.
          (b) On the basis of this evaluation, the department or agency head may approve or disapprove the application or proposal, or enter into negotiations to develop an approvable one.
        
        
          § 60.121
          [Reserved]
        
        
          § 60.122
          Use of Federal funds.
          Federal funds administered by a Federal department or agency may not be expended for research involving human subjects unless the requirements of this policy have been satisfied.
        
        
          § 60.123
          Early termination of research support: Evaluation of applications and proposals.
          (a) The department or agency head may require that Federal department or agency support for any project be terminated or suspended in the manner prescribed in applicable program requirements, when the department or agency head finds an institution has materially failed to comply with the terms of this policy.
          (b) In making decisions about supporting or approving applications or proposals covered by this policy the department or agency head may take into account, in addition to all other eligibility requirements and program criteria, factors such as whether the applicant has been subject to a termination or suspension under paragraph (a) of this section and whether the applicant or the person or persons who would direct or has/have directed the scientific and technical aspects of an activity has/have, in the judgment of the department or agency head, materially failed to discharge responsibility for the protection of the rights and welfare of human subjects (whether or not the research was subject to federal regulation).
        
        
          § 60.124
          Conditions.
          With respect to any research project or any class of research projects the department or agency head of either the conducting or the supporting Federal department or agency may impose additional conditions prior to or at the time of approval when in the judgment of the department or agency head additional conditions are necessary for the protection of human subjects.
        
      
      
        Pt. 70
        PART 70—USE OF VOLUNTEERS ON PROJECTS SUBJECT TO DAVIS-BACON AND HUD-DETERMINED WAGE RATES
        
          Sec.
          70.1
          Purpose and authority.
          70.2
          Applicability.
          70.3
          Definitions.
          70.4
          Procedure for implementing prevailing wage exemptions for volunteers.
          70.5
          Procedure for obtaining HUD waiver of prevailing wage rates for volunteers.
        
        
          Authority:
          Sec. 955, Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 1437(j), 5310 and 12 U.S.C. 1701q(c)(3); Sec. 7(d) Department of Housing and Urban Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3535(d)).
        
        
          Source:
          57 FR 14756, Apr. 22, 1992, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 70.1
          Purpose and authority.

          (a) This part implements section 955 of the National Affordable Housing Act (NAHA), which provides an exemption from the requirement to pay prevailing wage rates determined under the Davis-Bacon Act or (in the case of laborers and mechanics employed in the operation of public housing projects, and architects, technical engineers, draftsmen and technicians employed in the development of public housing projects) determined or adopted by HUD, for volunteers employed on projects that are subject to prevailing wage rates under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (including Community Development Block Grants, section 108 loan guarantees, and Urban Development Action Grants), under section 12 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (public housing development and operation and section 8 projects), and under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 for elderly and handicapped housing projects prior to the effective date of the amendment of section 202 by section 801 of NAHA. This part also implements other provisions that provide an exemption for volunteers, including section 286 of NAHA (the HOME program), section 202 of the House Act of 1959, as amended by NAHA (supportive housing for the elderly), and any later-enacted exemptions.
          (b) This part is also applicable to all HUD programs for which there is a statutory provision allowing HUD to waive Davis-Bacon wage rates for volunteers that are not otherwise employed at any time on the work for which the individual volunteers. These programs include section 811 of NAHA (supportive housing for persons with disabilities), FHA mortgage insurance programs under sections 221(d)(3) and (d)(4) (each with respect to cooperative housing projects only), 221(h)(1) (but only where a nonprofit organization undertakes the construction), 235(j)(1) (but only where a nonprofit organization undertakes the construction), 231, 232, 236 and 242 of the National Housing Act, rehabilitation under section 312 of the Housing Act of 1964 and college housing under section 402 of the Housing Act of 1950.
          (c) This part provides definitions and procedures for determining allowable payments to volunteers, determining who is a bona fide volunteer, and otherwise implementing exemptions from and waivers of prevailing wage requirements where volunteers are employed.
        
        
          § 70.2
          Applicability.
          This part applies to all HUD programs for which there is a statutory exemption from Davis-Bacon or HUD-determined prevailing wage rates for volunteers or a statutory provision allowing HUD waiver of Davis-Bacon prevailing wage rates for volunteers. The programs to which this part applies include the programs listed in section 70.1(a) and (b) and any other program for which a statutory exemption or HUD waiver provision for volunteers is enacted. This part does not, however, apply to HUD waivers of prevailing wage requirements under section 20 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 for public housing residents who volunteer a portion of their labor (see 24 CFR 964.41). This part also does not apply to the contribution of labor by an eligible family under the Mutual Help Homeownership Opportunity Program for Indian families under section 202 of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
        
        
          § 70.3
          Definitions.
          (a) A volunteer, for purposes of this part, is an individual who performs service for a public or private entity for civic, charitable, or humanitarian reasons, without promise, expectation or receipt of compensation for services rendered, on a HUD-assisted or insured project which is subject to a requirement to pay prevailing wage rates.
          (1) Individuals shall be considered volunteers only where their services are offered freely and without pressure and coercion, direct or implied, from an employer.
          (2) An individual shall not be considered a volunteer if the individual is otherwise employed at any time in the construction or maintenance work for which the individual volunteers.
          (b) Expenses, reasonable benefits, or nominal fees may be provided to volunteers without the status of the volunteer being lost but only after a determination is made by HUD on a case-by-case basis by examining the total amount of payments made (expenses, benefits, fees) in the context of the economic realities of the particular situation. Subject to this determination:
          (1) A payment for an expense may be received by a volunteer for items such as uniform allowances or reimbursement for reasonable cleaning expenses or wear and tear on personal clothing worn while performing the volunteer work. Additionally, reimbursement for approximate out-of-pocket expenses for the cost of meals and transportation expenses may be made.
          (2) Reasonable benefits may constitute inclusion of individual volunteers in group insurance plans (such as liability, health, life, disability, workers' compensation) or pension plan or length of service awards.
          (3) A nominal fee is not a substitute for compensation and must not be tied to productivity. The decision as to what constitutes “nominal” must be made on a case-by-case basis and in the context of the economic realities of the situation.
          (4) The phrase economic realities means that in determining whether the fee described in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be deemed “nominal”, the amount of the fee must be judged in the context of what paid workers doing the same work would earn in the particular locality involved. For example, a “payment” made to a “homeless” volunteer in an amount which covers basic necessities but nonetheless represents an insignificant amount when compared with local cost of living and real wages may be determined to be nominal for purposes of qualifying as a volunteer, provided the payment is not in fact a substitute for compensation and is not tied in any way to productivity.
          (c) Prevailing wage rates, for purposes of this part, means:
          (1) Wage rates required to be paid to laborers and mechanics employed in the construction (including rehabilitation) of a project (or in the case of public housing, the development of the project), as determined by the Secretary of Labor under the Davis-Bacon Act;
          (2) Wage rates required to be paid to laborers and mechanics employed in the operation of a public housing project, as determined or adopted by the Secretary of HUD; and
          (3) Wage rates required to be paid to architects, technical engineers, draftsmen and technicians employed in the development of a public housing project, as determined or adopted by the Secretary of HUD.
        
        
          § 70.4
          Procedure for implementing prevailing wage exemptions for volunteers.

          (a) This section applies to those HUD programs for which there is a statutory exemption for volunteers, as referenced in § 70.1(a).
          (b) Local or State agencies or private parties whose employees are otherwise subject to Davis-Bacon or HUD-determined prevailing wage rates which propose to use volunteers and wish to pay the volunteers' expenses, reasonable benefits, or nominal fees shall request a determination from HUD that these payments meet the criteria in § 70.3(b). A written determination shall be provided to the requester by the Department within ten days of receipt by the Department of sufficient information to allow for the determination.
          (c) A determination under paragraph (b) shall not be construed in any way as limiting the use of bona fide volunteers on HUD-assisted construction, but rather is required to ensure that the Department performs its appropriate responsibilities under Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 1950 and related Department of Labor Regulations in title 29 CFR part 5, regarding the administration and enforcement of the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, and its responsibility for the administration and enforcement of HUD-determined or adopted wage rates in the operation of public housing assisted under the United States Housing Act of 1937.
          (d) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in which all the work is to be done by volunteers and there are no paid construction employees, the local or State funding agency (or, if none, the entity that employs the volunteers) shall record in the pertinent project file the name and address of the agency sponsoring the project, a description of the project (location, cost, nature of the work), and the number of volunteers and the hours of work they performed. The entity responsible for recording this information shall also provide a copy of this information to HUD.
          (e) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in which there is to be a mix of paid workers and volunteers, the local or State funding agency (or, if none, the entity responsible for generating certified payrolls) shall provide HUD the information in paragraph (d) of this section, along with the names of the volunteers.
          (f) Volunteers who receive no expenses, benefits or fees described in (c) and are otherwise bona fide shall be recorded as in (d) or (e).
        
        
          § 70.5
          Procedure for obtaining HUD waiver of prevailing wage rates for volunteers.

          (a) This section applies to those HUD programs under which HUD is statutorily authorized to waive prevailing wage requirements for volunteers, as referenced in § 70.1(b).
          (b) Local or State agencies or private parties whose employees are otherwise subject to prevailing wage rates and which wish to use volunteers shall request a waiver of prevailing wage requirements from HUD for the volunteers. A request for waiver shall indicate that the proposed volunteers are volunteering their services for the purposes of lowering the costs of construction. The request shall include information sufficient for HUD to make a determination, as required by statute, that any amounts saved through the use of volunteers are fully credited to the corporation, cooperative, or public body or agency undertaking the construction and a determination that any payments to volunteers meet the criteria in section 70.3(b). Information regarding the crediting of amounts saved is required in order to insure that the statutorily prescribed purpose of lowering the costs of construction is fulfilled by passing savings from the use of volunteers on to the sponsor or other body or agency undertaking the construction, rather than permitting the retention of any savings as a windfall by a contractor or subcontractor. A written waiver shall be provided to the requestor by the Department within ten days of receipt by the Department of sufficient information to meet the requirements for a waiver.
          (c) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in which all the work is to be done by volunteers and there are no paid construction employees, the local or State funding agency (or, if none, the entity that employs the volunteers) shall record in the pertinent project file the name and address of the agency sponsoring the project, the name, location, and HUD project number (if any) of the project, the number of volunteers, and type of work and hours of work they performed. The entity responsible for recording this information shall provide a copy of the information to HUD.
          (d) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in which there is to be a mix of paid workers and volunteers, the local or State funding agency (or, if none, the entity responsible for generating certified payrolls) shall provide HUD the information in (c) of this section, along with the names of the proposed volunteers.
        
      
      
        Pt. 81
        PART 81—THE SECRETARY OF HUD'S REGULATION OF THE FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (FANNIE MAE) AND THE FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORPORATION (FREDDIE MAC)
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            81.1
            Scope of part.
            81.2
            Definitions.
          
          
            Subpart B—Housing Goals
            81.11
            General.
            81.12
            Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal.
            81.13
            Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal.
            81.14
            Special Affordable Housing Goal.
            81.15
            General requirements.
            81.16
            Special counting requirements.
            81.17
            Affordability—Income level definitions—family size and income known (owner-occupied units, actual tenants, and prospective tenants).
            81.18
            Affordability—Income level definitions—family size not known (actual or prospective tenants).
            81.19
            Affordability—Rent level definitions—tenant income is not known.
            81.20
            Actions to be taken to meet the goals.
            81.21
            Notice and determination of failure to meet goals.
            81.22
            Housing plans.
          
          
            Subpart C—Fair Housing
            81.41
            General.
            81.42
            Prohibitions against discrimination.
            81.43
            Reports; underwriting and appraisal guideline review.
            81.44
            Submission of information to the Secretary.
            81.45
            Obtaining and disseminating information.
            81.46
            Remedial actions.
            81.47
            Violations of provisions by the GSEs.
          
          
            Subpart D—New Program Approval
            81.51
            General.
            81.52
            Requirement for program requests.
            81.53
            Processing of program requests.
            81.54
            Review of disapproval.
          
          
            
            Subpart E—Reporting Requirements
            81.61
            General.
            81.62
            Mortgage reports.
            81.63
            Annual Housing Activities Report.
            81.64
            Periodic reports.
            81.65
            Other information and analyses.
            81.66
            Submission of reports.
          
          
            Subpart F—Access to Information
            81.71
            General.
            81.72
            Public-use database and public information.
            81.73
            GSE request for proprietary treatment.
            81.74
            Secretarial determination on GSE request.
            81.75
            Proprietary information withheld by order or regulation.
            81.76
            FOIA requests and protection of GSE information.
            81.77
            Requests for GSE information on behalf of Congress, the Comptroller General, a subpoena, or other legal process.
          
          
            Subpart G—Procedures for Actions and Review of Actions
            81.81
            General.
            81.82
            Cease-and-desist proceedings.
            81.83
            Civil money penalties.
            81.84
            Hearings.
            81.85
            Public disclosure of final orders and agreements.
            81.86
            Enforcement and jurisdiction.
            81.87
            Judicial review.
          
          
            Subpart H—Book-Entry Procedures
            81.91
            Maintenance of GSE Securities.
            81.92
            Law governing rights and obligations of United States, Federal Reserve Banks, and GSEs; rights of any Person against United States, Federal Reserve Banks, and GSEs; Law governing other interests.
            81.93
            Creation of Participant's Security Entitlement; security interests.
            81.94
            Obligations of GSEs; no adverse claims.
            81.95
            Authority of Federal Reserve Banks.
            81.96
            Withdrawal of Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities for conversion to definitive form.
            81.97
            Waiver of regulations.
            81.98
            Liability of GSEs and Federal Reserve Banks.
            81.99
            Additional provisions.
          
          
            Subpart I—Other Provisions
            81.101
            Equal employment opportunity.
            81.102
            Verification and enforcement to ensure GSE data integrity.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq., 1716-1723h, and 4501-4641; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 3601-3619.
        
        
          Source:
          60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 81.1
            Scope of part.
            (a) Authority. The Secretary has general regulatory power respecting the Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie Mac”) (referred to collectively as Government-sponsored enterprises (“GSEs”)) and is required to make such rules and regulations as are necessary and proper to ensure that the provisions of the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (“FHEFSSA”), codified generally at 12 U.S.C. 4501-4641; the Fannie Mae Charter Act, 12 U.S.C. 1716-1723h; and the Freddie Mac Act, 12 U.S.C. 1451-59, are accomplished.
            (b) Relation between this part and the authorities of OFHEO. The Director of the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (“OFHEO”) will issue separate regulations implementing the Director's authority respecting the GSEs. In this part, OFHEO and the Director are only referenced when the Director's responsibilities are connected with the Secretary's responsibilities.
          
          
            § 81.2
            Definitions.
            (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in FHEFSSA (12 U.S.C. 4502) are used in accordance with their statutory meaning unless otherwise defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
            (b) Other terms. As used in this part, the term—
            
              AHAR means the Annual Housing Activities Report that a GSE submits to the Secretary under sections 309(n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act or 307(f) of the Freddie Mac Act.
            
              AHAR information means data or information contained in the AHAR.
            
              AHS means the American Housing Survey published by HUD and the Department of Commerce.
            
              Balloon mortgage means a mortgage providing for payments at regular intervals, with a final payment (“balloon payment”) that is at least 5 percent more than the periodic payments. The periodic payments may cover some or all of the periodic principal or interest. Typically, the periodic payments are level monthly payments that would fully amortize the mortgage over a stated term and the balloon payment is a single payment due after a specified period (but before the mortgage would fully amortize) and pays off or satisfies the outstanding balance of the mortgage.
            
              Book-entry GSE Security means a GSE Security issued or maintained in the Book-entry System. Book-entry GSE Security also means the separate interest and principal components of a Book-entry GSE Security if such security has been designated by the GSE as eligible for division into such components and the components are maintained separately on the books of one or more Federal Reserve Banks.
            
              Book-entry System means the automated book-entry system operated by the Federal Reserve Banks acting as the fiscal agent for the GSEs, on which Book-entry GSE Securities are issued, recorded, transferred and maintained in book-entry form.
            
              Central city means the underserved areas located in any political subdivision designated as a central city by the Office of Management and Budget of the Executive Office of the President.
            
              Charter Act means the Federal National Mortgage Association Charter Act (12 U.S.C. 1716 et seq.) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
            
              Contract rent means the total rent that is, or is anticipated to be, specified in the rental contract as payable by the tenant to the owner for rental of a dwelling unit, including fees or charges for management and maintenance services and those utility charges that are included in the rental contract. In determining contract rent, rent concessions shall not be considered, i.e., contract rent is not decreased by any rent concessions. Contract rent is rent net of rental subsidies.
            
              Conventional mortgage means a mortgage other than a mortgage as to which a GSE has the benefit of any guaranty, insurance or other obligation by the United States or any of its agencies or instrumentalities.
            
              Day means a calendar day.
            
              Definitive GSE Security means a GSE Security in engraved or printed form, or that is otherwise represented by a certificate.
            
              Director means the Director of OFHEO.
            
              Dwelling unit means a room or unified combination of rooms intended for use, in whole or in part, as a dwelling by one or more persons, and includes a dwelling unit in a single-family property, multifamily property, or other residential or mixed-use property.
            
              ECOA means the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691 et seq.).
            
              Eligible Book-entry GSE Security means a Book-entry GSE Security issued or maintained in the Book-entry System which by the terms of its Security Documentation is eligible to be converted from book-entry form into definitive form.
            
              Entitlement Holder means a Person or a GSE to whose account an interest in a Book-entry GSE Security is credited on the records of a Securities Intermediary.
            
              Familial status has the same definition as is set forth at 24 CFR 100.20.
            
              Family means one or more individuals who occupy the same dwelling unit.
            
              Fannie Mae means the Federal National Mortgage Association and any affiliate thereof.
            
              Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circular means the publication issued by each Federal Reserve Bank that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the Reserve Bank maintains book-entry Securities accounts (including Book-entry GSE Securities) and transfers book-entry Securities (including Book-entry GSE Securities).
            
              FHEFSSA means the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992, codified generally at 12 U.S.C. 4501-4651.
            
              FOIA means the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).
            
              Freddie Mac means the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and any affiliate thereof.
            
              Freddie Mac Act means the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
            
              Government-sponsored enterprise or GSE means Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.
            
              GSE Security means any security or obligation of Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac issued under its respective Charter Act in the form of a Definitive GSE Security or a Book-entry GSE Security.
            
              Handicap has the same definition as is set forth at 24 CFR 100.201.
            
              HOEPA mortgage” means a mortgage for which the annual percentage rate (as calculated in accordance with the relevant provisions of section 107 of the Home Ownership Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) (15 U.S.C. 1606)) exceeds the threshold described in section 103(aa)(1)(A) of HOEPA (15 U.S.C. 1602(aa)(1)(A)), or for which the total points and fees payable by the borrower exceed the threshold described in section 103(aa)(1)(B) of HOEPA (15 U.S.C. 1602(aa)(1)(B)), as those thresholds may be increased or decreased by the Federal Reserve Board or by Congress, unless the GSEs are otherwise notified in writing by HUD. Notwithstanding the exclusions in section 103(aa)(1) of HOEPA, for purposes of this part, the term “HOEPA mortgage” includes all types of mortgages as defined in this section, including residential mortgage transactions as that term is defined in section 103(w) of HOEPA (15 U.S.C. 1602(w)), but does not include reverse mortgages.
            
              Home Purchase Mortgage means a residential mortgage for the purchase of an owner-occupied single-family property.
            
              HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Lender means any entity that makes, originates, sells, or services mortgages, and includes the secured creditors named in the debt obligation and document creating the mortgage.
            
              Low-income area means a census tract or block numbering area in which the median income does not exceed 80 percent of the area median income.
            
              Median income means, with respect to an area, the unadjusted median family income for the area as most recently determined and published by HUD. HUD will provide the GSEs annually with information specifying how HUD's published median family income estimates for metropolitan areas are to be applied for the purposes of determining median family income.
            
              Metropolitan area means a metropolitan statistical area (“MSA”), or a portion of such an area for which median family income estimates are published annually by HUD.
            
              Minority means any individual who is included within any one or more of the following racial and ethnic categories:
            (1) American Indian or Alaskan Native—a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment;
            (2) Asian—a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent, including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam;
            (3) Black or African American—a person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa;
            (4) Hispanic or Latino—a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race; and
            (5) Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander—a person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.
            
              Mortgage means a member of such classes of liens, including subordinate liens, as are commonly given or are legally effective to secure advances on, or the unpaid purchase price of, real estate under the laws of the State in which the real estate is located, or a manufactured home that is personal property under the laws of the State in which the manufactured home is located, together with the credit instruments, if any, secured thereby, and includes interests in mortgages. “Mortgage” includes a mortgage, lien, including a subordinate lien, or other security interest on the stock or membership certificate issued to a tenant-stockholder or resident-member by a cooperative housing corporation, as defined in section 216 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and on the proprietary lease, occupancy agreement, or right of tenancy in the dwelling unit of the tenant-stockholder or resident-member in such cooperative housing corporation.
            
              Mortgage data means data obtained by the Secretary from the GSEs under subsection 309(m) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act and subsection 307(e) of the Freddie Mac Act.
            
              Mortgage purchase means a transaction in which a GSE bought or otherwise acquired with cash or other thing of value, a mortgage for its portfolio or for securitization.
            
              Mortgages contrary to good lending practices means a mortgage or a group or category of mortgages entered into by a lender and purchased by a GSE where it can be shown that a lender engaged in a practice of failing to:
            (1) Report monthly on borrowers' repayment history to credit repositories on the status of each GSE loan that a lender is servicing;
            (2) Offer mortgage applicants products for which they qualify, but rather steer applicants to high cost products that are designed for less credit worthy borrowers. Similarly, for consumers who seek financing through a lender's higher-priced subprime lending channel, lenders should not fail to offer or direct such consumers toward the lender's standard mortgage line if they are able to qualify for one of the standard products;
            (3) Comply with fair lending requirements; or
            (4) Engage in other good lending practices that are:
            (i) Identified in writing by a GSE as good lending practices for inclusion in this definition; and
            (ii) Determined by the Secretary to constitute good lending practices.
            
              Mortgages with unacceptable terms or conditions or resulting from unacceptable practices means a mortgage or a group or category of mortgages with one or more of the following terms or conditions:
            (1) Excessive fees, where the total points and fees charged to a borrower exceed the greater of 5 percent of the loan amount or a maximum dollar amount of $1000, or an alternative amount requested by a GSE and determined by the Secretary as appropriate for small mortgages.
            (i) For purposes of this definition, points and fees include:
            (A) Origination fees;
            (B) Underwriting fees;
            (C) Broker fees;
            (D) Finder's fees; and
            (E) Charges that the lender imposes as a condition of making the loan, whether they are paid to the lender or a third party.
            (ii) For purposes of this definition, points and fees do not include:
            (A) Bona fide discount points;
            (B) Fees paid for actual services rendered in connection with the origination of the mortgage, such as attorneys' fees, notary's fees, and fees paid for property appraisals, credit reports, surveys, title examinations and extracts, flood and tax certifications, and home inspections;
            (C) The cost of mortgage insurance or credit-risk price adjustments;
            (D) The costs of title, hazard, and flood insurance policies;
            (E) State and local transfer taxes or fees;
            (F) Escrow deposits for the future payment of taxes and insurance premiums; and
            (G) Other miscellaneous fees and charges that, in total, do not exceed 0.25 percent of the loan amount.
            (2) Prepayment penalties, except where:

            (i) The mortgage provides some benefits to the borrower (e.g., such as rate or fee reduction for accepting the prepayment premium);
            (ii) The borrower is offered the choice of another mortgage that does not contain payment of such a premium;
            (iii) The terms of the mortgage provision containing the prepayment penalty are adequately disclosed to the borrower; and
            (iv) The prepayment penalty is not charged when the mortgage debit is accelerated as the result of the borrower's default in making his or her mortgage payments.
            (3) The sale or financing of prepaid single-premium credit life insurance products in connection with the origination of the mortgage;

            (4) Evidence that the lender did not adequately consider the borrower's ability to make payments, i.e., mortgages that are originated with underwriting techniques that focus on the borrower's equity in the home, and do not give full consideration of the borrower's income and other obligations. Ability to repay must be determined and must be based upon relating the borrower's income, assets, and liabilities to the mortgage payments; or
            (5) Other terms or conditions that are:

            (i) Identified in writing by a GSE as unacceptable terms or conditions or resulting from unacceptable practices for inclusion in this definition; and
            (ii) Determined by the Secretary as an unacceptable term or condition of a mortgage for which goals credit should not be received.
            
              Multifamily housing means a residence consisting of more than 4 dwelling units. The term includes cooperative buildings and condominium projects.
            
              New England means Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont.
            
              OFHEO means the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.
            
              Ongoing program means a program that is expected to continue for the foreseeable future.
            
              Other underserved area means any underserved area that is in a metropolitan area, but not in a central city.
            
              Owner-occupied unit means a dwelling unit in single-family housing in which a mortgagor of the unit resides.
            
              Participant means a Person or GSE that maintains a Participant's Securities Account with a Federal Reserve Bank.
            
              Participation means a fractional interest in the principal amount of a mortgage.
            
              Person, as used in subpart H, means and includes an individual, corporation, company, governmental entity, association, firm, partnership, trust, estate, representative, and any other similar organization, but does not mean or include the United States, a GSE, or a Federal Reserve Bank.
            
              Portfolio of loans means 10 or more loans.
            
              Proprietary information means all mortgage data and all AHAR information that the GSEs submit to the Secretary in the AHARs that contain trade secrets or privileged or confidential, commercial, or financial information that, if released, would be likely to cause substantial competitive harm.
            
              Public data means all mortgage data and all AHAR information that the GSEs submit to the Secretary in the AHARs, that the Secretary determines are not proprietary and may appropriately be disclosed consistent with other applicable laws and regulations.
            
              Real estate mortgage investment conduit (REMIC) means multi-class mortgage securities issued by a tax-exempt entity.
            
              Refinancing means a transaction in which an existing mortgage is satisfied or replaced by a new mortgage undertaken by the same borrower. The term does not include:
            (1) A renewal of a single payment obligation with no change in the original terms;
            (2) A reduction in the annual percentage rate of the mortgage as computed under the Truth in Lending Act, with a corresponding change in the payment schedule;
            (3) An agreement involving a court proceeding;
            (4) A workout agreement, in which a change in the payment schedule or collateral requirements is agreed to as a result of the mortgagor's default or delinquency, unless the rate is increased or the new amount financed exceeds the unpaid balance plus earned finance charges and premiums for the continuation of insurance;
            (5) The renewal of optional insurance purchased by the mortgagor and added to an existing mortgage; and
            (6) A renegotiated balloon mortgage on a multifamily property where the balloon payment was due within 1 year after the date of the closing of the renegotiated mortgage.
            (7) A conversion of a balloon mortgage note on a single family property to a fully amortizing mortgage note where the GSE already owns or has an interest in the balloon note at the time of the conversion
            
              Rent means, for a dwelling unit:
            (1) When the contract rent includes all utilities, the contract rent; or
            (2) When the contract rent does not include all utilities, the contract rent plus:
            (i) The actual cost of utilities not included in the contract rent; or
            (ii) A utility allowance.
            
              Rental housing means dwelling units in multifamily housing and dwelling units that are not owner occupied in single-family housing.
            
            
              Rental unit means a dwelling unit that is not owner-occupied and is rented or available to rent.
            
              Residence means a property where one or more families reside.
            
              Residential mortgage means a mortgage on single-family or multifamily housing.
            
              Revised Article 8 has the same meaning as in 31 CFR 357.2.
            
              Rural area means any underserved area located outside of any metropolitan area.
            
              Seasoned mortgage means a mortgage on which the date of the mortgage note is more than 1 year before the GSE purchased the mortgage.
            
              Second mortgage means any mortgage that has a lien position subordinate only to the lien of the first mortgage.
            
              Secondary residence means a dwelling where the mortgagor maintains (or will maintain) a part-time place of abode and typically spends (or will spend) less than the majority of the calendar year. A person may have more than one secondary residence at a time.
            
              Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and, where appropriate, any person designated by the Secretary to perform a particular function for the Secretary, including any HUD officer, employee, or agent.
            
              Security means any mortgage participation certificate, note, bond, debenture, evidence of indebtedness, collateral-trust certificate, transferable share, certificate of deposit for a security, or, in general, any interest or instrument commonly known as a “security.”
            
              Securities Documentation means the applicable statement of terms, trust indenture, securities agreement or other documents establishing the terms of a Book-entry GSE Security.
            
              Single-family housing means a residence consisting of one to four dwelling units. Single-family housing includes condominium dwelling units and dwelling units in cooperative housing projects.
            
              Transfer message means an instruction of a Participant to a Federal Reserve Bank to effect a transfer of a Book-entry Security (including a Book-entry GSE Security) maintained in the Book-entry System, as set forth in Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circulars.
            
              Underserved area means:
            (1) For purposes of the definitions of “Central city” and “Other underserved area,” a census tract, a Federal or State American Indian reservation or tribal or individual trust land, or the balance of a census tract excluding the area within any Federal or State American Indian reservation or tribal or individual trust land, having:
            (i) A median income at or below 120 percent of the median income of the metropolitan area and a minority population of 30 percent or greater; or
            (ii) A median income at or below 90 percent of median income of the metropolitan area.
            (2) For purposes of the definition of “Rural area,” a whole census tract, a Federal or State American Indian reservation or tribal or individual trust land, or the balance of a census tract excluding the area within any Federal or State American Indian reservation or tribal or individual trust land, having:
            (i) A median income at or below 120 percent of the greater of the State non-metropolitan median income or the nationwide non-metropolitan median income and a minority population of 30 percent or greater; or
            (ii) A median income at or below 95 percent of the greater of the State non-metropolitan median income or nationwide non-metropolitan median income.
            (3) Any Federal or State American Indian reservation or tribal or individual trust land that includes land that is both within and outside of a metropolitan area and that is designated as an underserved area by HUD. In such cases, HUD will notify the GSEs as to applicability of other definitions and counting conventions.
            
              Utilities means charges for electricity, piped or bottled gas, water, sewage disposal, fuel (oil, coal, kerosene, wood, solar energy, or other), and garbage and trash collection. Utilities do not include charges for telephone service.
            
              Utility allowance means either:

            (1) The amount to be added to contract rent when utilities are not included in contract rent (also referred to as the “AHS-derived utility allowance”), as issued annually by the Secretary; or
            (2) The utility allowance established under the HUD Section 8 Program (42 U.S.C. 1437f) for the area where the property is located.
            
              Very-low-income has the same definition as “very low-income” has in FHEFSSA.
            
              Wholesale exchange means a transaction in which a GSE buys or otherwise acquires mortgages held in portfolio or securitized by the other GSE, or where both GSEs swap such mortgages.
            
              Working day means a day when HUD is officially open for business.
            (c) Subpart H terms. Unless the context requires otherwise, terms used in subpart H of this part that are not defined in this part, have the meanings as set forth in 31 CFR 357.2. Definitions and terms used in 31 CFR part 357 should read as though modified to effectuate their application to the GSEs.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 63947, Dec. 2, 1996; 62 FR 28977, May 29, 1997; 65 FR 65084, Oct. 31, 2000; 69 FR 63638, Nov. 2, 2004]
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Housing Goals
          
            § 81.11
            General.
            This subpart establishes: three housing goals, as required by FHEFSSA; requirements for measuring performance under the goals; and procedures for monitoring and enforcing the goals.
          
          
            § 81.12
            Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal.
            (a) Purpose of goal. This annual goal for the purchase by each GSE of mortgages on housing for low- and moderate-income families (“the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal”) is intended to achieve increased purchases by the GSEs of such mortgages.
            (b) Factors. In establishing the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goals, the Secretary considered the factors in 12 U.S.C. 4562(b). A statement documenting HUD's considerations and findings with respect to these factors, entitled “Departmental Considerations to Establish the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal,” was published in the Federal Register on November 2, 2004.
            (c) Goals. The annual goals for each GSE's purchases of mortgages on housing for low- and moderate-income families are:
            (1) For the year 2005, 52 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 45 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal in the year 2005 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;
            (2) For the year 2006, 53 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 46 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal in the year 2006 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;
            (3) For the year 2007, 55 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 47 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal in the year 2007 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;

            (4) For the year 2008, 56 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 47 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal in the year 2008 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA; and
            (5) For the year 2009 and thereafter HUD shall establish annual goals. Pending establishment of goals for the year 2009 and thereafter, the annual goal for each of those years shall be 56 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in each of those years. In addition, as a Low and Moderate Income Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 47 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal in each of those years unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65085, Oct. 31, 2000; 69 FR 63639, Nov. 2, 2004]
          
          
            § 81.13
            Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal.
            (a) Purpose of the goal. This annual goal for the purchase by each GSE of mortgages on housing located in central cities, rural areas, and other underserved areas is intended to achieve increased purchases by the GSEs of mortgages financing housing in areas that are underserved in terms of mortgage credit.
            (b) Factors. In establishing the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Goals, the Secretary considered the factors in 12 U.S.C. 4564(b). A statement documenting HUD's considerations and findings with respect to these factors, entitled “Departmental Considerations to Establish the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal,” was published in the Federal Register on November 2, 2004.
            (c) Goals. The annual goals for each GSE's purchases of mortgages on housing located in central cities, rural areas, and other underserved areas are:
            (1) For the year 2005, 37 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Home Purchase Subgoal, 32 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal in the year 2005 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;
            (2) For the year 2006, 38 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Home Purchase Subgoal, 33 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal in the year 2006 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;
            (3) For the year 2007, 38 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Home Purchase Subgoal, 33 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal in the year 2007 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;

            (4) For the year 2008, 39 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Home Purchase Subgoal, 34 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal in the year 2008 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA; and
            (5) For the year 2009 and thereafter HUD shall establish annual goals. Pending establishment of goals for the year 2009 and thereafter, the annual goal for each of those years shall be 39 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in each of those years. In addition, as a Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Home Purchase Subgoal, 34 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal in each of those years unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA.
            (d) Measuring performance. The GSEs shall determine on a mortgage-by-mortgage basis, through geocoding or any similarly accurate and reliable method, whether a mortgage finances one or more dwelling units located in a central city, rural area, or other underserved area.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65086, Oct. 31, 2000; 69 FR 63639, Nov. 2, 2004]
          
          
            § 81.14
            Special Affordable Housing Goal.
            (a) Purpose of the goal. This goal is intended to achieve increased purchases by the GSEs of mortgages on rental and owner-occupied housing meeting the then-existing unaddressed needs of, and affordable to, low-income families in low-income areas and very-low-income families.
            (b) Factors. In establishing the Special Affordable Housing Goals, the Secretary considered the factors in 12 U.S.C. 4563(a)(2). A statement documenting HUD's considerations and findings with respect to these factors, entitled “Departmental Considerations to Establish the Special Affordable Housing Goal,” was published in the Federal Register on November 2, 2004.
            (c) Goals. The annual goals for each GSE's purchases of mortgages on rental and owner-occupied housing meeting the then-existing, unaddressed needs of and affordable to low-income families in low-income areas and very low-income families are:
            (1) For the year 2005, 22 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. The goal for the year 2005 shall include mortgage purchases financing dwelling units in multifamily housing totaling not less than 1.0 percent of the average annual dollar volume of combined (single-family and multifamily) mortgages purchased by the respective GSE in 2000, 2001, and 2002, unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Special Affordable Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 17 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Special Affordable Housing Goal in the year 2005 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;

            (2) For the year 2006, 23 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. The goal for the year 2006 shall include mortgage purchases financing dwelling units in multifamily housing totaling not less than 1.0 percent of the average annual dollar volume of combined (single-family and multifamily) mortgages purchased by the respective GSE in 2000, 2001, and 2002, unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Special Affordable Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 17 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Special Affordable Housing Goal in the year 2006 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;
            (3) For the year 2007, 25 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. The goal for the year 2007 shall include mortgage purchases financing dwelling units in multifamily housing totaling not less than 1.0 percent of the average annual dollar volume of combined (single-family and multifamily) mortgages purchased by the respective GSE in 2000, 2001, and 2002, unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Special Affordable Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 18 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Special Affordable Housing Goal in the year 2007 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA;
            (4) For the year 2008, 27 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. The goal for the year 2008 shall include mortgage purchases financing dwelling units in multifamily housing totaling not less than 1.0 percent of the average annual dollar volume of combined (single-family and multifamily) mortgages purchased by the respective GSE in 2000, 2001, and 2002, unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA. In addition, as a Special Affordable Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 18 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Special Affordable Housing Goal in the year 2008 unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA; and
            (5) For the year 2009 and thereafter HUD shall establish annual goals. Pending establishment of goals for the year 2009 and thereafter, the annual goal for each of those years shall be 27 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases in each of those years. The goal for each such year shall include mortgage purchases financing dwelling units in multifamily housing totaling not less than 1.0 percent of the annual average dollar volume of combined (single-family and multifamily) mortgages purchased by the respective GSE in the years 2000, 2001, and 2002. In addition, as a Special Affordable Housing Home Purchase Subgoal, 18 percent of the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases shall be home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas which count toward the Special Affordable Housing Goal in each of those years unless otherwise adjusted by HUD in accordance with FHEFSSA.
            (d) Counting of multifamily units. (1) Dwelling units affordable to low-income families and financed by a particular purchase of a mortgage on multifamily housing shall count toward achievement of the Special Affordable Housing Goal where at least:
            (i) 20 percent of the dwelling units in the particular multifamily property are affordable to especially low-income families; or
            (ii) 40 percent of the dwelling units in the particular multifamily property are affordable to very-low-income families.
            (2) Where only some of the units financed by a purchase of a mortgage on multifamily housing count under the multifamily component of the goal, only a portion of the unpaid principal balance of the mortgage attributable to such units shall count toward the multifamily component. The portion of the mortgage counted under the multifamily requirement shall be equal to the ratio of the total units that count to the total number of units in the mortgaged property.
            (e) Full Credit Activities. (1) For purposes of 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1) and this paragraph (e), full credit means that each unit financed by a mortgage purchased by a GSE and meeting the requirements of this section shall count toward achievement of the Special Affordable Housing Goal for that GSE.
            (2) Mortgages insured under HUD's Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (“HECM”) Insurance Program, 12 U.S.C. 1715 z-20; mortgages guaranteed under the Rural Housing Service's Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program, 42 U.S.C. 1472; mortgages on properties on tribal lands insured under FHA's Section 248 program, 12 U.S.C. 1715 z-13, HUD's Section 184 program, 12 U.S.C. 1515 z-13a, or Title VI of the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996, 25 U.S.C. 4191-4195; meet the requirements of 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(A)(i) and (ii).
            (3) HUD will give full credit toward achievement of the Special Affordable Housing Goal for the activities in 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(A), provided the GSE submits documentation to HUD that supports eligibility under 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(A) for HUD's approval.
            (4)(i) For purposes of determining whether a seller meets the requirement in 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(B), a seller must currently operate on its own or actively participate in an on-going, discernible, active, and verifiable program directly targeted at the origination of new mortgage loans that qualify under the Special Affordable Housing Goal.
            (ii) A seller's activities must evidence a current intention or plan to reinvest the proceeds of the sale into mortgages qualifying under the Special Affordable Housing Goal, with a current commitment of resources on the part of the seller for this purpose.
            (iii) A seller's actions must evidence willingness to buy qualifying loans when these loans become available in the market as part of active, on-going, sustainable efforts to ensure that additional loans that meet the goal are originated.
            (iv) Actively participating in such a program includes purchasing qualifying loans from a correspondent originator, including a lender or qualified housing group, that operates an on-going program resulting in the origination of loans that meet the requirements of the goal, has a history of delivering, and currently delivers qualifying loans to the seller.
            (v) The GSE must verify and monitor that the seller meets the requirements in paragraphs (e)(4)(i) through (e)(4)(iv) of this section and develop any necessary mechanisms to ensure compliance with the requirements, except as provided in paragraph (e)(4)(vi) and (vii) of this section.
            (vi) Where a seller's primary business is originating mortgages on housing that qualifies under this Special Affordable Housing Goal such seller is presumed to meet the requirements in paragraphs (e)(4)(i) through (e)(4)(iv) of this section. Sellers that are institutions that are:
            (A) Regularly in the business of mortgage lending;
            (B) A BIF-insured or SAIF-insured depository institution; and
            (C) Subject to, and has received at least a satisfactory performance evaluation rating for
            (1) At least the two most recent consecutive examinations under, the Community Reinvestment Act, if the lending institution has total assets in excess of $250 million; or
            (2) The most recent examination under the Community Reinvestment Act if the lending institutions which have total assets no more than $250 million are identified as sellers that are presumed to have a primary business of originating mortgages on housing that qualifies under this Special Affordable Housing Goal and, therefore, are presumed to meet the requirements in paragraphs (e)(4)(i) through (e)(4)(iv) of this section.
            (vii) Classes of institutions or organizations that are presumed have as their primary business originating mortgages on housing that qualifies under this Special Affordable Housing Goal and, therefore. are presumed in paragraphs (e)(4)(i) through (e)(4)(iv) of this section to meet the requirements are as follows: State housing finance agencies; affordable housing loan consortia; Federally insured credit unions that are:

            (A) Members of the Federal Home Loan Bank System and meet the first-time homebuyer standard of the Community Support Program; or
            
            (B) Community development credit unions; community development financial institutions; public loan funds; or non-profit mortgage lenders. HUD may determine that additional classes of institutions or organizations are primarily engaged in the business of financing affordable housing mortgages for purposes of this presumption, and if, so will notify the GSEs in writing.
            (viii) For purposes of paragraph (e)(4) of this section, if the seller did not originate the mortgage loans, but the originator of the mortgage loans fulfills the requirements of either paragraphs (e)(4)(i) through (e)(4)(iv), paragraph (e)(4)(vi) or paragraph (e)(4)(vii) of this section; and the seller has held the loans for six months or less prior to selling the loans to the GSE, HUD will consider that the seller has met the requirements of this paragraph (e)(4) and of 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(B).
            (f) Partial credit activities. Mortgages insured under HUD's Title I program, which includes property improvement and manufactured home loans, shall receive one-half credit toward the Special Affordable Housing Goal until such time as the Government National Mortgage Association fully implements a program to purchase and securitize Title I loans.
            (g) No credit activities. Neither the purchase nor the securitization of mortgages associated with the refinancing of a GSE's existing mortgage or mortgage-backed securities portfolios shall receive credit toward the achievement of the Special Affordable Housing Goal. Refinancings that result from the wholesale exchange of mortgages between the two GSEs shall not count toward the achievement of this goal. Refinancings of individual mortgages shall count toward achievement of this goal when the refinancing is an arms-length transaction that is borrower-driven and the mortgage otherwise counts toward achievement of this goal. For purposes of this paragraph (g), “mortgages or mortgage-backed securities portfolios” includes mortgages retained by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac and mortgages utilized to back mortgage-backed securities.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65086, Oct. 31, 2000; 69 FR 63640, Nov. 2, 2004]
          
          
            § 81.15
            General requirements.
            (a) Calculating the numerator and denominator. Performance under each of the housing goals shall be measured using a fraction that is converted into a percentage.
            (1) The numerator. The numerator of each fraction is the number of dwelling units financed by a GSE's mortgage purchases in a particular year that count toward achievement of the housing goal.
            (2) The denominator. The denominator of each fraction is, for all mortgages purchased, the number of dwelling units that could count toward achievement of the goal under appropriate circumstances. The denominator shall not include GSE transactions or activities that are not mortgages or mortgage purchases as defined by HUD or transactions that are specifically excluded as ineligible under § 81.16(b).
            (3) Missing data or information. When a GSE lacks sufficient data or information to determine whether the purchase of a mortgage originated after 1992 counts toward achievement of a particular housing goal, that mortgage purchase shall be included in the denominator for that housing goal, except under the circumstances described in paragraphs (d) and (e)(6) of this section.
            (b) Properties with multiple dwelling units. For the purposes of counting toward the achievement of the goals, whenever the property securing a mortgage contains more than one dwelling unit, each such dwelling unit shall be counted as a separate dwelling unit financed by a mortgage purchase.
            (c) Credit toward multiple goals. A mortgage purchase (or dwelling unit financed by such purchase) by a GSE in a particular year shall count toward the achievement of each housing goal for which such purchase (or dwelling unit) qualifies in that year.
            (d) Counting owner-occupied units. (1) For purposes of counting owner-occupied units toward achievement of the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal or the Special Affordable Housing Goal, mortgage purchases financing such units shall be evaluated based on the income of the mortgagors and the area median income at the time of origination of the mortgage. To determine whether mortgages may be counted under a particular family income level, i.e., especially low, very low, low or moderate income, the income of the mortgagors is compared to the median income for the area at the time of the mortgage application, using the appropriate percentage factor provided under § 81.17.
            (2)(i) When the income of the mortgagor(s) is not available to determine whether an owner-occupied unit in a property securing a single-family mortgage originated after 1992 and purchased by a GSE counts toward achievement of the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal or the Special Affordable Housing Goal, a GSE's performance with respect to such unit may be evaluated using estimated affordability information in accordance with one of the following methods:
            (A) Excluding from the denominator and the numerator single-family owner-occupied units located in census tracts with median incomes less than, or equal to, area median income based on the most recent decennial census, up to a maximum of one percent of the total number of single-family owner-occupied dwelling units eligible to be counted toward the respective housing goal in the current year. Mortgage purchases with missing data in excess of the maximum will be included in the denominator and excluded from the numerator;
            (B) For home purchase mortgages and for refinance mortgages separately, multiplying the number of owner-occupied units with missing borrower income information in properties securing mortgages purchased by the GSE in each census tract by the percentage of all single-family owner-occupied mortgage originations in the respective tracts that would count toward achievement of each goal, as determined by HUD based on the most recent HMDA data available; or
            (C) Such other data source and methodology as may be approved by HUD.
            (ii) In any calendar year, a GSE may use only one of the methods specified in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section to estimate affordability information for single-family owner-occupied units.
            (iii) If a GSE chooses to use an estimation methodology under paragraph (d)(2)(i)(B) or (d)(2)(i)(C) of this section to determine affordability for owner-occupied units in properties securing single-family mortgage purchases eligible to be counted toward the respective housing goal, then that methodology may be used up to nationwide maximums for home purchase mortgages and for refinance mortgages that shall be calculated by multiplying, for each census tract, the percentage of all single-family owner-occupied mortgage originations with missing borrower incomes (as determined by HUD based on the most recent HMDA data available for home purchase and refinance mortgages, respectively) by the number of single-family owner-occupied units in properties securing mortgages purchased by the GSE for each census tract, summed up over all census tracts. If this nationwide maximum is exceeded, then the estimated number of goal-qualifying units will be adjusted by the ratio of the applicable nationwide maximum number of units for which income information may be estimated to the total number of single-family owner-occupied units with missing income information in properties securing mortgages purchased by the GSE. Owner-occupied units in excess of the nationwide maximum, and any units for which estimation information is not available, shall remain in the denominator of the respective goal calculation.
            (e) Counting rental units—(1) Use of income, rent—(i) Generally. For purposes of counting rental units toward achievement of the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal or the Special Affordable Housing Goal, mortgage purchases financing such units shall be evaluated based on the income of actual or prospective tenants where such data is available, i.e., known to a lender.
            (ii) Availability of income information. (A) Each GSE shall require lenders to provide to the GSE tenant income information under paragraphs (e)(3) and (4) of this section, but only when such information is known to the lender.

            (B) When such tenant income information is available for all occupied units, the GSE's performance shall be based on the income of the tenants in the occupied units. For unoccupied units that are vacant and available for rent and for unoccupied units that are under repair or renovation and not available for rent, the GSE shall use the income of prospective tenants, if paragraph (e)(4) of this section is applicable. If paragraph (e)(4) of this section is not applicable, the GSE shall use rent levels for comparable units in the property to determine affordability.
            (2) Model units and rental offices. A model unit or rental office in a multifamily property may count toward achievement of the housing goals only if a GSE determines that:
            (i) It is reasonably expected that the units will be occupied by a family within one year;
            (ii) The number of such units is reasonable and minimal considering the size of the multifamily property; and
            (iii) Such unit otherwise meets the requirements for the goal.
            (3) Income of actual tenants. When the income of actual tenants is available, to determine whether a tenant is very-low-, low-, or moderate-income, the income of the tenant shall be compared to the median income for the area, adjusted for family size as provided in § 81.17.
            (4) Income of prospective tenants. When income for tenants is available to a lender because a project is subject to a Federal housing program that establishes the maximum income for a tenant or a prospective tenant in rental units, the income of prospective tenants may be counted at the maximum income level established under such housing program for that unit. In determining the income of prospective tenants, the income shall be projected based on the types of units and market area involved. Where the income of prospective tenants is projected, each GSE must determine that the income figures are reasonable considering the rents (if any) on the same units in the past and considering current rents on comparable units in the same market area.
            (5) Use of rent. When the income of the prospective or actual tenants of a dwelling unit is not available, performance under these goals will be evaluated based on rent and whether the rent is affordable to the income group targeted by the housing goal. A rent is affordable if the rent does not exceed 30 percent of the maximum income level of very-low-, low-, or moderate-income families as provided in § 81.19. In determining contract rent for a dwelling unit, the actual rent or average rent by unit type shall be used.
            (6) Affordability data unavailable. (i) Multifamily. (A) When a GSE lacks sufficient information to determine whether a rental unit in a property securing a multifamily mortgage purchased by a GSE counts toward achievement of the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal or the Special Affordable Housing Goal because neither the income of prospective or actual tenants, nor the actual or average rental data, are available, a GSE's performance with respect to such unit may be evaluated using estimated affordability information in accordance with one of the following methods:
            (1) Multiplying the number of rental units with missing affordability information in properties securing multifamily mortgages purchased by the GSE in each census tract by the percentage of all rental dwelling units in the respective tracts that would count toward achievement of each goal, as determined by HUD based on the most recent decennial census. For units with missing affordability information in tracts for which such methodology is not possible, such units will be excluded from the denominator as well as the numerator in calculating performance under the respective housing goal(s); or
            (2) Such other data source and methodology as may be approved by HUD.
            (B) In any calendar year, a GSE may use only one of the methods specified in paragraph (e)(6)(i)(A) of this section to estimate affordability information for multifamily rental units.

            (C) If a GSE chooses to use an estimation methodology under paragraph (e)(6)(i)(A) of this section to determine affordability for rental units in properties securing multifamily mortgage purchases eligible to be counted toward the respective housing goal, then that methodology may be used up to a nationwide maximum of ten percent of the total number of rental units in properties securing multifamily mortgages purchased by the GSE in the current year. If this maximum is exceeded, the estimated number of goal-qualifying units will be adjusted by the ratio of the nationwide maximum number of units for which affordability information may be estimated to the total number of multifamily rental units with missing affordability information in properties securing mortgages purchased by the GSE. Multifamily rental units in excess of the maximum set forth in this paragraph (e)(6)(i)(C), and any units for which estimation information is not available, shall be removed from the denominator of the respective goal calculation.
            (ii) Rental units in 1-4 unit single-family properties. (A) When a GSE lacks sufficient information to determine whether a rental unit in a property securing a single-family mortgage purchased by a GSE counts toward achievement of the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal or the Special Affordable Housing Goal because neither the income of prospective or actual tenants, nor the actual or average rental data, are available, a GSE's performance with respect to such unit may be evaluated using estimated affordability information in accordance with one of the following methods:
            (1) Excluding rental units in 1-to 4-unit properties with missing affordability information from the denominator as well as the numerator in calculating performance under those goals;
            (2) Multiplying the number of rental units with missing affordability information in properties securing single family mortgages purchased by the GSE in each census tract by the percentage of all rental dwelling units in the respective tracts that would count toward achievement of each goal, as determined by HUD based on the most recent decennial census. For units with missing affordability information in tracts for which such methodology is not possible, such units will be excluded from the denominator as well as the numerator in calculating performance under the respective housing goal(s); or
            (3) Such other data source and methodology as may be approved by HUD.
            (B) In any calendar year, a GSE may use only one of the methods specified in paragraph (e)(6)(ii)(A) of this section to estimate affordability information for single-family rental units.

            (C) If a GSE chooses to use an estimation methodology under paragraph (e)(6)(ii)(A)(2) or (e)(6)(ii)(A)(3) of this section to determine affordability for rental units in properties securing single-family mortgage purchases eligible to be counted toward the respective housing goal, then that methodology may be used up to nationwide maximums of five percent of the total number of rental units in properties securing non-seasoned single-family mortgage purchases by the GSE in the current year and 20 percent of the total number of rental units in properties securing seasoned single-family mortgage purchases by the GSE in the current year. If either or both of these maximums are exceeded, the estimated number of goal-qualifying units will be adjusted by the ratio of the applicable nationwide maximum number of units for which affordability information may be estimated to the total number of single-family rental units with missing affordability information in properties securing seasoned or unseasoned mortgages purchased by the GSE, as applicable. Single-family rental units in excess of the maximums set forth in this paragraph (e)(6)(ii)(C), and any units for which estimation information is not available, shall be removed from the denominator of the respective goal calculation.
            (7) Timeliness of information. In determining performance under the housing goals, each GSE shall use tenant and rental information as of the time of mortgage:
            (i) Acquisition for mortgages on multifamily housing; and
            (ii) Origination for mortgages on single-family housing.
            (f) Application of Median income. (1) For purposes of determining an area's median income under §§ 81.17 through 81.19 and for the definition of “low-income area,” the area is:

            (i) The metropolitan area, if the property which is the subject of the mortgage is in a metropolitan area; and
            
            (ii) In all other areas, the county in which the property is located, except that where the State nonmetropolitan median income is higher than the county's median income, the area is the State nonmetropolitan area.
            (2) When a GSE cannot precisely determine whether a mortgage is on dwelling unit(s) located in one area, the GSE shall determine the median income for the split area in the manner prescribed by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council for reporting under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, if the GSE can determine that the mortgage is on dwelling unit(s) located in:
            (i) A census tract;
            (ii) A census place code;
            (iii) A block-group enumeration district;
            (iv) A nine-digit zip code; or
            (v) Another appropriate geographic segment that is partially located in more than one area (“split area”).
            (g) Sampling not permitted. Performance under the housing goals for each year shall be based on a complete tabulation of mortgage purchases for that year; a sampling of such purchases is not acceptable.
            (h) Newly available data. When a GSE uses data to determine whether a mortgage purchase counts toward achievement of any goal and new data is released after the start of a calendar quarter, the GSE need not use the new data until the start of the following quarter.
            (i) Counting mortgages toward the Home Purchase Subgoals—(1) General. The requirements of this section, except for paragraphs (b) and (e) of this section, shall apply to counting mortgages toward the Home Purchase Subgoals at §§ 81.12 through 81.14. However, performance under the subgoals shall be counted using a fraction that is converted into a percentage for each subgoal and the numerator of the fraction for each subgoal shall be the number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases in a particular year that count towards achievement of the applicable housing goal. The denominator of each fraction shall be the total number of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases in a particular year. For purposes of each subgoal, the procedure for addressing missing data or information, as set forth in paragraph (d) of this section, shall be implemented using numbers of home purchase mortgages in metropolitan areas and not single-family owner-occupied dwelling units.
            (2) Special counting rule for mortgages with more than one owner-occupied unit. For purposes of counting mortgages toward the Home Purchase Subgoals, where a single home purchase mortgage finances the purchase of two or more owner-occupied units in a metropolitan area, the mortgage shall count once toward each subgoal that applies to the GSE's mortgage purchase.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65087, Oct. 31, 2000; 69 FR 63641, Nov. 2, 2004]
          
          
            § 81.16
            Special counting requirements.
            (a) General. HUD shall determine whether a GSE shall receive full, partial, or no credit for a transaction toward achievement of any of the housing goals. In this determination, HUD will consider whether a transaction or activity of the GSE is substantially equivalent to a mortgage purchase and either creates a new market or adds liquidity to an existing market, provided however that such mortgage purchase actually fulfills the GSE's purposes and is in accordance with its Charter Act.
            (b) Not counted. The following transactions or activities shall not count toward achievement of any of the housing goals and shall not be included in the denominator in calculating either GSE's performance under the housing goals:
            (1) Equity investments in housing development projects;
            (2) Purchases of State and local government housing bonds except as provided in 81.16(c)(8);
            (3) Purchases of non-conventional mortgages except:
            (i) Where such mortgages are acquired under a risk-sharing arrangement with a Federal agency;

            (ii) Mortgages insured under HUD's Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (“HECM”) insurance program, 12 U.S.C. 1715z-20; mortgages guaranteed under the Rural Housing Service's Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program, 42 U.S.C. 1472; mortgages on properties on lands insured under FHA's Section 248 program, 12 U.S.C. 1715z-13, or HUD's Section 184 program, 12 U.S.C. 1515z-13a, or Title VI of the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996, 25 U.S.C. 4191-4195; and mortgages with expiring assistance contracts as defined at 42 U.S.C. 1737f;
            (iii) Mortgages under other mortgage programs involving Federal guarantees, insurance or other Federal obligation where the Department determines in writing that the financing needs addressed by the particular mortgage program are not well served and that the mortgage purchases under such program should count under the housing goals, provided the GSE submits documentation to HUD that supports eligibility and that HUD makes such a determination, or
            (iv) As provided in § 81.14(e)(3)
            (4) Commitments to buy mortgages at a later date or time;
            (5) Options to acquire mortgages;
            (6) Rights of first refusal to acquire mortgages;
            (7) Any interests in mortgages that the Secretary determines, in writing, shall not be treated as interests in mortgages;
            (8) Mortgage purchases to the extent they finance any dwelling units that are secondary residences; and
            (9) Single family mortgage refinancings that result from conversion of balloon notes to fully amortizing notes, if the GSE already owns or has an interest in the balloon note at the time conversion occurs.
            (10) Any combination of factors in paragraphs (b)(1) through (9) of this section.
            (c) Other special rules. Subject to HUD's primary determination of whether a GSE shall receive full, partial, or no credit for a transaction toward achievement of any of the housing goals as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, the following supplemental rules apply:
            (1) Credit enhancements. (i) Dwelling units financed under a credit enhancement entered into by a GSE shall be treated as mortgage purchases and count toward achievement of the housing goals when:
            (A) The GSE provides a specific contractual obligation to ensure timely payment of amounts due under a mortgage or mortgages financed by the issuance of housing bonds (such bonds may be issued by any entity, including a State or local housing finance agency);
            (B) The GSE assumes a credit risk in the transaction substantially equivalent to the risk that would have been assumed by the GSE if it had securitized the mortgages financed by such bonds; and
            (C) Such dwelling units otherwise qualify under this part.
            (ii) When a GSE provides a specific contractual obligation to ensure timely payment of amounts due under any mortgage originally insured by a public purpose mortgage insurance entity or fund, the GSE may, on a case-by-case basis, seek approval from the Secretary for such activities to count toward achievement of the housing goals.
            (2) Real estate mortgage investment conduits (“REMICs”). (i) A GSE's purchase or guarantee of all or a portion of a REMIC shall be treated as a mortgage purchase and receive credit toward the achievement of the housing goals provided:
            (A) The underlying mortgages or mortgage-backed securities for the REMIC were not:
            (1) Guaranteed by the Government National Mortgage Association; or
            (2) Previously counted toward any housing goal by the GSE; and
            (B) The GSE has the information necessary to support counting the dwelling units financed by the REMIC, or that part of the REMIC purchased or guaranteed by the GSE, toward the achievement of a particular housing goal.
            (ii) For REMICs that meet the requirements in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section and for which the GSE purchased or guaranteed:
            (A) The whole REMIC, all of the units financed by the REMIC shall be treated as a mortgage purchase and count toward achievement of the housing goals; or

            (B) A portion of the REMIC, the GSE shall receive partial credit toward achievement of the housing goals. This credit shall be equal to the percentage of the REMIC purchased or guaranteed by the GSE (the dollar amount of the purchase or guarantee divided by the total dollar amount of the REMIC) multiplied by the number of dwelling units that would have counted toward the goal(s) if the GSE had purchased or guaranteed the whole REMIC. In calculating performance under the housing goals, the denominator shall include the number of dwelling units included in the whole REMIC multiplied by the percentage of the REMIC purchased or guaranteed by the GSE.
            (3) Risk-sharing. Mortgage purchases under risk-sharing arrangements between the GSEs and any Federal agency where the units would otherwise count toward achievement of the housing goal under which the GSE is responsible for a substantial amount (50 percent or more) of the risk shall be treated as mortgage purchases and count toward achievement of the housing goal or goals.
            (4) Participations. Participations purchased by a GSE shall be treated as mortgage purchases and count toward the achievement of the housing goals, if the GSE's participation in the mortgage is 50 percent or more.
            (5) Cooperative housing and condominium projects. (i) The purchase of a mortgage on a cooperative housing unit (“a share loan”) or a condominium unit is a mortgage purchase. Such a purchase is counted toward achievement of a housing goal in the same manner as a mortgage purchase of single-family owner-occupied units, i.e., affordability is based on the income of the owner(s).
            (ii) The purchase of a mortgage on a cooperative building (“a blanket loan”) or a condominium project is a mortgage purchase and shall count toward achievement of the housing goals. Where a GSE purchases both “a blanket loan” and mortgages for units in the same building (“share loans”), both the blanket loan and the share loan(s) are mortgage purchases and shall count toward achievement of the housing goals. Where a GSE purchases both a condominium project mortgage and mortgages on condominium dwelling units in the same project, both the condominium project mortgages and the mortgages on condominium dwelling units are mortgage purchases and shall count toward achievement of the housing goals.
            (6) Seasoned mortgages. A GSE's purchase of a seasoned mortgage shall be treated as a mortgage purchase for purposes of these goals and shall be included in the numerator, as appropriate, and the denominator in calculating the GSE's performance under the housing goals, except where:
            (i) The GSE has already counted the mortgage under a housing goal applicable to 1993 or any subsequent year; or
            (ii) HUD determines, based upon a written request by a GSE, that a seasoned mortgage or class of such mortgages should be excluded from the numerator and the denominator in order to further the purposes of the Special Affordable Housing Goal.
            (7) Purchase of refinanced mortgages. Except as otherwise provided in this part, the purchase of a refinanced mortgage by a GSE is a mortgage purchase and shall count toward achievement of the housing goals to the extent the mortgage qualifies.
            (8) Mortgage revenue bonds. (i) The purchase of a state or local mortgage revenue bond shall be treated as a mortgage purchase and units financed under such MRB shall count toward achievement of the goals where:
            (A) The MRB is to be repaid only from the principal and interest of the underlying mortgages originated with funds made available by the MRB; and
            (B) The MRB is not a general obligation of a state or local government or agency or is not credit enchanced by any government or agency, third party guarantor or surety.
            (ii) Dwelling units financed by a mortgage revenue bond meeting the requirements of paragraph (c)(8)(i) of this section shall count toward a housing goal to the extent such dwelling units otherwise qualify under this part.
            (9) Expiring assistance contracts. In accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4565(a)(5), actions that assist in maintaining the affordability of assisted units in eligible multifamily housing projects with expiring contracts shall receive credit under the housing goals as provided in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) and in accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c)(1) through (c)(9) of this section.
            (i) For restructured (modified) multifamily mortgage loans with an expiring assistance contract where a GSE holds the loan in portfolio and facilitates modification of loan terms that results in lower debt service to the project's owner, the GSE shall receive full credit under any of the housing goals for which the units covered by the mortgage otherwise qualify.
            (ii) Where a GSE undertakes more than one action to assist a single project or where a GSE engages in an activity that it believes assists in maintaining the affordability of assisted units in eligible multifamily housing projects but which is not otherwise covered in paragraph (c)(9)(i) of this section, the GSE must submit the transaction to HUD for a determination on appropriate goals counting treatment.
            (10)-(11) [Reserved]
            (12) HOEPA mortgages and mortgages with unacceptable terms and conditions. HOEPA mortgages and mortgages with unacceptable terms or conditions as defined in § 81.2 will not receive credit toward any of the three housing goals.
            (13) Mortgages contrary to good lending practices. The Secretary will monitor the practices and processes of the GSEs to ensure that they are not purchasing loans that are contrary to good lending practices as defined in § 81.2. Based on the results of such monitoring, the Secretary may determine in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section that mortgages or categories of mortgages where a lender has not engaged in good lending practices will not receive credit toward the three housing goals.
            (14) Seller dissolution option. (i) Mortgages acquired through transactions involving seller dissolution options shall be treated as mortgage purchases, and receive credit toward the achievement of the housing goals, only when:
            (A) The terms of the transaction provide for a lockout period that prohibits the exercise of the dissolution option for at least one year from the date on which the transaction was entered into by the GSE and the seller of the mortgages; and
            (B) The transaction is not dissolved during the one-year minimum lockout period.
            (ii) The Secretary may grant an exception to the one-year minimum lockout period described in paragraph (c)(14)(i)(A) and (B) of this section, in response to a written request from an enterprise, if the Secretary determines that the transaction furthers the purposes of FHEFSSA and the GSE's charter act;
            (iii) For purposes of this paragraph (c)(14), “seller dissolution option” means an option for a seller of mortgages to the GSEs to dissolve or otherwise cancel a mortgage purchase agreement or loan sale.
            (d) HUD review of transactions. HUD will determine whether a class of transactions counts as a mortgage purchase under the housing goals. If a GSE seeks to have a class of transactions counted under the housing goals that does not otherwise count under the rules in this part, the GSE may provide HUD detailed information regarding the transactions for evaluation and determination by HUD in accordance with this section. In making its determination, HUD may also request and evaluate additional information from a GSE with regard to how the GSE believes the transactions should be counted. HUD will notify the GSE of its determination regarding the extent to which the class of transactions may count under the goals.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65088, Oct. 31, 2000; 69 FR 63642, Nov. 2, 2004]
          
          
            § 81.17
            Affordability—Income level definitions—family size and income known (owner-occupied units, actual tenants, and prospective tenants).
            In determining whether a dwelling unit is affordable to very-low-, low-, or moderate-income families, where the unit is owner-occupied or, for rental housing, family size and income information for the dwelling unit is known to the GSE, the affordability of the unit shall be determined as follows:
            (a) Moderate-income means:

            (1) In the case of owner-occupied units, income not in excess of 100 percent of area median income; and
            
            (2) In the case of rental units, where the income of actual or prospective tenants is available, income not in excess of the following percentages of area median income corresponding to the following family sizes:
            
              
                Number of persons in family
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                1
                70
              
              
                2
                80
              
              
                3
                90
              
              
                4
                100
              
              
                5 or more
                (*)
              
              *100% plus (8% multiplied by the number of persons in excess of 4).
            
            (b) Low-income means:
            (1) In the case of owner-occupied units, income not in excess of 80 percent of area median income; and
            (2) In the case of rental units, where the income of actual or prospective tenants is available, income not in excess of the following percentages of area median income corresponding to the following family sizes:
            
              
                Number of persons in family
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                1
                56
              
              
                2
                64
              
              
                3
                72
              
              
                4
                80
              
              
                5 or more
                (*)
              
              *80% plus (6.4% multiplied by the number of persons in excess of 4).
            
            (c) Very-low-income means:
            (1) In the case of owner-occupied units, income not in excess of 60 percent of area median income; and
            (2) In the case of rental units, where the income of actual or prospective tenants is available, income not in excess of the following percentages of area median income corresponding to the following family sizes:
            
              
                Number of persons in family
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                1
                42
              
              
                2
                48
              
              
                3
                54
              
              
                4
                60
              
              
                5 or more
                (*)
              
              *60% plus (4.8% multiplied by the number of persons in excess of 4).
            
            (d) Especially-low-income means, in the case of rental units, where the income of actual or prospective tenants is available, income not in excess of the following percentages of area median income corresponding to the following family sizes:
            
              
                Number of persons in family
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                1
                35
              
              
                2
                40
              
              
                3
                45
              
              
                4
                50
              
              
                5 or more
                (*)
              
              * 50% plus (4.0% multiplied by the number of persons in excess of 4).
            
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65089, Oct. 31, 2000]
          
          
            § 81.18
            Affordability—Income level definitions—family size not known (actual or prospective tenants).
            In determining whether a rental unit is affordable to very-low, low-, or moderate-income families where family size is not known to the GSE, income will be adjusted using unit size, and affordability determined as follows:
            (a) For moderate-income, the income of prospective tenants shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                70
              
              
                1 bedroom
                75
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                90
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              *104% plus (12% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).
            
            (b) For low-income, income of prospective tenants shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                56
              
              
                1 bedroom
                60
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                72
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              *83.2% plus (9.6% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).
            
            (c) For very-low-income, income of prospective tenants shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                42
              
              
                1 bedroom
                45
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                54
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              *62.4% plus (7.2% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).
            
            (d) For especially-low-income, income of prospective tenants shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                35
              
              
                1 bedroom
                37.5
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                45
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              * 52% plus (6.0% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).
            
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65089, Oct. 31, 2000]
          
          
            § 81.19
            Affordability—Rent level definitions—tenant income is not known.
            For purposes of determining whether a rental unit is affordable to very-low-, low-, or moderate-income families where the income of the family in the dwelling unit is not known to the GSE, the affordability of the unit is determined based on unit size as follows:
            (a) For moderate-income, maximum affordable rents to count as housing for moderate-income families shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                21
              
              
                1 bedroom
                22.5
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                27
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              *31.2% plus (3.6% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3);
            
            (b) For low-income, maximum affordable rents to count as housing for low-income families shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                16.8
              
              
                1 bedroom
                18
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                21.6
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              *24.96% plus (2.88% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3); and
            
            (c) For very-low-income, maximum affordable rents to count as housing for very-low-income families shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                12.6
              
              
                1 bedroom
                13.5
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                16.2
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              *18.72% plus (2.16% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).
            
            (d) For especially-low-income, maximum affordable rents to count as housing for especially-low-income families shall not exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:
            
              
                Unit size
                Percentage of area median income
              
              
                Efficiency
                10.5
              
              
                1 bedroom
                11.25
              
              
                2 bedrooms
                13.5
              
              
                3 bedrooms or more
                (*)
              
              * 15.6% plus (1.8% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).
            
            (e) Missing Information. Each GSE shall make every effort to obtain the information necessary to make the calculations in this section. If a GSE makes such efforts but cannot obtain data on the number of bedrooms in particular units, in making the calculations on such units, the units shall be assumed to be efficiencies except as provided in § 81.15(e)(6)(i).
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65089, Oct. 31, 2000]
          
          
            § 81.20
            Actions to be taken to meet the goals.
            To meet the goals under this rule, each GSE shall operate in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4565.
          
          
            
            § 81.21
            Notice and determination of failure to meet goals.
            If the Secretary determines that a GSE has failed or there is a substantial probability that a GSE will fail to meet any housing goal, the Secretary shall follow the procedures at 12 U.S.C. 4566(b).
          
          
            § 81.22
            Housing plans.
            (a) If the Secretary determines, under § 81.21, that a GSE has failed or there is a substantial probability that a GSE will fail to meet any housing goal and that the achievement of the housing goal was or is feasible, the Secretary shall require the GSE to submit a housing plan for approval by the Secretary.
            (b) Nature of plan. Each housing plan shall:
            (1) Be feasible;
            (2) Be sufficiently specific to enable the Secretary to monitor compliance periodically;
            (3) Describe the specific actions that the GSE will take:
            (i) To achieve the goal for the next calendar year; or
            (ii) If the Secretary determines that there is substantial probability that the GSE will fail to meet a housing goal in the current year, to make such improvements as are reasonable in the remainder of the year; and
            (4) Address any additional matters relevant to the plan as required, in writing, by the Secretary.
            (c) Deadline for submission. The GSE shall submit a housing plan to the Secretary within 30 days after issuance of a notice under § 81.21 requiring the GSE to submit a housing plan. The Secretary may extend the deadline for submission of a plan, in writing and for a time certain, to the extent the Secretary determines an extension is necessary.
            (d) Review of housing plans. The Secretary shall review and approve or disapprove housing plans in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4566(c)(4) and (5).
            (e) Resubmission. If the Secretary disapproves an initial housing plan submitted by a GSE, the GSE shall submit an amended plan acceptable to the Secretary within 30 days of the Secretary disapproving the initial plan; the Secretary may extend the deadline if the Secretary determines an extension is in the public interest. If the amended plan is not acceptable to the Secretary, the Secretary may afford the GSE 15 days to submit a new plan.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Fair Housing
          
            § 81.41
            General.
            In this subpart, the Secretary: prohibits discrimination by the GSEs in their mortgage purchases because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, age, or national origin, including any consideration of the age or location of a dwelling or age of the neighborhood or census tract where the dwelling is located in a manner that has a discriminatory effect; requires that the GSEs submit information to the Secretary to assist Fair Housing Act and ECOA investigations; provides for advising the GSEs of Fair Housing Act and ECOA violations; provides for reviewing the GSEs' underwriting and appraisal guidelines to ensure compliance with the Fair Housing Act; and requires that the GSEs take actions as directed by the Secretary following Fair Housing Act and ECOA adjudications. Because FHEFSSA provides, generally, that the Director of OFHEO shall enforce violations by the GSEs of FHEFSSA and regulations in this subpart, this subpart also provides for referral of such cases to the Director.
          
          
            § 81.42
            Prohibitions against discrimination.
            Neither GSE shall discriminate in any manner in making any mortgage purchases because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, age, or national origin, including any consideration of the age or location of the dwelling or the age of the neighborhood or census tract where the dwelling is located in a manner that has a discriminatory effect.
          
          
            § 81.43
            Reports; underwriting and appraisal guideline review.
            (a) Reports. Each GSE, in the AHAR required under § 81.63, shall assess underwriting standards, business practices, repurchase requirements, pricing, fees, and procedures that affect the purchase of mortgages for low- and moderate-income families, or that may yield disparate results based on the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, age, or national origin of the borrower, including revisions thereto to promote affordable housing or fair lending.
            (b) Review of Underwriting and Appraisal Guidelines. The Secretary shall periodically review and comment on the underwriting and appraisal guidelines of each enterprise to ensure that such guidelines are consistent with the Fair Housing Act and 12 U.S.C. 4545.
          
          
            § 81.44
            Submission of information to the Secretary.
            (a) General. Upon request from the Secretary, the GSEs shall submit information and data to the Secretary to assist in investigating whether any mortgage lender with which the GSE does business has failed to comply with the Fair Housing Act or ECOA.
            (b) Information requests and submissions—(1) Information requests by the Secretary. The Secretary may require the GSEs to submit information to assist in Fair Housing Act or ECOA investigations of lenders. Under FHEFSSA, other Federal agencies responsible for the enforcement of ECOA must submit requests for information from the GSEs through the Secretary. For matters involving only ECOA, the Secretary will only issue requests for information upon request from the appropriate Federal agency responsible for ECOA.
            (2) Information from established data systems. The Secretary may request that a GSE generate information or reports from its data system(s) to assist a Fair Housing Act or ECOA investigation.
            (3) GSE replies. A GSE receiving any request(s) for information under this section shall reply in a complete and timely manner with any and all information that it is privy to and collects that is responsive to the request.
            (c) Submission to ECOA enforcers. The Secretary shall submit any information received under paragraph (b) of this section concerning compliance with ECOA to appropriate Federal agencies responsible for ECOA enforcement, as provided in section 704 of ECOA.
          
          
            § 81.45
            Obtaining and disseminating information.
            (a) The Secretary shall obtain information from other regulatory and enforcement agencies of the Federal Government and State and local governments regarding violations by lenders of the Fair Housing Act, ECOA, and/or State or local fair housing/lending laws, and shall make such information available to the GSEs as the Secretary deems appropriate in accordance with applicable law regarding the confidentiality of supervisory information and the right to financial privacy, and subject to the terms of memoranda of understanding and other arrangements between the Secretary and Federal financial regulators and other agencies. In addition, the Secretary shall make information that the Secretary possesses regarding violations of the Fair Housing Act available to the GSEs.
            (b) As contemplated in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary shall obtain information regarding violations by lenders of the Fair Housing Act or ECOA involving discrimination with respect to the availability of credit in a residential real-estate-related transaction from other Federal regulatory or enforcement agencies. The Secretary will obtain information from regulators regarding violations of ECOA by lenders only in circumstances in which there is either more than a single ECOA violation, or the ECOA violation could also be a violation of the Fair Housing Act.
          
          
            § 81.46
            Remedial actions.
            (a) General. The Secretary shall direct the GSEs to take one or more remedial actions, including suspension, probation, reprimand or settlement, against lenders found to have engaged in discriminatory lending practices in violation of the Fair Housing Act or ECOA, pursuant to a final adjudication on the record and an opportunity for a hearing under subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
            (b) Definitions. For purposes of this subpart, the following definitions apply:
            
              Indefinite suspension means that, until directed to do otherwise by the Secretary, the GSEs will refrain from purchasing mortgages from a lender.
            
            
              Probation means that, for a fixed period of time specified by the Secretary, a lender that has been found to have violated the Fair Housing Act or ECOA will be subject automatically to more severe sanctions than probation, e.g., suspension, if further violations are found.
            
              Remedial action includes a reprimand, probation, temporary suspension, indefinite suspension, or settlement.
            
              Reprimand means a written letter to a lender from a GSE, which has been directed to be sent by the Secretary, stating that the lender has violated the Fair Housing Act or ECOA and warning of the possibility that the Secretary may impose more severe remedial actions than reprimand if any further violation occurs.
            
              Temporary Suspension means that, for a fixed period of time specified by the Secretary, the GSEs will not purchase mortgages from a lender.
            (c) Institution of remedial actions. (1) The Secretary shall direct the GSE to take remedial action(s) against a lender charged with violating ECOA only after a final determination on the charge has been made by an appropriate United States District Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction. The Secretary shall direct the GSE to take remedial action(s) against a lender charged with violating the Fair Housing Act only after a final determination on the matter has been made by a United States Court, a HUD Administrative Law Judge, or the Secretary.
            (2) Following a final determination sustaining a charge against a lender for violating the Fair Housing Act or ECOA, in accordance with paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the Secretary shall determine the remedial action(s) that the GSE is to be directed to take for such violation.
            (3) In determining the appropriate remedial action(s), the Secretary shall solicit and fully consider the views of the Federal financial regulator responsible for the subject lender concerning the action(s) that are contemplated to be directed against such lender, prior to directing any such action(s). If such responsible Federal financial regulator makes a written determination that a particular remedial action would threaten the financial safety and soundness of a Federally-insured lender, the Secretary shall consider other remedial actions. Where warranted, the Secretary also shall solicit and fully consider the views of the Director regarding the effect of the action(s) that are contemplated on the safety and soundness of the GSE. In determining what action(s) to direct, the Secretary will also, without limitation, consider the following:
            (i) The gravity of the violation;
            (ii) The extent to which other action has been taken against the lender for discriminatory activities;
            (iii) Whether the lender's actions demonstrate a discriminatory pattern or practice or an individual instance of discrimination;
            (iv) The impact or seriousness of the harm;
            (v) The number of people affected by the discriminatory act(s);
            (vi) Whether the lender operates an effective program of self assessment and correction;
            (vii) The extent of any actions or programs by the lender designed to compensate victims and prevent future fair lending violations;
            (viii) The extent that a finding of liability against a lender is based on a lender's use of a facially-neutral underwriting guideline of a secondary mortgage market entity applied appropriately by the lender in order to sell loans to that secondary mortgage market entity; and
            (ix) Any other information deemed relevant by the Secretary.
            (d) Notice of remedial action(s). (1) Following the Secretary's decision concerning the appropriate remedial action(s) that the GSE is to be directed to take, the Secretary shall prepare and issue to the GSE and the lender a written notice setting forth the remedial action(s) to be taken and the date such remedial action(s) are to commence. The Notice shall inform the lender of its right to request a hearing on the appropriateness of the proposed remedial action(s), within 20 days of service of the Notice, by filing a request with the Docket Clerk, HUD Office of Administrative Law Judges.

            (2) Where a lender does not timely request a hearing on a remedial action, the GSE shall take the action in accordance with the Notice.
            (e) Review and decision on remedial action(s). (1) Where a lender timely requests a hearing on a remedial action, a hearing shall be conducted before a HUD administrative law judge (ALJ) and a final decision rendered in accordance with the procedures set forth in 24 CFR part 26, subpart B, to the extent such provisions are not inconsistent with subpart C of this part or FHEFSSA. The lender and the Secretary, but not the GSE, shall be parties to the action. At such hearing, the appropriateness of the remedial action for the violation(s) will be the sole matter for review. The validity or appropriateness of the underlying determination on the violation(s) shall not be subject to review at such hearing.
            (2) The Secretary shall transmit to the GSEs each final decision by HUD on a remedial action and any dispositive settlement of a proceeding on such action.
            (3) The GSE shall take the action(s) set forth in a final decision by HUD on remedial action(s) or any dispositive settlement of such a proceeding setting forth remedial action(s) in accordance with such decision or settlement.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50218, Sept. 24, 1996]
          
          
            § 81.47
            Violations of provisions by the GSEs.
            (a) FHEFSSA empowers the Director of OFHEO to initiate enforcement actions for GSE violations of the provisions of section 1325 of FHEFSSA and these regulations. The Secretary shall refer violations and potential violations of 12 U.S.C. 4545 and this subpart C to the Director.
            (b) Where a private complainant or the Secretary is also proceeding against a GSE under the Fair Housing Act, the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity shall conduct the investigation of the complaint and make the reasonable cause/no reasonable cause determination required by section 810(g) of the Fair Housing Act. Where reasonable cause is found, a charge shall be issued and the matter will proceed to enforcement pursuant to sections 812(b) and (o) of the Fair Housing Act.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—New Program Approval
          
            § 81.51
            General.
            This subpart details the requirements and procedures for review of requests for new program approval by the Secretary.
          
          
            § 81.52
            Requirement for program requests.
            (a) Before implementing a new program, a GSE shall submit a request for new program approval (“program request”) to the Secretary for the Secretary's review. Submission of a program request is not required where the program that the GSE proposes to implement is not significantly different from:
            (1) A program that has already been approved in writing by the Secretary; or
            (2) A program that was engaged in by the GSE prior to October 28, 1992.
            (b) If a GSE does not submit a program request for a program, the Secretary may request information about the program and require that the GSE submit a program request. The GSE shall comply with the request and may indicate in such response its views respecting whether the program is subject to the Secretary's review.
          
          
            § 81.53
            Processing of program requests.
            (a) Each program request submitted to the Secretary by a GSE shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Secretary and the Director, Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC. For those requests submitted before 1 year after the effective date of the regulations issued by the Director of OFHEO under 12 U.S.C. 4611(e), the GSE shall simultaneously submit the program request to the Director.
            (b) Each program request shall include:

            (1) An opinion from counsel stating the statutory authority for the new program (Freddie Mac Act section 305(a) (1), (4), or (5), or Fannie Mae Charter Act section 302(b)(2)-(5) or 304);
            
            (2) A good-faith estimate of the anticipated dollar volume of the program over the short- and long-term;
            (3) A full description of: (i) The purpose and operation of the proposed program;
            (ii) The market targeted by the program;
            (iii) The delivery system for the program;
            (iv) The effect of the program on the mortgage market; and
            (v) Material relevant to the public interest.
            (c) Following receipt of a program request, the Secretary and, where a program request is submitted to the Director pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, the Director shall review the program request.
            (d) Transition standard for approval. Program requests submitted by the GSEs before the date occurring 1 year after the effective date of the regulations issued by the Director under 12 U.S.C. 4611(e) shall be approved or disapproved by the Secretary as provided in 12 U.S.C. 4542(b)(2).
            (e) Permanent standard for approval by the Secretary. Program requests submitted after the date occurring one year after the effective date of the regulations issued by the Director under 12 U.S.C. 4611(e) establishing the risk-based capital test shall be approved by the Secretary in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4542(b)(1).
            (f) Time for review. Unless the Secretary and, where appropriate, the Director of OFHEO, need additional information, a program request shall be approved or disapproved within 45 days from the date it is received by the Director, Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises, and, where applicable, the Director of OFHEO. If within 45 days after receiving a request, the Secretary or the Director of OFHEO determine that additional information is necessary to review the matter and request such information from the GSE, the Secretary may extend the time period for consideration for an additional 15 days.
            (1) Where additional information is requested, the GSE must provide the requested information to the Secretary and, where appropriate, the Director, within 10 days after the request for additional information.
            (2) If the GSE fails to furnish requested information within 10 days after the request for information, the Secretary may deny the GSE's request for approval based on such failure and so report to the Committees of Congress in accordance with paragraph (g) of this section.
            (g) Approval or report. Within 45 days or, if the period is extended, 60 days following receipt of a program request, the Secretary shall approve the request, in writing, or submit a report to the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, explaining the reasons for not approving the request. If the Secretary does not act within this time period, the GSE's program request will be deemed approved.
          
          
            § 81.54
            Review of disapproval.
            (a) Programs disapproved as unauthorized. (1) Where the Secretary disapproves a program request on the grounds that the new program is not authorized, as defined in § 81.53(d) or (e), the GSE may, within 30 days of the date of receipt of the decision on disapproval, request an opportunity to review and supplement the administrative record for the decision, in accordance with paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this section.
            (2) Supplementing in writing. A GSE supplementing the record in writing must submit written materials within 30 days after the date of receipt of the decision on disapproval, but no later than the date of a meeting, if requested, under paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
            (3) Meeting. Within 10 days of the date of receipt of the decision of disapproval, the GSE may request a meeting. If the request for the meeting is timely, the Secretary shall arrange such a meeting, which shall be conducted by the Secretary or the Secretary's designee within 10 working days after receipt of the request. The GSE may be represented by counsel and may submit relevant written materials to supplement the record.
            
            (4) Determination. The Secretary shall:
            (i) In writing and within 10 days after submission of any materials under paragraph (a)(2) of this section or the conclusion of any meeting under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, whichever is later, withdraw, modify, or affirm the program disapproval; and
            (ii) Provide the GSE with that decision.
            (b) Programs disapproved under public interest determination. When a program request is disapproved because the Secretary determines that the program is not in the public interest or the Director makes the determination in 12 U.S.C. 4542(b)(2)(B), the Secretary shall provide the GSE with notice of, and opportunity for, a hearing on the record regarding such disapproval. A request for a hearing must be submitted by a GSE within 30 days of the Secretary's submission of a report under § 81.53(g) disapproving a program request or the provision of the notice under this paragraph (b), whichever is later. The procedures for such hearings are provided in subpart G of this part.
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Reporting Requirements
          
            § 81.61
            General.
            This subpart establishes data submission and reporting requirements to carry out the requirements of the GSEs' Charter Acts and FHEFSSA.
          
          
            § 81.62
            Mortgage reports.
            (a) Loan-level data elements. To implement the data collection and submission requirements for mortgage data and to assist the Secretary in monitoring the GSEs' housing goal activities, each GSE shall collect and compile computerized loan-level data on each mortgage purchased in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 1456(e) and 1723a(m). The Secretary may, from time-to-time, issue a list entitled “Required Loan-level Data Elements” specifying the loan-level data elements to be collected and maintained by the GSEs and provided to the Secretary. The Secretary may revise the list by written notice to the GSEs.
            (b) Quarterly Mortgage reports. Each GSE shall submit to the Secretary quarterly a Mortgage Report. The fourth quarter report shall serve as the Annual Mortgage Report and shall be designated as such.
            (1) Each Mortgage Report shall include:
            (i) Aggregations of the loan-level mortgage data compiled by the GSE under paragraph (a) of this section for year-to-date mortgage purchases, in the format specified in writing by the Secretary; and
            (ii) Year-to-date dollar volume, number of units, and number of mortgages on owner-occupied and rental properties purchased by the GSE that do and do not qualify under each housing goal as set forth in this part.
            (2) To facilitate the Secretary's monitoring of the GSE's housing goal activities, the Mortgage Report for the second quarter shall include year-to-date computerized loan-level data consisting of the data elements required under paragraph (a) of this section.
            (3) To implement the data collection and submission requirements for mortgage data and to assist the Secretary in monitoring the GSE's housing goal activities, each Annual Mortgage Report shall include year-to-date computerized loan-level data consisting of the data elements required by under paragraph (a) of this section.
            (c) Timing of Reports. The GSEs shall submit the Mortgage Report for each of the first 3 quarters of each year within 60 days of the end of the quarter. Each GSE shall submit its Annual Mortgage Report within 75 days after the end of the calendar year.
            (d) Revisions to Reports. At any time before submission of its Annual Mortgage Report, a GSE may revise any of its quarterly reports for that year.
            (e) Format. The GSEs shall submit to the Secretary computerized loan-level data with the Mortgage Report, in the format specified in writing by the Secretary.
          
          
            § 81.63
            Annual Housing Activities Report.

            To comply with the requirements in sections 309(n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act and 307(f) of the Freddie Mac Act and assist the Secretary in preparing the Secretary's Annual Report to Congress, each GSE shall submit to the Secretary an AHAR including the information listed in those sections of the Charter Acts and as provided in § 81.43(a) of this part. Each GSE shall submit such report within 75 days after the end of each calendar year, to the Secretary the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate. Each GSE shall make its AHAR available to the public at its principal and regional offices. Before making any such report available to the public, the GSE may exclude from the report any information that the Secretary has deemed proprietary under subpart F of this part.
          
          
            § 81.64
            Periodic reports.
            Each GSE shall provide to the Secretary all:
            (a) Material distributed to the GSE's Housing Advisory Council;
            (b) Press releases;
            (c) Investor reports;
            (d) Proxy statements;
            (e) Seller-servicer guides; and
            (f) Other information disclosed by the GSE to entities outside of the GSE, but only where the GSE determines that such information is relevant to the Secretary's regulatory responsibilities.
          
          
            § 81.65
            Other information and analyses.
            When deemed appropriate and requested in writing, on a case by-case basis, by the Secretary, a GSE shall furnish the data underlying any of the reports required under this part and shall conduct additional analyses concerning any such report. A GSE shall submit additional reports or other information concerning its activities when deemed appropriate to carry out the Secretary's responsibilities under FHEFSSA or the Charter Acts and requested in writing by the Secretary.
          
          
            § 81.66
            Submission of reports.
            Each GSE shall submit all hard copy reports or other written information required under this subpart to the Secretary and the Director, Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises. Each GSE shall submit computerized data required under this subpart to the Director, Financial Institutions Regulations, Office of Policy Development and Research. The address for both of these offices is Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW. Washington, DC 20410.
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Access to Information
          
            § 81.71
            General.
            This subpart:
            (a) Provides for the establishment of a public-use database to make available to the public mortgage data that the GSEs submit to the Secretary under subsection 309(m) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act and subsection 307(e) of the Freddie Mac Act, and AHAR information that the GSEs submit to the Secretary in the AHAR under subsection 309(n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act and subsection 307(f) of the Freddie Mac Act;
            (b) Establishes mechanisms for the GSEs to designate mortgage data or AHAR information as proprietary information and for the Secretary to determine whether such mortgage data or AHAR information is proprietary information which should be withheld from disclosure;
            (c) Addresses the availability of HUD procedures to protect from public disclosure proprietary information and other types of confidential business information submitted by or relating to the GSEs;
            (d) Addresses protections from disclosure when there is a request from Congress for information and sets forth protections for treatment of data or information submitted by or relating to the GSEs by HUD officers, employees, and contractors; and
            (e) Provides that data or information submitted by or relating to the GSEs that would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy shall not be disclosed to the public.
          
          
            § 81.72
            Public-use database and public information.
            (a) General. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the Secretary shall establish and make available for public use, a public-use database containing public data as defined in § 81.2.
            (b) Examination of submissions. Following receipt of mortgage data and AHAR information from the GSEs, the Secretary shall, as expeditiously as possible, examine the submissions for mortgage data and AHAR information that:
            (1) Has been deemed to be proprietary information under this part by a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect at the time of submission;
            (2) Has been designated as proprietary information by the GSE in accordance with § 81.73;
            (3) Would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy if such data or information were released to the public; or
            (4) Is required to be withheld or, in the determination of the Secretary, is not appropriate for public disclosure under other applicable laws and regulations, including the Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S.C. 1905) and Executive Order 12600.
            (c) Public data and proprietary data. The Secretary shall place public data in the public-use database. The Secretary shall exclude from the public-use database and from public disclosure:
            (1) All mortgage data and AHAR information within the scope of paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4) of this section;
            (2) Any other mortgage data and AHAR information under (b)(2) when determined by the Secretary under § 81.74 to be proprietary information; and
            (3) Mortgage data that is not year-end data.
            (d) Access. The Secretary shall provide such means as the Secretary determines are reasonable for the public to gain access to the public-use database. To obtain access to the public-use database, the public should contact the Director, Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20410, telephone (202) 708-2224 (this is not a toll-free number).
            (e) Fees. The Secretary may charge reasonable fees to cover the cost of providing access to the public-use database. These fees will include the costs of system access, computer use, copying fees, and other costs.
          
          
            § 81.73
            GSE request for proprietary treatment.
            (a) General. A GSE may request proprietary treatment of any mortgage data or AHAR information that the GSE submits to the Secretary. Such a request does not affect the GSE's responsibility to provide data or information required by the Secretary. Where the Secretary grants a request for proprietary treatment, HUD will not include the data or information in the public-use database or publicly disclose the data or information, except as otherwise provided in accordance with this subpart.
            (b) Request for proprietary treatment of mortgage data and AHAR information. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, a GSE requesting proprietary treatment of mortgage data or AHAR information shall:
            (1) Clearly designate those portions of the mortgage data or AHAR information to be treated as proprietary, with a prominent stamp, typed legend, or other suitable form of notice, stating “Proprietary Information—Confidential Treatment Requested by [name of GSE]” on each page or portion of page to which the request applies. If such marking is impractical, the GSE shall attach to the mortgage data or information for which confidential treatment is requested a cover sheet prominently marked “Proprietary Information—Confidential Treatment Requested by [name of GSE];”
            (2) Accompany its request with a certification by an officer or authorized representative of the GSE that the mortgage data or information is proprietary; and
            (3) Submit any additional statements in support of proprietary designation that the GSE chooses to provide.
            (c) Alternative procedure available for mortgage data or AHAR information subject to a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect. When the request for proprietary treatment pertains to mortgage data or AHAR information that has been deemed proprietary by the Secretary under a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect, the GSE may reference such temporary order, final order, or regulation in lieu of complying with paragraphs (b)(2) and (3) of this section.
            
            (d) Nondisclosure during pendency. Except as may otherwise be required by law, during the time any Request for Proprietary Treatment under § 81.73 is pending determination by the Secretary, the data or information submitted by the GSE that is the subject of the request shall not be disclosed to, or be subject to examination by, the public or any person or representative of any person or agency outside of HUD.
          
          
            § 81.74
            Secretarial determination on GSE request.
            (a) General. The Secretary shall review all Requests for Proprietary Treatment from the GSEs, along with any other information that the Secretary may elicit from other sources regarding the Request.
            (b) Factors for proprietary treatment. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, in making the determination of whether to accord proprietary treatment to mortgage data or AHAR information, the Secretary's considerations shall include, but are not limited to:
            (1) The type of data or information involved and the nature of the adverse consequences to the GSE, financial or otherwise, that would result from disclosure, including any adverse effect on the GSE's competitive position;
            (2) The existence and applicability of any prior determinations by HUD, any other Federal agency, or a court, concerning similar data or information;
            (3) The measures taken by the GSE to protect the confidentiality of the mortgage data or AHAR information in question, and similar data or information, before and after its submission to the Secretary;
            (4) The extent to which the mortgage data or AHAR information is publicly available including whether the data or information is available from other entities, from local government offices or records, including deeds, recorded mortgages, and similar documents, or from publicly available data bases;
            (5) The difficulty that a competitor, including a seller/servicer, would face in obtaining or compiling the mortgage data or AHAR information; and
            (6) Such additional facts and legal and other authorities as the Secretary may consider appropriate, including the age of the mortgage data (see 24 CFR 81.75(b)(3)), or the extent to which particular mortgage data or AHAR information, when considered together with other information, could reveal proprietary information.
            (c) Alternative criterion for mortgage data or AHAR information subject to a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect. Where the request for proprietary treatment pertains to mortgage data or AHAR information that has been deemed proprietary by the Secretary under a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect, the Secretary shall grant the request with respect to any mortgage data or AHAR information which comes within the order or regulation.
            (d) Determination of proprietary treatment. The Secretary shall determine, as expeditiously as possible, whether mortgage data or AHAR information designated as proprietary by a GSE is proprietary information, or whether it is not proprietary and subject to inclusion in the public-use database and public release notwithstanding the GSE's request.
            (e) Action when according proprietary treatment to mortgage data and AHAR information. (1) When the Secretary determines that mortgage data or AHAR information designated as proprietary by a GSE is proprietary, and the mortgage data or AHAR information is not subject to a temporary order, a final order, or a regulation in effect providing that the mortgage data or AHAR information is not subject to public disclosure, the Secretary shall notify the GSE that the request has been granted. In such cases, the Secretary shall issue either a temporary order, a final order, or a regulation providing that the mortgage data or information is not subject to public disclosure. Such a temporary order, final order, or regulation shall:
            (i) Document the reasons for the determination; and

            (ii) Be provided to the GSE, made available to members of the public, and published in the Federal Register, except that any portions of such order or regulation that would reveal the proprietary information shall be withheld from public disclosure. Publications of temporary orders shall invite public comments when feasible.
            (2) Where the Secretary determines that such mortgage data or information is proprietary, the Secretary shall not make it publicly available, except as otherwise provided in accordance with this subpart.
            (f) Determination not to accord proprietary treatment to mortgage data and AHAR information or to seek further information. When the Secretary determines that such mortgage data or AHAR information designated as proprietary by a GSE may not be proprietary, that the request may be granted only in part, or that questions exist concerning the request, the following procedure shall apply:
            (1) The Secretary shall provide the GSE with an opportunity for a meeting with HUD to discuss the matter, for the purpose of gaining additional information concerning the request.
            (2) Following the meeting, based on the Secretary's review of the mortgage data or AHAR information that is the subject of a request and the GSE's objections, if any, to disclosure of such mortgage data or AHAR information, the Secretary shall make a determination:
            (i) If the Secretary determines to withhold from the public-use database as proprietary the mortgage data or AHAR information that is the subject of a request, the procedures in paragraph (e) of this section shall apply; or
            (ii) If the Secretary determines that any mortgage data or AHAR information that is the subject of a request is not proprietary, the Secretary shall provide notice in writing to the GSE of the reasons for this determination, and such notice shall provide that the Secretary shall not release the mortgage data or AHAR information to the public for 10 working days.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 70 FR 69031, Nov. 10, 2005]
          
          
            § 81.75
            Proprietary information withheld by order or regulation.
            (a) Secretarial determination of proprietary classification. Following a determination by the Secretary that mortgage data or AHAR information are proprietary information under FHEFSSA, the Secretary shall expeditiously issue a temporary order, final order, or regulation withholding the mortgage data or AHAR information from the public-use database and from public disclosure by HUD in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4546. The Secretary may, from time to time, by regulation or order, issue a list providing that certain mortgage data or AHAR information shall be treated as proprietary information.
            (b) Modification of proprietary classification—(1) General. The Secretary may, based upon a consideration of the factors in § 81.74(b), modify a previous determination that mortgage data or AHAR information are proprietary information (and may also make conforming changes to the list designating certain mortgage data or AHAR information as proprietary information) by regulation, or by order using the procedures described in paragraph (d) of this section, as applicable.
            (2) Release of data following a modification of proprietary classification. Following the Secretary's determination under paragraph (b)(1) of this section to modify a previous proprietary determination by reclassifying certain mortgage data as non-proprietary, the Secretary shall release the reclassified, non-proprietary mortgage data to the public both prospectively and for all prior years' public use databases, unless otherwise provided by the Secretary.
            (3) Release of aged data. The Secretary may determine, through case-by-case consideration of individual data elements under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, that certain mortgage data previously determined to be proprietary may lose their proprietary status if they are at least five years old (as measured from the end of the calendar year to which the mortgage data pertain). The Secretary will evaluate the age of the data as one of the relevant factors that may be considered under 24 CFR 81.74(b)(6). If the Secretary determines that such aged mortgage data have lost their proprietary status, these data shall be released publicly.
            (c) Release of aggregated data derived from proprietary loan-level data. The Secretary may, based upon a consideration of the factors in § 81.74(b) and using the procedures in paragraph (d) of this section, determine that certain aggregated data derived from proprietary loan-level mortgage data are not proprietary. If the Secretary makes such a determination, then the aggregated data shall be released to the public both prospectively and for all prior years, unless otherwise provided by the Secretary.
            (d) Procedures. The following procedures apply to the Secretary's issuance of an order in connection with a determination under paragraph (b)(1) or (c) of this section:
            (1) The Secretary shall provide each GSE with written notice of the mortgage data, AHAR information or aggregated data proposed to be released, and an opportunity to submit written comments. The Secretary may also provide each GSE with an opportunity for a meeting with HUD to discuss the proposed release of mortgage data, AHAR information, or aggregated data;
            (2) The Secretary shall make a determination regarding the proposed release of the GSE mortgage data, AHAR information, or aggregated data based upon a consideration of the data or information under the standards set forth in 24 CFR 81.74(b) and the GSEs' written and oral objections, if any, to the proposed release of such mortgage data, AHAR information, or aggregated data;
            (3) The Secretary shall provide notice in writing to each GSE of the Secretary's determination and the reasons under § 81.74(b) for his or her determination. If the Secretary determines that the mortgage data, AHAR information, or aggregated data may be released, the notice will also provide that the Secretary shall not release the mortgage data, AHAR information, or aggregated data to the public for 10 working days;

            (4) The Secretary shall, no earlier than the end of the ten-working-day period referred to in paragraph (d)(3) of this section, publish an order in the Federal Register notifying the public of the Secretary's determination to release the mortgage data or AHAR information that has been reclassified as non-proprietary and/or to release certain non-proprietary aggregations of data derived from proprietary loan-level mortgage data. The order will also modify the list described in paragraph (a) of this section to reflect the Secretary's reclassification of the mortgage data or AHAR information. The Secretary shall omit from the published order any information that would reveal proprietary information.
            [70 FR 69031, Nov. 10, 2005]
          
          
            § 81.76
            FOIA requests and protection of GSE information.
            (a) General. HUD shall process FOIA requests for information submitted to the Secretary by the GSEs in accordance with:
            (1) HUD's FOIA and Privacy Act regulations, 24 CFR parts 15 and 16;
            (2) 12 U.S.C. 4525, 4543, and 4546 and this subpart; and
            (3) Other applicable statutes, regulations, and guidelines, including the Trade Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C. 1905, and Executive Order 12600. In responding to requests for data or information submitted by or relating to the GSEs, the Secretary may invoke provisions of these authorities to protect data or information from disclosure.
            (b) Protection of confidential business information other than mortgage data and AHAR information. When a GSE seeks to protect from disclosure confidential business information, the GSE may seek protection of such confidential business information pursuant to the provisions of HUD's FOIA regulations at 24 CFR part 15, without regard to whether or not it is mortgage data or AHAR information.
            (c) Processing of FOIA requests—(1) FOIA Exemption (b)(4). HUD will process FOIA requests for confidential business information of the GSEs to which FOIA exemption 4 may apply in accordance with 24 CFR part 15, and the predisclosure notification procedures of Executive Order 12,600.
            (2) FOIA Exemption (b)(8). Under section 1319F of FHEFSSA, the Secretary may invoke FOIA exemption (b)(8) to withhold from the public any GSE data or information contained in or related to examination, operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of HUD. HUD may make data or information available for the confidential use of other government agencies in their official duties or functions, but all data or information remains the property of HUD and any unauthorized use or disclosure of such data or information may be subject to the penalties of 18 U.S.C. 641.
            (3) Other FOIA exemptions. Under 24 CFR part 15, the Secretary may invoke other exemptions including, without limitation, exemption (b)(6) (5 U.S.C. 552(b)(6)), to protect data and information that would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
            (d) Protection of information by HUD officers and employees. The Secretary will institute all reasonable safeguards to protect data or information submitted by or relating to either GSE, including, but not limited to, advising all HUD officers and employees having access to data or information submitted by or relating to either GSE of the legal restrictions against unauthorized disclosure of such data or information under the executive branch-wide standards of ethical conduct, 5 CFR part 2635, and the Trade Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C. 1905. Officers and employees shall be advised of the penalties for unauthorized disclosure, ranging from disciplinary action under 5 CFR part 2635 to criminal prosecution.
            (e) Protection of information by contractors. (1) In contracts and agreements entered into by HUD where contractors have access to data or information submitted by or relating to either GSE, HUD shall include detailed provisions specifying that:
            (i) Neither the contractor nor any of its officers, employees, agents, or subcontractors may release data submitted by or relating to either GSE without HUD's authorization; and
            (ii) Unauthorized disclosure may be a basis for:
            (A) Terminating the contract for default;
            (B) Suspending or debarring the contractor; and
            (C) Criminal prosecution of the contractor, its officers, employees, agents, or subcontractors under the Federal Criminal Code.
            (2) Contract provisions shall require safeguards against unauthorized disclosure, including training of contractor and subcontractor agents and employees, and provide that the contractor will indemnify and hold HUD harmless against unauthorized disclosure of data or information belonging to the GSEs or HUD.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 65 FR 65089, Oct. 31, 2000]
          
          
            § 81.77
            Requests for GSE information on behalf of Congress, the Comptroller General, a subpoena, or other legal process.
            (a) General. With respect to information submitted by or relating to the GSEs, nothing in this subpart F may be construed to grant authority to the Secretary under FHEFSSA to withhold any information from or to prohibit the disclosure of any information to the following persons or entities:
            (1) Either House of Congress or, to the extent of matters within its jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, or any joint committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee;
            (2) The Comptroller General, or any of the Comptroller General's authorized representatives, in the course of the performance of the duties of the General Accounting Office;
            (3) A court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to a subpoena; or
            (4) As otherwise compelled by law.
            (b) Notice of proprietary or confidential nature of GSE information. (1) In releasing data or information in response to a request as set out in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will, where applicable, include a statement with the data or information to the effect that:
            (i) The GSE regards the data or information as proprietary information and/or confidential business information;
            (ii) Public disclosure of the data or information may cause competitive harm to the GSE; and
            (iii) The Secretary has determined that the data or information is proprietary information and/or confidential business information.

            (2) To the extent practicable, the Secretary will provide notice to the GSE after a request from the persons or entities described in paragraphs (a)(1)-(4) of this section for proprietary information or confidential business information is received and before the data or information is provided in response to the request.
            (c) Procedures for requests pursuant to subpoena or other legal process. The procedures in 24 CFR 15.71-15.74 shall be followed when a subpoena, order, or other demand of a court or other authority is issued for the production or disclosure of any GSE data or information that:
            (1) Is contained in HUD's files;
            (2) Relates to material contained in HUD's files; or
            (3) Was acquired by any person while such person was an employee of HUD, as a part of the performance of the employee's official duties or because of the employee's official status.
            (d) Requests pursuant to subpoena or other legal process not served on HUD. If an individual who is not a HUD employee or an entity other than HUD is served with a subpoena, order, or other demand of a court or authority for the production or disclosure of HUD data or information relating to a GSE and such data or information may not be disclosed to the public under this subpart or 24 CFR part 15, such individual or entity shall comply with 24 CFR 15.71-15.74 as if the individual or entity is a HUD employee, including immediately notifying HUD in accordance with the procedures set forth in 24 CFR 15.73(a).
            (e) Reservation of additional actions. Nothing in this section precludes further action by the Secretary, in his or her discretion, to protect data or information submitted by a GSE from unwarranted disclosure in appropriate circumstances.
          
        
        
          Subpart G—Procedures for Actions and Review of Actions
          
            § 81.81
            General.
            This subpart sets forth procedures for:
            (a) The Secretary to issue cease-and-desist orders and impose civil money penalties to enforce the housing goal provisions implemented in subpart B of this part and the information submission and reporting requirements implemented in subpart E of this part; and
            (b) Hearings, in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4542(c)(4)(B), on the Secretary's disapproval of new programs that the Secretary determines are not in the public interest.
          
          
            § 81.82
            Cease-and-desist proceedings.
            (a) Issuance. The Secretary may issue and serve upon a GSE a written notice of charges justifying issuance of a cease-and-desist order, if the Secretary determines the GSE:
            (1) Has failed to submit, within the time prescribed in § 81.22, a housing plan that substantially complies with 12 U.S.C. 4566(c), as implemented by § 81.22;
            (2) Is failing or has failed, or there is reasonable cause to believe that the GSE is about to fail, to make a good-faith effort to comply with a housing plan submitted to and approved by the Secretary; or
            (3) Has failed to submit any of the information required under sections 309(m) or (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act, sections 307(e) or (f) of the Freddie Mac Act, or subpart E of this part.
            (b) Procedures—(1) Content of notice. The notice of charges shall provide:
            (i) A concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged misconduct and the violations with which the GSE is charged;
            (ii) Notice of the GSE's right to a hearing on the record;
            (iii) A time and date for a hearing on the record;
            (iv) A statement of the consequences of failing to contest the matter; and
            (v) The effective date of the order if the GSE does not contest the matter.
            (2) Administrative Law Judge. A HUD Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) shall preside over any hearing conducted under this section. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 81.84 and, to the extent the provisions are not inconsistent with any of the procedures in this part or FHEFSSA, with 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.
            (3) Issuance of order. If the GSE consents to the issuance of the order or the ALJ finds, based on the hearing record, that a preponderance of the evidence established the conduct specified in the notice of charges, the ALJ may issue and serve upon the GSE an order requiring the GSE to:
            
            (i) Submit a housing plan that substantially complies with 12 U.S.C. 4566(c), as implemented by § 81.22;
            (ii) Comply with a housing plan; or
            (iii) Provide the information required under subpart E of this part.
            (4) Effective date. An order under this section shall be effective as provided in 12 U.S.C. 4581(c) and § 81.84(m).
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50218, Sept. 24, 1996]
          
          
            § 81.83
            Civil money penalties.
            (a) Imposition. The Secretary may impose a civil money penalty on a GSE that has failed:
            (1) To submit, within the time prescribed in § 81.22, a housing plan that substantially complies with 12 U.S.C. 4566(c), as implemented by § 81.22;
            (2) To make a good-faith effort to comply with a housing plan submitted and approved by the Secretary; or
            (3) To submit any of the information required under sections 309(m) or (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act, sections 307(e) or (f) of the Freddie Mac Act, or subpart E of this part.
            (b) Amount of penalty. The amount of the penalty shall not exceed:
            (1) For any failure described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, $35,000 for each day that the failure occurs; and
            (2) For any failure described in paragraphs (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section, $16,000 for each day that the failure occurs.
            (c) Factors in determining amount of penalty. In determining the amount of a penalty under this section, the Secretary shall consider the factors in 12 U.S.C. 4585(c)(2) including the public interest.
            (d) Procedures—(1) Notice of Intent. The Secretary shall notify the GSE in writing of the Secretary's determination to impose a civil money penalty by issuing a Notice of Intent to Impose Civil Money Penalties (“Notice of Intent”). The Notice of Intent shall provide:
            (i) A concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged misconduct;
            (ii) The amount of the civil money penalty;
            (iii) Notice of the GSE's right to a hearing on the record;
            (iv) The procedures to follow to obtain a hearing;
            (v) A statement of the consequences of failing to request a hearing; and
            (vi) The date the penalty shall be due unless the GSE contests the matter.
            (2) To appeal the Secretary's decision to impose a civil money penalty, the GSE shall, within 20 days of service of the Notice of Intent, file a written Answer with the Chief Docket Clerk, Office of Administrative Law Judges, Department of Housing and Urban Development, at the address provided in the Notice of Intent.
            (3) Administrative law judge. A HUD ALJ shall preside over any hearing conducted under this section, in accordance with § 81.84 and, to the extent the provisions are not inconsistent with any of the procedures in this part or FHEFSSA, with 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.
            (4) Issuance of order. If the GSE consents to the issuance of the order or the ALJ finds, on the hearing record, that a preponderance of the evidence establishes the conduct specified in the notice of charges, the ALJ may issue an order imposing a civil money penalty.
            (5) Consultation with the Director. In the Secretary's discretion, the Director of OFHEO may be requested to review any Notice of Intent, determination, order, or interlocutory ruling arising from a hearing.
            (e) Action to collect penalty. The Secretary may request the Attorney General of the United States to bring an action to collect the penalty, in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4585(d). Interest on, and other charges for, any unpaid penalty may be assessed in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3717.
            (f) Settlement by Secretary. The Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit any civil money penalty that may be, or has been, imposed under this section.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50218, Sept. 24, 1996; 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007]
          
          
            § 81.84
            Hearings.
            (a) Applicability. The hearing procedures in this section apply to hearings on the record to review cease-and-desist orders, civil money penalties, and new programs disapproved based upon a determination by the Secretary that such programs are not in the public interest, in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4542(c)(4)(B).
            (b) Hearing requirements. (1) Hearings shall be held in the District of Columbia.
            (2) Hearings shall be conducted by a HUD ALJ authorized to conduct proceedings under 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.
            (c) Timing. Unless an earlier or later date is requested by a GSE and the request is granted by the ALJ, a hearing shall be fixed for a date not earlier than 30 days, nor later than 60 days, after:
            (1) Service of the notice of charges under § 81.82;
            (2) Service of the Notice of Intent to Impose Civil Money Penalty(ies) under § 81.83; or
            (3) Filing of a request for a hearing under § 81.54(b).
            (d) Procedure. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in 24 CFR part 26, subpart B to the extent that such provisions are not inconsistent with any of the procedures in this part or FHEFSSA.
            (e) Service—(1) To GSE. Any service required or authorized to be made by the Secretary under this subpart G may be made to the Chief Executive Officer of a GSE or any other representative as the GSE may designate in writing to the Secretary.
            (2) How service may be made. A serving party shall use one or more of the following methods of service:
            (i) Personal service;
            (ii) Delivering the papers to a reliable commercial courier service, overnight delivery service, or the U.S. Post Office for Express Mail Delivery; or
            (iii) Transmission by electronic media, only if the parties mutually agree. The serving party shall mail an original of the filing after any proper service using electronic media.
            (f) Subpoena authority—(1) General. In the course of or in connection with any hearing, the Secretary and the ALJ shall have the authority to:
            (i) Administer oaths and affirmations;
            (ii) Take and preserve testimony under oath;
            (iii) Issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum; and
            (iv) Revoke, quash, or modify subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum issued under this paragraph (f).
            (2) Witnesses and documents. The attendance of witnesses and the production of documents provided for in this section may be required from any place in any State. A witness may be required to appear, and a document may be required to be produced, at:
            (i) The hearing; and
            (ii) Any place that is designated for attendance at a deposition or production of a document under this section.
            (3) Enforcement. In accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4588(c), the Secretary may request the Attorney General of the United States to enforce any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued pursuant to this section. If a subpoenaed person fails to comply with all or any portion of a subpoena issued pursuant to this paragraph (f), the subpoenaing party or any other aggrieved person may petition the Secretary to seek enforcement of the subpoena. A party's petition to the Secretary for enforcement of a subpoena in no way limits the sanctions that may be imposed by the ALJ on a party who fails to comply with a subpoena issued under this paragraph (f).
            (4) Fees and expenses. Witnesses subpoenaed under this section shall be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid witnesses in the district courts of the United States and may seek reasonable expenses and attorneys fees in any court having jurisdiction of any proceeding instituted under this section. Such expenses and fees shall be paid by the GSE or from its assets.
            (g) Failure to appear. If a GSE fails to appear at a hearing through a duly authorized representative, the GSE shall be deemed to have consented to the issuance of the cease-and-desist order, the imposition of the penalty, or the disapproval of the new program, whichever is applicable.
            (h) Public hearings. (1) All hearings shall be open to the public, unless the ALJ determines that an open hearing would be contrary to the public interest. Where a party makes a timely motion to close a hearing and the ALJ denies the motion, such party may file with the Secretary within 5 working days a request for a closed hearing, and any party may file a reply to such a request within 5 working days of service of such a motion. Such motions, requests, and replies are governed by § 26.38 of this title. When a request for a closed hearing has been filed with the Secretary under this paragraph (h)(1), the hearing shall be stayed until the Secretary has advised the parties and the ALJ, in writing, of the Secretary's decision on whether the hearing should be closed.
            (2) Failure to file a timely motion, request or reply is deemed a waiver of any objection regarding whether the hearing will be public or closed. A party must file any motion for a closed hearing within 10 days after:
            (i) Service of the notice of charges under § 81.82;
            (ii) Service of the Notice of Intent to Impose Civil Money Penalt(ies) under § 81.83; or
            (iii) Filing of a request for a hearing under § 81.54(b).
            (i) Decision of ALJ. After each hearing, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision and serve the initial decision on the GSE, the Secretary, any other parties, and the HUD General Counsel. This service will constitute notification that the case has been submitted to the Secretary.
            (j) Review of initial decision—(1) Secretary's discretion. The Secretary, in the Secretary's discretion, may review any initial decision.
            (2) Requested by a party. Any party may file a notice of appeal of an initial decision to the Secretary in accordance with § 26.51(c) of this title. Any waiver of the limitations contained in § 26.51(f) of this title on the number of pages for notices of appeal and responses, of the time limitation in § 26.51(c) of this title for filing a notice of appeal of the initial decision, or any other waivers under this subpart shall not be subject to the publication requirements in 42 U.S.C. 3535(q).
            (k) Final decision. (1) The initial decision will become the final decision unless the Secretary issues a final decision within 90 days after the initial decision is served on the Secretary.
            (2) Issuance of final decision by Secretary. The Secretary may review any finding of fact, conclusion of law, or order contained in the initial decision of the ALJ and may issue a final decision in the proceeding. Any decision shall include findings of fact upon which the decision is predicated. The Secretary may affirm, modify, or set aside, in whole or in part, the initial decision or may remand the initial decision for further proceedings. The final decision shall be served on all parties and the ALJ.
            (l) Decisions on remand. If the initial decision is remanded for further proceedings, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision on remand within 60 days of the date of issuance of the decision to remand, unless it is impractical to do so.
            (m) Modification. The Secretary may modify, terminate, or set aside any order in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4582(b)(2).
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50219 Sept. 24, 1996]
          
          
            § 81.85
            Public disclosure of final orders and agreements.
            (a) Disclosure. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the Secretary shall make available to the public final orders; written agreements and statements; and modifications and terminations of those orders, agreements, and statements, as set forth in 12 U.S.C. 4586(a) and the implementing regulations in this subpart G. The retention of records of these orders, agreements, and statements, and their modifications and terminations, are governed by 12 U.S.C. 4586(e).
            (b) Exceptions to disclosure. Exceptions to disclosure will be determined in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4586 (c), (d), and (f) and paragraph (c) of this section.
            (c) Filing documents under seal—(1) Request by party. Upon the denial by the ALJ of a motion for a protective order, any party may request the Secretary to file any document or part of a document under seal if the party believes that disclosure of the document would be contrary to the public interest. Any other party may file with the Secretary a reply to such a request within 5 working days after a request is made or some other time to be determined by the Secretary. Such requests and replies are governed by § 26.38 of this title.
            (2) Effect of request. A document or part of a document that is the subject of a timely request to the Secretary to file under seal will not be disclosed under this section until the Secretary has advised the parties and the ALJ, in writing, of the Secretary's decision on whether the document or part of a document should be filed under seal. The ALJ shall take all appropriate steps to preserve the confidentiality of such documents or parts of documents, including closing portions of the hearing to the public.
            (3) Time of request. Failure to file with the Secretary a timely request or a reply is deemed a waiver of any objection regarding the decision on whether a document is to be disclosed. A party must make its request to file a document under seal at least 10 days before the commencement of the hearing. A request may be filed at any other time before or during the course of the hearing, but the requesting party's obligation to produce the document or parts of the document will not be affected by the party's pending request to the Secretary, unless the Secretary expressly directs the ALJ to treat the document as protected from disclosure until the Secretary makes a final written decision on whether the document should be filed under seal. If the Secretary's direction to the ALJ is made orally, that direction must be reduced to writing and filed with the ALJ within 3 working days of the making of the oral order or the document will then be subject to disclosure pending the Secretary's final written decision on disclosure.
            [60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50219 Sept. 24, 1996]
          
          
            § 81.86
            Enforcement and jurisdiction.
            If a GSE fails to comply with a final decision, the Secretary may request the Attorney General of the United States to bring an action in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for the enforcement of the notice or order. Such request may be made:
            (a) For a cease-and-desist order:
            
            (1) Upon expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the service of the order on the GSE; or
            (2) Upon the effective time specified in an order issued upon consent; and
            (b) For a civil money penalty, when the order imposing the penalty is no longer subject to review under 12 U.S.C. 4582 and 4583 and the implementing regulations at §§ 81.84 and 81.87.
          
          
            § 81.87
            Judicial review.
            (a) Commencement. In a proceeding under 12 U.S.C. 4581 or 4585, as implemented by §§ 81.82 or 81.83, a GSE that is a party to the proceeding may obtain review of any final order issued under § 81.84 by filing in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, within 30 days after the date of service of such order, a written petition praying that the order of the Secretary be modified, terminated, or set aside.
            (b) Filing of record. Upon receiving a copy of a petition, the Chief Docket Clerk, Office of Administrative Law Judges, shall file in the court the record in the proceeding, as provided in 28 U.S.C. 2112.
            (c) No automatic stay. The commencement of proceedings for judicial review under this section shall not, unless specifically ordered by the court, operate as a stay of any order issued by the Secretary.
          
        
        
          Subpart H—Book-Entry Procedures
          
            Source:
            61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 81.91
            Maintenance of GSE Securities.
            A GSE Security may be maintained in the form of a Definitive GSE Security or a Book-entry GSE Security. A Book-entry GSE Security shall be maintained in the Book-entry System.
          
          
            § 81.92
            Law governing rights and obligations of United States, Federal Reserve Banks, and GSEs; rights of any Person against United States, Federal Reserve Banks, and GSEs; Law governing other interests.

            (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the following rights and obligations are governed solely by the book-entry regulations contained in this subpart H, the Securities Documentation, and Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circulars (but not including any choice of law provisions in the Security Documentation to the extent such provisions conflict with the Book-entry regulations contained in this subpart H):
            (1) The rights and obligations of a GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks with respect to:
            (i) A Book-entry GSE Security or Security Entitlement; and
            (ii) The operation of the Book-entry System as it applies to GSE Securities; and
            (2) The rights of any Person, including a Participant, against a GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks with respect to:
            (i) A Book-entry GSE Security or Security Entitlement; and
            (ii) The operation of the Book-entry System as it applies to GSE Securities;
            (b) A security interest in a Security Entitlement that is in favor of a Federal Reserve Bank from a Participant and that is not recorded on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank pursuant to § 81.93(c)(1), is governed by the law (not including the conflict-of-law rules) of the jurisdiction where the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank maintaining the Participant's Securities Account is located. A security interest in a Security Entitlement that is in favor of a Federal Reserve Bank from a Person that is not a Participant, and that is not recorded on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank pursuant to § 81.93(c)(1), is governed by the law determined in the manner specified in paragraph (d) of this section.
            (c) If the jurisdiction specified in the first sentence of paragraph (b) of this section is a State that has not adopted Revised Article 8, then the law specified in paragraph (b) of this section shall be the law of that State as though Revised Article 8 had been adopted by that State.
            (d) To the extent not otherwise inconsistent with this subpart H, and notwithstanding any provision in the Security Documentation setting forth a choice of law, the provisions set forth in 31 CFR 357.11 regarding law governing other interests apply and shall be read as though modified to effectuate the application of 31 CFR 357.11 to the GSEs.
            [61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 29, 1997]
          
          
            § 81.93
            Creation of Participant's Security Entitlement; security interests.
            (a) A Participant's Security Entitlement is created when a Federal Reserve Bank indicates by book-entry that a Book-entry GSE Security has been credited to a Participant's Securities Account.
            (b) A security interest in a Security Entitlement of a Participant in favor of the United States to secure deposits of public money, including without limitation deposits to the Treasury tax and loan accounts, or other security interest in favor of the United States that is required by Federal statute, regulation, or agreement, and that is marked on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank is thereby effected and perfected, and has priority over any other interest in the securities. Where a security interest in favor of the United States in a Security Entitlement of a Participant is marked on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank, such Reserve Bank may rely, and is protected in relying, exclusively on the order of an authorized representative of the United States directing the transfer of the security. For purposes of this paragraph, an “authorized representative of the United States” is the official designated in the applicable regulations or agreement to which a Federal Reserve Bank is a party, governing the security interest.

            (c)(1) A GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks have no obligation to agree to act on behalf of any Person or to recognize the interest of any transferee of a security interest or other limited interest in favor of any Person except to the extent of any specific requirement of Federal law or regulation or to the extent set forth in any specific agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank on whose books the interest of the Participant is recorded. To the extent required by such law or regulation or set forth in an agreement with a Federal Reserve Bank, or the Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circular, a security interest in a Security Entitlement that is in favor of a Federal Reserve Bank, a GSE, or a Person may be created and perfected by a Federal Reserve Bank marking its books to record the security interest. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a security interest in a Security Entitlement marked on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank shall have priority over any other interest in the securities.
            (2) In addition to the method provided in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, a security interest, including a security interest in favor of a Federal Reserve Bank, may be perfected by any method by which a security interest may be perfected under applicable law as described in § 81.92(b) or (d). The perfection, effect of perfection or non-perfection and priority of a security interest are governed by such applicable law. A security interest in favor of a Federal Reserve Bank shall be treated as a security interest in favor of a clearing corporation in all respects under such law, including with respect to the effect of perfection and priority of such security interest. A Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circular shall be treated as a rule adopted by a clearing corporation for such purposes.
            [61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 29, 1997]
          
          
            § 81.94
            Obligations of GSEs; no adverse claims.
            (a) Except in the case of a security interest in favor of the United States or a Federal Reserve Bank or otherwise as provided in § 81.93(c)(1), for the purposes of this subpart H, the GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks shall treat the Participant to whose Securities Account an interest in a Book-entry GSE Security has been credited as the person exclusively entitled to issue a Transfer Message, to receive interest and other payments with respect thereof and otherwise to exercise all the rights and powers with respect to such Security, notwithstanding any information or notice to the contrary. Neither the Federal Reserve Banks nor a GSE is liable to a Person asserting or having an adverse claim to a Security Entitlement or to a Book-entry GSE Security in a Participant's Securities Account, including any such claim arising as a result of the transfer or disposition of a Book-entry GSE Security by a Federal Reserve Bank pursuant to a Transfer Message that the Federal Reserve Bank reasonably believes to be genuine.
            (b) The obligation of the GSE to make payments (including payments of interest and principal) with respect to Book-entry GSE Securities is discharged at the time payment in the appropriate amount is made as follows:
            (1) Interest or other payments on Book-entry GSE Securities is either credited by a Federal Reserve Bank to a Funds Account maintained at such Bank or otherwise paid as directed by the Participant.
            (2) Book-entry GSE Securities are redeemed in accordance with their terms by a Federal Reserve Bank withdrawing the securities from the Participant's Securities Account in which they are maintained and by either crediting the amount of the redemption proceeds, including both redemption proceeds, where applicable, to a Funds Account at such Bank or otherwise paying such redemption proceeds as directed by the Participant. No action by the Participant ordinarily is required in connection with the redemption of a Book-entry GSE Security.
            [61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 28, 1997]
          
          
            § 81.95
            Authority of Federal Reserve Banks.
            (a) Each Federal Reserve Bank is hereby authorized as fiscal agent of the GSEs to perform the following functions with respect to the issuance of Book-entry GSE Securities offered and sold by a GSE to which this subpart H applies, in accordance with the Securities Documentation, Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circulars, this subpart H, and procedures established by the Secretary consistent with these authorities:
            (1) To service and maintain Book-entry GSE Securities in accounts established for such purposes;
            (2) To make payments with respect to such securities, as directed by the GSE;

            (3) To effect transfer of Book-entry GSE Securities between Participants' Securities Accounts as directed by the Participants;
            
            (4) To effect conversions between Book-entry GSE Securities and Definitive GSE Securities with respect to those securities as to which conversion rights are available pursuant to the applicable Securities Documentation; and
            (5) To perform such other duties as fiscal agent as may be requested by the GSE.
            (b) Each Federal Reserve Bank may issue Operating Circulars not inconsistent with this subpart H, governing the details of its handling of Book-entry GSE Securities, Security Entitlements, and the operation of the book-entry system under this subpart H.
          
          
            § 81.96
            Withdrawal of Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities for conversion to definitive form.
            (a) Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities may be withdrawn from the Book-entry System by requesting delivery of like Definitive GSE Securities.
            (b) A Reserve bank shall, upon receipt of appropriate instructions to withdraw Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities from book-entry in the Book-entry System, convert such securities into Definitive GSE Securities and deliver them in accordance with such instructions. No such conversion shall affect existing interests in such GSE Securities.
            (c) All requests for withdrawal of Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities must be made prior to the maturity or date of call of the securities.
            (d) GSE Securities which are to be delivered upon withdrawal may be issued in either registered or bearer form, to the extent permitted by the applicable Securities Documentation.
            [61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 29, 1997]
          
          
            § 81.97
            Waiver of regulations.
            The Secretary reserves the right in the Secretary's discretion, to waive any provision(s) of these regulations in any case or class of cases for the convenience of a GSE, the United States, or in order to relieve any person(s) of unnecessary hardship, if such action is not inconsistent with law, does not adversely affect any substantial existing rights, and the Secretary is satisfied that such action will not subject a GSE or the United States to any substantial expense or liability.
          
          
            § 81.98
            Liability of GSEs and Federal Reserve Banks.
            A GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks may rely on the information provided in a Transfer Message, and are not required to verify the information. A GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks shall not be liable for any action taken in accordance with the information set out in a Transfer Message, or evidence submitted in support thereof.
          
          
            § 81.99
            Additional provisions.
            (a) Additional requirements. In any case or any class of cases arising under these regulations, a GSE may require such additional evidence and a bond of indemnity, with or without surety, as may in the judgment of the GSE be necessary for the protection of the interests of the GSE.
            (b) Notice of attachment for GSE Securities in Book-entry system. The interest of a debtor in a Security Entitlement may be reached by a creditor only by legal process upon the Securities Intermediary with whom the debtor's securities account is maintained, except where a Security Entitlement is maintained in the name of a secured party, in which case the debtor's interest may be reached by legal process upon the secured party. These regulations do not purport to establish whether a Federal Reserve Bank is required to honor an order or other notice of attachment in any particular case or class of cases.
          
        
        
          Subpart I—Other Provisions
          
            § 81.101
            Equal employment opportunity.
            Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac shall comply with sections 1 and 2 of Executive Order 11478 (3 CFR, 1966-1970 Compilation, p. 803), as amended by Executive Order 12106, (3 CFR, 1978, Compilation, p. 263), providing for the adoption and implementation of equal employment opportunity, as required by section 1216 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1833e).
          
          
            
            § 81.102
            Verification and enforcement to ensure GSE data integrity.
            (a) Independent verification authority. The Secretary may independently verify the accuracy and completeness of the data, information, and reports provided by each GSE, including conducting on-site verification, when such steps are reasonably related to determining whether a GSE is complying with 12 U.S.C. 4541-4589 and the GSE's Charter Act.
            (b) Certification. (1) The senior officer of each GSE who is responsible for submitting to HUD the fourth quarter Annual Mortgage Report and the AHAR under sections 309(m) and (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act or sections 307(e) and (f) of the Freddie Mac Act, as applicable, or for submitting to the Secretary such other report(s), data, or information for which certification is requested in writing by the Secretary, shall certify such report(s), data or information.
            (2) The certification shall state as follows: “To the best of my knowledge and belief, the information provided herein is true, correct and complete.”
            (3) If the Secretary determines that a GSE has failed to provide the certification required by paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section, or that a GSE has provided the certification required by paragraph (b) in connection with data, information or report(s) that the Secretary later determines are not true, correct and complete, the Secretary may pursue the enforcement remedies under paragraph (e) of this section. For data, information or report(s) subject to paragraphs (c) or (d) of this section, the Secretary may pursue the enforcement remedies described in paragraph (e) only in connection with material errors, omissions or discrepancies as those terms are defined in § 81.102(c) or (d).
            (c) Verification procedure and adjustment to correct errors, omissions or discrepancies in AHAR data for the immediately preceding year. (1) This paragraph (c) pertains to the GSEs' submission of year-end data. For purposes of this paragraph, “year-end data” means data that HUD receives from the GSEs related to housing goals performance in the immediately preceding year and covering data reported in the fourth quarter Annual Mortgage Report and the GSE's AHAR. An “error” means a technical mistake, such as a mistake in coding or calculating data. An “omission” means a GSE's failure to count units in the denominator. A “discrepancy” means any difference between HUD's analysis of data and the analysis contained in a GSE's submission of data, including a discrepancy in goal or Special Affordable subgoal performance.
            (2) If HUD finds errors, omissions or discrepancies in a GSE's year-end data submissions relative to HUD's regulations, HUD will first notify the GSE by telephone or e-mail transmission of each such error, omission or discrepancy. The GSE must respond within five working days of each such notification. HUD may, in its discretion or upon a request by a GSE within the five working day period, extend the response period for up to an additional 20 working days. Information exchanges during the five working day period following initial notification, and any subsequent extensions of time that may be granted, may be by electronic mail. Any person with delegated authority from the Secretary, or the Director of HUD's Financial Institution Regulation Division, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for issuing initial notifications regarding errors, omissions, or discrepancies; making determinations on the adequacy of responses received; approving any extensions of time permitted under this provision; and managing the data verification process.

            (3) If each error, omission or discrepancy is not resolved to HUD's satisfaction during the initial five working day period from notification, and any extension period, the Secretary will notify the GSE in writing and seek clarification or additional information to correct the error, omission or discrepancy. The GSE shall have 10 working days (or such longer period as the Secretary may establish, not to exceed 30 working days) from the date of the Secretary's written notice to respond in writing to the notice. If the GSE fails to submit a written response to the Secretary within this period, or if the Secretary determines that the GSE's written response fails to correct or otherwise resolve each error, omission or discrepancy in its reported year-end data to the Secretary's satisfaction, the Secretary will determine the appropriate adjustments to the numerator and the denominator of the applicable housing goal(s) and Special Affordable subgoal(s) due to the GSE's failure to provide the Secretary with accurate submissions of data.
            (4) The Secretary, or his or her designee, shall inform a GSE in writing, at least five working days prior to HUD's release of its official performance figures to the public, of HUD's determination of official goals performance figures, including any adjustments. During the five working days prior to such public release, a GSE may request, in writing, a reconsideration of HUD's final determination of its performance and must provide the basis for requesting the reconsideration. If the request is granted, the Secretary will consider the GSE's request for reconsideration of its determination of goals performance and make a final determination regarding the GSE's performance, within 10 working days of the Secretary's granting of the GSE's written request for reconsideration.
            (5) Should the Secretary determine that additional enforcement action against the GSE is warranted for material errors, omissions or discrepancies with regard to a housing goal or Special Affordable subgoal, it may pursue additional remedies under paragraph (e) of this section. An error, omission or discrepancy is material if it results in an overstatement of credit for a housing goal or Special Affordable subgoal, and, without such overstatement, the GSE would have failed to meet such housing goal or Special Affordable subgoal for the immediately preceding year.
            (d) Adjustment to correct prior year reporting errors, omissions or discrepancies—(1) General. The Secretary may require a GSE to correct a material error, omission or discrepancy in a GSE's prior year's data reported in the fourth quarter Annual Mortgage Report and the GSE's AHAR under sections 309(m) and (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act or sections 307(e) and (f) of the Freddie Mac Act, as applicable. An error, omission or discrepancy is material if it results in an overstatement of credit for a housing goal or Special Affordable subgoal and, without such overstatement, the GSE would have failed to meet such housing goal or Special Affordable subgoal for the prior year. A “prior year” for purposes of this section is any one of the two years immediately preceding the latest year for which data on housing goals performance was reported to HUD.
            (2) Procedural requirements. In the event the Secretary determines that a GSE's prior year's fourth quarter Annual Mortgage Report or AHAR contain a material error, omission or discrepancy, the Secretary will provide the GSE with an initial letter containing written findings and determinations within 24 months of the end of the relevant GSE reporting year. The GSE shall have an opportunity, not to exceed 30 days from the date of receipt of the Secretary's initial letter, to respond in writing with supporting documentation, to contest the Secretary's initial determination that there was a material error, omission or discrepancy in a prior year's data. The Secretary shall then issue a final determination letter within 60 days of the date of HUD's receipt of the GSE's written response or, if no response is received, within 90 days of the date of the GSE's receipt of the Secretary's initial letter. The Secretary may extend the period for issuing a final determination letter by an additional 30 days and may grant the GSE an opportunity, for a period not to exceed 10 working days from the date of the GSE's receipt of the determination letter to request that the determination be reconsidered.

            (3) If the Secretary determines that a GSE's prior year's fourth quarter Annual Mortgage Report or AHAR contained a material error, omission or discrepancy, the Secretary may direct the GSE to correct the overstatement by purchasing mortgages to finance the number of units that HUD has determined were overstated in the prior year's goal performance (or, for the Special Affordable subgoal, the number or dollar amount, as applicable, of mortgage purchases that HUD has determined were overstated), or that equal the percentage of the overstatement in the prior year's goal or Special Affordable subgoal performance as applied to the most current year-end performance, whichever is less. Units or mortgages purchased to remedy an overstatement in the housing goals or the Special Affordable subgoal must be eligible to qualify under the same goal or Special Affordable subgoal that HUD has determined were overstated in the prior year.
            (4) If a GSE does not purchase a sufficient amount or type of mortgages to meet the requirements set forth in paragraph (d)(3) of this section as directed by the Secretary by no later than the end of the calendar year immediately following the year in which the Secretary notifies the GSE of such overstatement (unless, upon written request from the GSE, the Secretary, in his or her discretion, determines that a grant of additional time is appropriate to correct or compensate for the overstatement) the Department may pursue any or all of the following remedies:
            (i) Issue a notice that the GSE has failed a housing goal or Special Affordable subgoal in the prior year;
            (ii) Seek additional enforcement remedies under paragraph (e) of this section;
            (iii) Pursue any other civil or administrative remedies as are available to it.
            (e) Additional enforcement options—(1) General. In the event the Secretary determines, either as a result of his or her independent verification authority described in paragraph (a) of this section, or by the authority set forth in paragraphs (b), (c) or (d) of this section, that any of the following circumstances has occurred with respect to data, information or report(s) required by sections 309(m) or (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act, sections 307(e) or (f) of the Freddie Mac Act, or subpart E of this part, the Secretary may regard this as a GSE's failure to submit such data, information or report(s) and, accordingly, the Secretary may take the additional enforcement actions authorized by paragraph (e)(2) of this section:
            (i) A GSE fails to submit the certification required by paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section in connection with such data, information or report(s); or
            (ii) A GSE submits the certification required by paragraph (b) of this section, but the Secretary later determines that the data, information or report(s) are not true, correct and complete. For data, information or report(s) subject to paragraphs (c) or (d) of this section, the Secretary may pursue the additional enforcement remedies under paragraph (e)(2) only in connection with material errors, omissions or discrepancies, as those terms are defined in § 81.102(c) or (d). In addition, the Secretary may only pursue such remedies in connection with material errors, omissions or discrepancies arising under paragraph (d) of this section if the GSE has failed to purchase a sufficient amount or type of mortgages, as provided in paragraphs (d)(3) and (d)(4) of this section.
            (2) Remedies. (i) Submissions required under the GSE's charter acts. After the Secretary makes a determination under paragraph (e)(1) of this section that any of the circumstances described in paragraphs (e)(1)(i) or (ii) has occurred with respect to data, information, or report(s) required by sections 309(m) or (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act, or by sections 307(e) or (f) of the Freddie Mac Act, the Secretary may pursue any or all of the following remedies in accordance with paragraph (e)(3), or applicable law, as appropriate:
            (A) A cease-and-desist order against the GSE for failing to submit the required data, information or report(s) in accordance with this section;
            (B) Civil money penalties against the GSE for failing to submit the required data, information or report(s) in accordance with this section;
            (C) Any other civil or administrative remedies or penalties against the GSE that may be available to the Secretary by virtue of the GSE's failing to submit or certify the required data, information or report(s) in accordance with this section.
            (ii) Submissions required under subpart E of this part. After the Secretary makes a determination under paragraph (e)(1) of this section that any of the circumstances described in paragraphs (e)(1)(i) or (ii) has occurred with respect to data, information or report(s) required under subpart E of this part (but that are not required by sections 309(m) or (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act or by sections 307(e) or (f) of the Freddie Mac Act), the Secretary may pursue any civil or administrative remedies or penalties against the GSE that may be available to the Secretary. The Secretary shall pursue such remedies under applicable law.
            (3) Procedures. The Secretary shall comply with the procedures set forth in subpart G of this part in connection with any enforcement action that he or she may initiate against a GSE under paragraph (e) of this section.
            [69 FR 63642, Nov. 2, 2004]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 84
        PART 84—UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTS AND AGREEMENTS WITH INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, HOSPITALS, AND OTHER NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          59 FR 47011, Sept. 13, 1994, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 84.1
          Applicability of and cross reference to 2 CFR part 200.
          (a) Federal awards to institutions of higher education, hospitals and other non-profit organizations are subject to the Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards at 2 CFR part 200.
          (b) Federal awards made prior to December 26, 2014 will continue to be governed by the regulations in effect and codified in 24 CFR part 84 (2013 edition) or as provided under the terms of the Federal award. Where the terms of a Federal award made prior to December 26, 2014, state that the award will be subject to regulations as may be amended, the Federal award shall be subject to 2 CFR part 200.
          [79 FR 76078, Dec. 19, 2014]
        
      
      
        Pt. 85
        PART 85—ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTS AND COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS TO STATE, LOCAL AND FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED INDIAN TRIBAL GOVERNMENTS
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          53 FR 8068, 8087, Mar. 11, 1988, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          § 85.1
          Applicability of and cross reference to 2 CFR part 200.
          (a) Federal awards with State, local and Indian tribal governments are subject to the Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards at 2 CFR part 200.
          (b) Federal awards made prior to December 26, 2014 will continue to be governed by the regulations in effect and codified in 24 CFR part 85 (2013 edition) or as provided by the terms of the Federal award. Where the terms of a Federal award made prior to December 26, 2014, state that the award will be subject to regulations as may be amended, the Federal award shall be subject to 2 CFR part 200.
          [79 FR 76079, Dec. 19, 2014]
        
      
      
        Pt. 87
        PART 87—NEW RESTRICTIONS ON LOBBYING
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            87.100
            Conditions on use of funds.
            87.105
            Definitions.
            87.110
            Certification and disclosure.
          
          
            Subpart B—Activities by Own Employees
            87.200
            Agency and legislative liaison.
            87.205
            Professional and technical services.
            87.210
            Reporting.
          
          
            Subpart C—Activities by Other Than Own Employees
            87.300
            Professional and technical services.
          
          
            Subpart D—Penalties and Enforcement
            87.400
            Penalties.
            87.405
            Penalty procedures.
            87.410
            Enforcement.
          
          
            
            Subpart E—Exemptions
            87.500
            Secretary of Defense.
          
          
            Subpart F—Agency Reports
            87.600
            Semi-annual compilation.
            87.605
            Inspector General report.
            Appendix A to Part 87—Certification Regarding Lobbying
            Appendix B to Part 87—Disclosure Form To Report Lobbying
          
        
        
          Authority:
          28 U.S.C. 1 note; 31 U.S.C. 1352; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
        
        
          Source:
          55 FR 6737, 6750, Feb. 26, 1990, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Cross Reference:
          See also OMB notice published at 54 FR 52306, December 20, 1989.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 87.100
            Conditions on use of funds.
            (a) No appropriated funds may be expended by the recipient of a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative ageement to pay any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with any of the following covered Federal actions: the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
            (b) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement shall file with that agency a certification, set forth in appendix A, that the person has not made, and will not make, any payment prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section.
            (c) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a Federal contract, grant, loan, or a cooperative agreement shall file with that agency a disclosure form, set forth in appendix B, if such person has made or has agreed to make any payment using nonappropriated funds (to include profits from any covered Federal action), which would be prohibited under paragraph (a) of this section if paid for with appropriated funds.
            (d) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan shall file with that agency a statement, set forth in appendix A, whether that person has made or has agreed to make any payment to influence or attempt to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with that loan insurance or guarantee.
            (e) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan shall file with that agency a disclosure form, set forth in appendix B, if that person has made or has agreed to make any payment to influence or attempt to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with that loan insurance or guarantee.
          
          
            § 87.105
            Definitions.
            For purposes of this part:
            (a) Agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 552(f), includes Federal executive departments and agencies as well as independent regulatory commissions and Government corporations, as defined in 31 U.S.C. 9101(1).
            (b) Covered Federal action means any of the following Federal actions:
            (1) The awarding of any Federal contract;
            (2) The making of any Federal grant;
            (3) The making of any Federal loan;
            (4) The entering into of any cooperative agreement; and,
            (5) The extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
            Covered Federal action does not include receiving from an agency a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan. Loan guarantees and loan insurance are addressed independently within this part.
            (c) Federal contract means an acquisition contract awarded by an agency, including those subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), and any other acquisition contract for real or personal property or services not subject to the FAR.
            (d) Federal cooperative agreement means a cooperative agreement entered into by an agency.
            (e) Federal grant means an award of financial assistance in the form of money, or property in lieu of money, by the Federal Government or a direct appropriation made by law to any person. The term does not include technical assistance which provides services instead of money, or other assistance in the form of revenue sharing, loans, loan guarantees, loan insurance, interest subsidies, insurance, or direct United States cash assistance to an individual.
            (f) Federal loan means a loan made by an agency. The term does not include loan guarantee or loan insurance.
            (g) Indian tribe and tribal organization have the meaning provided in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450B). Alaskan Natives are included under the definitions of Indian tribes in that Act.
            (h) Influencing or attempting to influence means making, with the intent to influence, any communication to or appearance before an officer or employee or any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with any covered Federal action.
            (i) Loan guarantee and loan insurance means an agency's guarantee or insurance of a loan made by a person.
            (j) Local government means a unit of government in a State and, if chartered, established, or otherwise recognized by a State for the performance of a governmental duty, including a local public authority, a special district, an intrastate district, a council of governments, a sponsor group representative organization, and any other instrumentality of a local government.
            (k) Officer or employee of an agency includes the following individuals who are employed by an agency:
            (1) An individual who is appointed to a position in the Government under title 5, U.S. Code, including a position under a temporary appointment;
            (2) A member of the uniformed services as defined in section 101(3), title 37, U.S. Code;
            (3) A special Government employee as defined in section 202, title 18, U.S. Code; and,
            (4) An individual who is a member of a Federal advisory committee, as defined by the Federal Advisory Committee Act, title 5, U.S. Code appendix 2.
            (l) Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, authority, firm, partnership, society, State, and local government, regardless of whether such entity is operated for profit or not for profit. This term excludes an Indian tribe, tribal organization, or any other Indian organization with respect to expenditures specifically permitted by other Federal law.
            (m) Reasonable compensation means, with respect to a regularly employed officer or employee of any person, compensation that is consistent with the normal compensation for such officer or employee for work that is not furnished to, not funded by, or not furnished in cooperation with the Federal Government.
            (n) Reasonable payment means, with respect to perfessional and other technical services, a payment in an amount that is consistent with the amount normally paid for such services in the private sector.
            (o) Recipient includes all contractors, subcontractors at any tier, and subgrantees at any tier of the recipient of funds received in connection with a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement. The term excludes an Indian tribe, tribal organization, or any other Indian organization with respect to expenditures specifically permitted by other Federal law.
            (p) Regularly employed means, with respect to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan, an officer or employee who is employed by such person for at least 130 working days within one year immediately preceding the date of the submission that initiates agency consideration of such person for receipt of such contract, grant, loan, cooperative agreement, loan insurance commitment, or loan guarantee commitment. An officer or employee who is employed by such person for less than 130 working days within one year immediately preceding the date of the submission that initiates agency consideration of such person shall be considered to be regularly employed as soon as he or she is employed by such person for 130 working days.
            (q) State means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a territory or possession of the United States, an agency or instrumentality of a State, and a multi-State, regional, or interstate entity having governmental duties and powers.
          
          
            § 87.110
            Certification and disclosure.
            (a) Each person shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, with each submission that initiates agency consideration of such person for:
            (1) Award of a Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement exceeding $100,000; or
            (2) An award of a Federal loan or a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000 or the single family maximum mortgage limit for affected programs, whichever is greater.
            (b) Each person shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, upon receipt by such person of:
            (1) A Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement exceeding $100,000; or
            (2) A Federal loan or a commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000 or the single family maximum mortgage limit for affected programs, whichever is greater.
            Unless such person previously filed a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, under paragraph (a) of this section.
            (c) Each person shall file a disclosure form at the end of each calendar quarter in which there occurs any event that requires disclosure or that materially affects the accuracy of the information contained in any disclosure form previously filed by such person under paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section. An event that materially affects the accuracy of the information reported includes:
            (1) A cumulative increase of $25,000 or more in the amount paid or expected to be paid for influencing or attempting to influence a covered Federal action; or
            (2) A change in the person(s) or individual(s) influencing or attempting to influence a covered Federal action; or,
            (3) A change in the officer(s), employee(s), or Member(s) contacted to influence or attempt to influence a covered Federal action.
            (d) Any person who requests or receives from a person referred to in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section:
            (1) A subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal contract;
            (2) A subgrant, contract, or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal grant;
            (3) A contract or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal loan exceeding $150,000; or,
            (4) A contract or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal cooperative agreement,
            Shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, to the next tier above.
            (e) All disclosure forms, but not certifications, shall be forwarded from tier to tier until received by the person referred to in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section. That person shall forward all disclosure forms to the agency.

            (f) Any certification or disclosure form filed under paragraph (e) of this section shall be treated as a material representation of fact upon which all receiving tiers shall rely. All liability arising from an erroneous representation shall be borne solely by the tier filing that representation and shall not be shared by any tier to which the erroneous representation is forwarded. Submitting an erroneous certification or disclosure constitutes a failure to file the required certification or disclosure, respectively. If a person fails to file a required certification or disclosure, the United States may pursue all available remedies, including those authorized by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code.
            
            (g) For awards and commitments in process prior to December 23, 1989, but not made before that date, certifications shall be required at award or commitment, covering activities occurring between December 23, 1989, and the date of award or commitment. However, for awards and commitments in process prior to the December 23, 1989 effective date of these provisions, but not made before December 23, 1989, disclosure forms shall not be required at time of award or commitment but shall be filed within 30 days.
            (h) No reporting is required for an activity paid for with appropriated funds if that activity is allowable under either subpart B or C.
            [55 FR 6737, 6750, Feb. 26, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 5321, Feb. 4, 1994]
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Activities by Own Employees
          
            § 87.200
            Agency and legislative liaison.
            (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in § 87.100 (a), does not apply in the case of a payment of reasonable compensation made to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement if the payment is for agency and legislative liaison activities not directly related to a covered Federal action.
            (b) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, providing any information specifically requested by an agency or Congress is allowable at any time.
            (c) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the following agency and legislative liaison activities are allowable at any time only where they are not related to a specific solicitation for any covered Federal action:
            (1) Discussing with an agency (including individual demonstrations) the qualities and characteristics of the person's products or services, conditions or terms of sale, and service capabilities; and,
            (2) Technical discussions and other activities regarding the application or adaptation of the person's products or services for an agency's use.
            (d) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the following agencies and legislative liaison activities are allowable only where they are prior to formal solicitation of any covered Federal action:
            (1) Providing any information not specifically requested but necessary for an agency to make an informed decision about initiation of a covered Federal action;
            (2) Technical discussions regarding the preparation of an unsolicited proposal prior to its official submission; and,
            (3) Capability presentations by persons seeking awards from an agency pursuant to the provisions of the Small Business Act, as amended by Pub. L. 95-507 and other subsequent amendments.
            (e) Only those activities expressly authorized by this section are allowable under this section.
          
          
            § 87.205
            Professional and technical services.
            (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in § 87.100 (a), does not apply in the case of a payment of reasonable compensation made to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or an extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement if payment is for professional or technical services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or negotiation of any bid, proposal, or application for that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or for meeting requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
            (b) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, professional and technical services shall be limited to advice and analysis directly applying any professional or technical discipline. For example, drafting of a legal document accompanying a bid or proposal by a lawyer is allowable. Similarly, technical advice provided by an engineer on the performance or operational capability of a piece of equipment rendered directly in the negotiation of a contract is allowable. However, communications with the intent to influence made by a professional (such as a licensed lawyer) or a technical person (such as a licensed accountant) are not allowable under this section unless they provide advice and analysis directly applying their professional or technical expertise and unless the advice or analysis is rendered directly and solely in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action. Thus, for example, communications with the intent to influence made by a lawyer that do not provide legal advice or analysis directly and solely related to the legal aspects of his or her client's proposal, but generally advocate one proposal over another are not allowable under this section because the lawyer is not providing professional legal services. Similarly, communications with the intent to influence made by an engineer providing an engineering analysis prior to the preparation or submission of a bid or proposal are not allowable under this section since the engineer is providing technical services but not directly in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action.
            (c) Requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving a covered Federal award include those required by law or regulation, or reasonably expected to be required by law or regulation, and any other requirements in the actual award documents.
            (d) Only those services expressly authorized by this section are allowable under this section.
          
          
            § 87.210
            Reporting.
            No reporting is required with respect to payments of reasonable compensation made to regularly employed officers or employees of a person.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Activities by Other Than Own Employees
          
            § 87.300
            Professional and technical services.
            (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in § 87.100 (a), does not apply in the case of any reasonable payment to a person, other than an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a covered Federal action, if the payment is for professional or technical services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or negotiation of any bid, proposal, or application for that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or for meeting requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
            (b) The reporting requirements in § 87.110 (a) and (b) regarding filing a disclosure form by each person, if required, shall not apply with respect to professional or technical services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or negotiation of any commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan.
            (c) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, professional and technical services shall be limited to advice and analysis directly applying any professional or technical discipline. For example, drafting or a legal document accompanying a bid or proposal by a lawyer is allowable. Similarly, technical advice provided by an engineer on the performance or operational capability of a piece of equipment rendered directly in the negotiation of a contract is allowable. However, communications with the intent to influence made by a professional (such as a licensed lawyer) or a technical person (such as a licensed accountant) are not allowable under this section unless they provide advice and analysis directly applying their professional or technical expertise and unless the advice or analysis is rendered directly and solely in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action. Thus, for example, communications with the intent to influence made by a lawyer that do not provide legal advice or analysis directly and solely related to the legal aspects of his or her client's proposal, but generally advocate one proposal over another are not allowable under this section because the lawyer is not providing professional legal services. Similarly, communications with the intent to influence made by an engineer providing an engineering analysis prior to the preparation or submission of a bid or proposal are not allowable under this section since the engineer is providing technical services but not directly in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered Federal action.
            (d) Requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving a covered Federal award include those required by law or regulation, or reasonably expected to be required by law or regulation, and any other requirements in the actual award documents.
            (e) Persons other than officers or employees of a person requesting or receiving a covered Federal action include consultants and trade associations.
            (f) Only those services expressly authorized by this section are allowable under this section.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Penalties and Enforcement
          
            § 87.400
            Penalties.
            (a) Any person who makes an expenditure prohibited herein shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $19,639 and not more than $196,387 for each such expenditure.
            (b) Any person who fails to file or amend the disclosure form (see appendix B) to be filed or amended if required herein, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $19,639 and not more than $196,387 for each such failure.
            (c) A filing or amended filing on or after the date on which an administrative action for the imposition of a civil penalty is commenced does not prevent the imposition of such civil penalty for a failure occurring before that date. An administrative action is commenced with respect to a failure when an investigating official determines in writing to commence an investigation of an allegation of such failure.
            (d) In determining whether to impose a civil penalty, and the amount of any such penalty, by reason of a violation by any person, the agency shall consider the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation, the effect on the ability of such person to continue in business, any prior violations by such person, the degree of culpability of such person, the ability of the person to pay the penalty, and such other matters as may be appropriate.
            (e) First offenders under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $19,639, absent aggravating circumstances. Second and subsequent offenses by persons shall be subject to an appropriate civil penalty between $19,639 and $196,387 as determined by the agency head or his or her designee.
            (f) An imposition of a civil penalty under this section does not prevent the United States from seeking any other remedy that may apply to the same conduct that is the basis for the imposition of such civil penalty.
            [55 FR 6737, 6750, Feb. 26, 1990, as amended at 81 FR 38935, June 15, 2016; 82 FR 24525, May 30, 2017, as amended at 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 84 FR 9454, Mar. 15, 2019, § 87.400 was amended by revising paragraphs (a), (b), and (e), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
              
                
                  § 87.400
                  Penalties.
                  (a) Any person who makes an expenditure prohibited herein shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $20,134 and not more than $201,340 for each such expenditure.
                  (b) Any person who fails to file or amend the disclosure form (see appendix B of this part) to be filed or amended if required herein, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $20,134 and not more than $201,340 for each such failure.
                  
                  (e) First offenders under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $20,134, absent aggravating circumstances. Second and subsequent offenses by persons shall be subject to an appropriate civil penalty between $20,134 and $201,340 as determined by the agency head or his or her designee.
                  
                
              
            
          
          
            § 87.405
            Penalty procedures.
            Agencies shall impose and collect civil penalties pursuant to the provisions of the Program Fraud and Civil Remedies Act, 31 U.S.C. sections 3803 (except subsection (c)), 3804, 3805, 3806, 3807, 3808, and 3812, insofar as these provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements herein.
          
          
            
            § 87.410
            Enforcement.
            The head of each agency shall take such actions as are necessary to ensure that the provisions herein are vigorously implemented and enforced in that agency.
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Exemptions
          
            § 87.500
            Secretary of Defense.
            (a) The Secretary of Defense may exempt, on a case-by-case basis, a covered Federal action from the prohibition whenever the Secretary determines, in writing, that such an exemption is in the national interest. The Secretary shall transmit a copy of each such written exemption to Congress immediately after making such a determination.
            (b) The Department of Defense may issue supplemental regulations to implement paragraph (a) of this section.
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Agency Reports
          
            § 87.600
            Semi-annual compilation.
            (a) The head of each agency shall collect and compile the disclosure reports (see appendix B) and, on May 31 and November 30 of each year, submit to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives a report containing a compilation of the information contained in the disclosure reports received during the six-month period ending on March 31 or September 30, respectively, of that year.
            (b) The report, including the compilation, shall be available for public inspection 30 days after receipt of the report by the Secretary and the Clerk.
            (c) Information that involves intelligence matters shall be reported only to the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives, and the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and the House of Representatives in accordance with procedures agreed to by such committees. Such information shall not be available for public inspection.
            (d) Information that is classified under Executive Order 12356 or any successor order shall be reported only to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives or the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives (whichever such committees have jurisdiction of matters involving such information) and to the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and the House of Representatives in accordance with procedures agreed to by such committees. Such information shall not be available for public inspection.
            (e) The first semi-annual compilation shall be submitted on May 31, 1990, and shall contain a compilation of the disclosure reports received from December 23, 1989 to March 31, 1990.
            (f) Major agencies, designated by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), are required to provide machine-readable compilations to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives no later than with the compilations due on May 31, 1991. OMB shall provide detailed specifications in a memorandum to these agencies.
            (g) Non-major agencies are requested to provide machine-readable compilations to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives.
            (h) Agencies shall keep the originals of all disclosure reports in the official files of the agency.
          
          
            § 87.605
            Inspector General report.
            (a) The Inspector General, or other official as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, of each agency shall prepare and submit to Congress each year, commencing with submission of the President's Budget in 1991, an evaluation of the compliance of that agency with, and the effectiveness of, the requirements herein. The evaluation may include any recommended changes that may be necessary to strengthen or improve the requirements.

            (b) In the case of an agency that does not have an Inspector General, the agency official comparable to an Inspector General shall prepare and submit the annual report, or, if there is no such comparable official, the head of the agency shall prepare and submit the annual report.
            
            (c) The annual report shall be submitted at the same time the agency submits its annual budget justifications to Congress.
            (d) The annual report shall include the following: All alleged violations relating to the agency's covered Federal actions during the year covered by the report, the actions taken by the head of the agency in the year covered by the report with respect to those alleged violations and alleged violations in previous years, and the amounts of civil penalties imposed by the agency in the year covered by the report.
          
          
            Pt. 87, App. A
            Appendix A to Part 87—Certification Regarding Lobbying
            Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements
            The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:
            (1) No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of an agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
            (2) If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with its instructions.
            (3) The undersigned shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly.
            This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.
            Statement for Loan Guarantees and Loan Insurance
            The undersigned states, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:
            If any funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan, the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with its instructions.
            Submission of this statement is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required statement shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.
          
          
            
            Pt. 87, App. B
            Appendix B to Part 87—Disclosure Form To Report Lobbying
            
              EC12OC91.004
            
            
              
              EC12OC91.005
            
            
              
              EC12OC91.006
            
            
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 91
        PART 91—CONSOLIDATED SUBMISSIONS FOR COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            91.1
            Purpose.
            91.2
            Applicability.
            91.5
            Definitions.
            91.10
            Consolidated program year.
            91.15
            Submission date.
            91.20
            Exceptions.
          
          
            Subpart B—Citizen Participation and Consultation
            91.100
            Consultation; local governments.
            91.105
            Citizen participation plan; local governments.
            91.110
            Consultation; states.
            91.115
            Citizen participation plan; States.
          
          
            Subpart C—Local Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan
            91.200
            General.
            91.205
            Housing and homeless needs assessment.
            91.210
            Housing market analysis.
            91.215
            Strategic plan.
            91.220
            Action plan.
            91.225
            Certifications.
            91.230
            Monitoring.
            91.235
            Special case; abbreviated consolidated plan.
            91.236
            Special case; District of Columbia.
          
          
            Subpart D—State Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan
            91.300
            General.
            91.305
            Housing and homeless needs assessment.
            91.310
            Housing market analysis.
            91.315
            Strategic plan.
            91.320
            Action plan.
            91.325
            Certifications.
            91.330
            Monitoring.
          
          
            Subpart E—Consortia; Contents of Consolidated Plan
            91.400
            Applicability.
            91.401
            Citizen participation plan.
            91.402
            Consolidated program year.
            91.405
            Housing and homeless needs assessment.
            91.410
            Housing market analysis.
            91.415
            Strategic plan.
            91.420
            Action plan.
            91.425
            Certifications.
            91.430
            Monitoring.
          
          
            Subpart F—Other General Requirements
            91.500
            HUD approval action.
            91.505
            Amendments to the consolidated plan.
            91.510
            Consistency determinations.
            91.515
            Funding determinations by HUD.
            91.520
            Performance reports.
            91.525
            Performance review by HUD.
            91.600
            Waiver authority.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3601-3619, 5301-5315, 11331-11388, 12701-12711, 12741-12756, and 12901-12912.
        
        
          Source:
          60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 91.1
            Purpose.
            (a) Overall goals. (1) The overall goal of the community planning and development programs covered by this part is to develop viable urban communities by providing decent housing and a suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities principally for low- and moderate-income persons. The primary means towards this end is to extend and strengthen partnerships among all levels of government and the private sector, including for-profit and non-profit organizations, in the production and operation of affordable housing.

            (i) Decent housing includes assisting homeless persons to obtain appropriate housing and assisting persons at risk of becoming homeless; retention of the affordable housing stock; and increasing the availability of permanent housing in standard condition and affordable cost to low-income and moderate-income families, particularly to members of disadvantaged minorities, without discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status, or disability. Decent housing also includes increasing the supply of supportive housing, which combines structural features and services needed to enable persons with special needs, including persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, to live with dignity and independence; and providing housing affordable to low-income persons accessible to job opportunities.
            
            (ii) A suitable living environment includes improving the safety and livability of neighborhoods; increasing access to quality public and private facilities and services; reducing the isolation of income groups within a community or geographical area through the spatial deconcentration of housing opportunities for persons of lower income and the revitalization of deteriorating or deteriorated neighborhoods; restoring and preserving properties of special historic, architectural, or aesthetic value; and conservation of energy resources.
            (iii) Expanded economic opportunities includes job creation and retention; establishment, stabilization and expansion of small businesses (including microbusinesses); the provision of public services concerned with employment; the provision of jobs involved in carrying out activities under programs covered by this plan to low-income persons living in areas affected by those programs and activities; availability of mortgage financing for low-income persons at reasonable rates using nondiscriminatory lending practices; access to capital and credit for development activities that promote the long-term economic and social viability of the community; and empowerment and self-sufficiency opportunities for low-income persons to reduce generational poverty in federally assisted and public housing.
            (2) The consolidated submission described in this part 91 requires the jurisdiction to state in one document its plan to pursue these goals for all the community planning and development programs, as well as for housing programs. It is these goals against which the plan and the jurisdiction's performance under the plan will be evaluated by HUD.
            (b) Functions of plan. The consolidated plan serves the following functions:
            (1) A planning document for the jurisdiction, which builds on a participatory process among citizens, organizations, businesses, and other stakeholders;
            (2) A submission for federal funds under HUD's formula grant programs for jurisdictions;
            (3) A strategy to be followed in carrying out HUD programs; and
            (4) A management tool for assessing performance and tracking results.
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6961, Feb. 9, 2006]
          
          
            § 91.2
            Applicability.
            (a) The following formula grant programs are covered by the consolidated plan:
            (1) The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) programs (see 24 CFR part 570, subparts D and I);
            (2) The Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG) program (see 24 CFR part 576);
            (3) The HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) program (see 24 CFR part 92);
            (4) The Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program (see 24 CFR part 574); and
            (5) The Housing Trust Fund (HTF) program (see 24 CFR part 93).
            (b) The following programs require either that the jurisdiction receiving funds directly from HUD have a consolidated plan that is approved by HUD or that the application for HUD funds contain a certification that the application is consistent with a HUD-approved consolidated plan:
            (1) The HOPE I Public Housing Homeownership (HOPE I) program (see 24 CFR Subtitle A, Appendix A);
            (2) The HOPE II Homeownership of Multifamily Units (HOPE II) program (see 24 CFR Subtitle A, Appendix B);
            (3) The HOPE III Homeownership of Single Family Homes (HOPE III) program (see 24 CFR part 572);
            (4) The Low-Income Housing Preservation (prepayment avoidance incentives) program, when administered by a State agency (see 24 CFR 248.177);
            (5) The Supportive Housing for the Elderly (Section 202) program (see 24 CFR part 889);
            (6) The Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities program (see 24 CFR part 890);
            (7) The Supportive Housing program (see 24 CFR part 583);
            (8) The Single Room Occupancy Housing (SRO) program (see 24 CFR part 882, subpart H);

            (9) The Shelter Plus Care program (see 24 CFR part 582);
            
            (10) The Community Development Block Grant program—Small Cities (see 24 CFR part 570, subpart F);
            (11) HOME program reallocations;

            (12) Revitalization of Severely Distressed Public Housing (section 24 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.));
            (13) Hope for Youth: Youthbuild (see 24 CFR part 585);
            (14) The John Heinz Neighborhood Development program (see 24 CFR part 594);
            (15) The “Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Program (see 42 U.S.C. 4852(o));”
            (16) Grants for Regulatory Barrier Removal Strategies and Implementation (section 1204, Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 12705c)); and
            (17) Competitive grants under the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program (see 24 CFR part 574).
            (c) Other programs do not require consistency with an approved consolidated plan. However, HUD funding allocations for the Section 8 Certificate and Voucher Programs are to be made in a way that enables participating jurisdictions to carry out their consolidated plans.
            (d) The Public Housing Agency Plan submission (PHA Plan) (see 24 CFR part 903) includes a certification by the appropriate state or local official that the PHA Plan is consistent with the applicable consolidated plan for the jurisdiction in which the public housing agency is located and must describe the manner in which the applicable contents of the PHA Plan are consistent with the consolidated plan.
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 16379, Mar. 30, 1995; 64 FR 50223, Sept. 15, 1999; 71 FR 6961, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75966, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 5219, Jan. 30, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.5
            Definitions.
            The terms Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing, Assessment of Fair Housing or AFH, elderly person, and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
            
              At risk of homelessness. (1) An individual or family who:
            (i) Has an annual income below 30 percent of median family income for the area, as determined by HUD;

            (ii) Does not have sufficient resources or support networks, e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other social networks, immediately available to prevent them from moving to an emergency shelter or another place described in paragraph (1) of the “Homeless” definition in this section; and
            (iii) Meets one of the following conditions:
            (A) Has moved because of economic reasons two or more times during the 60 days immediately preceding the application for homelessness prevention assistance;
            (B) Is living in the home of another because of economic hardship;
            (C) Has been notified in writing that their right to occupy their current housing or living situation will be terminated within 21 days after the date of application for assistance;
            (D) Lives in a hotel or motel and the cost of the hotel or motel stay is not paid by charitable organizations or by federal, State, or local government programs for low-income individuals;
            (E) Lives in a single-room occupancy or efficiency apartment unit in which there reside more than two persons or lives in a larger housing unit in which there reside more than 1.5 people per room, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau;
            (F) Is exiting a publicly funded institution, or system of care (such as a health-care facility, a mental health facility, foster care or other youth facility, or correction program or institution); or
            (G) Otherwise lives in housing that has characteristics associated with instability and an increased risk of homelessness, as identified in the recipient's approved consolidated plan;

            (2) A child or youth who does not qualify as “homeless” under this section, but qualifies as “homeless” under section 387(3) of the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42 U.S.C. 5732a(3)), section 637(11) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9832(11)), section 41403(6) of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14043e-2(6)), section 330(h)(5)(A) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)(5)(A)), section 3(m) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2012(m)), or section 17(b)(15) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786(b)(15)); or
            (3) A child or youth who does not qualify as “homeless” under this section, but qualifies as “homeless” under section 725(2) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11434a(2)), and the parent(s) or guardian(s) of that child or youth if living with her or him.
            
              Certification. A written assertion, based on supporting evidence, that must be kept available for inspection by HUD, by the Inspector General of HUD, and by the public. The assertion shall be deemed to be accurate unless HUD determines otherwise, after inspecting the evidence and providing due notice and opportunity for comment.
            
              Chronically homeless means:
            (1) A “homeless individual with a disability,” as defined in section 401(9) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11360(9)), who:
            (i) Lives in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an emergency shelter; and
            (ii) Has been homeless and living as described in paragraph (1)(i) of this definition continuously for at least 12 months or on at least 4 separate occasions in the last 3 years, as long as the combined occasions equal at least 12 months and each break in homelessness separating the occasions included at least 7 consecutive nights of not living as described in paragraph (1)(i). Stays in institutional care facilities for fewer than 90 days will not constitute as a break in homelessness, but rather such stays are included in the 12-month total, as long as the individual was living or residing in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or an emergency shelter immediately before entering the institutional care facility;
            (2) An individual who has been residing in an institutional care facility, including a jail, substance abuse or mental health treatment facility, hospital, or other similar facility, for fewer than 90 days and met all of the criteria in paragraph (1) of this definition, before entering that facility; or
            (3) A family with an adult head of household (or if there is no adult in the family, a minor head of household) who meets all of the criteria in paragraph (1) or (2) of this definition, including a family whose composition has fluctuated while the head of household has been homeless.
            
              Consolidated plan or (“the plan”). The document that is submitted to HUD that serves as the comprehensive housing affordability strategy, community development plan, and submissions for funding under any of the Community Planning and Development formula grant programs (e.g., CDBG, ESG, HOME, and HOPWA), that is prepared in accordance with the process described in this part.
            
              Consortium. An organization of geographically contiguous units of general local government that are acting as a single unit of general local government for purposes of the HOME program (see 24 CFR part 92).
            
              Continuum of Care. The group composed of representatives of relevant organizations, which generally includes nonprofit homeless providers, victim service providers, faith-based organizations, governments, businesses, advocates, public housing agencies, school districts, social service providers, mental health agencies, hospitals, universities, affordable housing developers, law enforcement, organizations that serve homeless and formerly homeless veterans, and homeless and formerly homeless persons that are organized to plan for and provide, as necessary, a system of outreach, engagement, and assessment; emergency shelter; rapid re-housing; transitional housing; permanent housing; and prevention strategies to address the various needs of homeless persons and persons at risk of homelessness for a specific geographic area.
            
              Cost burden. The extent to which gross housing costs, including utility costs, exceed 30 percent of gross income, based on data available from the U.S. Census Bureau.
            
              Emergency shelter. Any facility, the primary purpose of which is to provide a temporary shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations of the homeless, and which does not require occupants to sign leases or occupancy agreements.
            
            
              Extremely low-income family. Family whose income is between 0 and 30 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 30 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
            
              Homeless. (1) An individual or family who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence, meaning:
            (i) An individual or family with a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings, including a car, park, abandoned building, bus or train station, airport, or camping ground;
            (ii) An individual or family living in a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designated to provide temporary living arrangements (including congregate shelters, transitional housing, and hotels and motels paid for by charitable organizations or by federal, state, or local government programs for low-income individuals); or
            (iii) An individual who is exiting an institution where he or she resided for 90 days or less and who resided in an emergency shelter or place not meant for human habitation immediately before entering that institution;
            (2) An individual or family who will imminently lose their primary nighttime residence, provided that:
            (i) The primary nighttime residence will be lost within 14 days of the date of application for homeless assistance;
            (ii) No subsequent residence has been identified; and
            (iii) The individual or family lacks the resources or support networks, e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other social networks needed to obtain other permanent housing;
            (3) Unaccompanied youth under 25 years of age, or families with children and youth, who do not otherwise qualify as homeless under this definition, but who:
            (i) Are defined as homeless under section 387 of the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42 U.S.C. 5732a), section 637 of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9832), section 41403 of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14043e-2), section 330(h) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)), section 3 of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2012), section 17(b) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786(b)), or section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11434a);
            (ii) Have not had a lease, ownership interest, or occupancy agreement in permanent housing at any time during the 60 days immediately preceding the date of application for homeless assistance;
            (iii) Have experienced persistent instability as measured by two moves or more during the 60-day period immediately preceding the date of applying for homeless assistance; and
            (iv) Can be expected to continue in such status for an extended period of time because of chronic disabilities, chronic physical health or mental health conditions, substance addiction, histories of domestic violence or childhood abuse (including neglect), the presence of a child or youth with a disability, or two or more barriers to employment, which include the lack of a high school degree or General Education Development (GED), illiteracy, low English proficiency, a history of incarceration or detention for criminal activity, and a history of unstable employment; or
            (4) Any individual or family who:
            (i) Is fleeing, or is attempting to flee, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or other dangerous or life-threatening conditions that relate to violence against the individual or a family member, including a child, that has either taken place within the individual's or family's primary nighttime residence or has made the individual or family afraid to return to their primary nighttime residence;
            (ii) Has no other residence; and
            (iii) Lacks the resources or support networks, e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other social networks, to obtain other permanent housing.
            
              Homeless Management Information System (HMIS). The information system designated by the Continuum of Care to comply with HUD's data collection, management, and reporting standards and used to collect client-level data and data on the provision of housing and services to homeless individuals and families and persons at risk of homelessness.
            
              Homeless person. A youth (17 years or younger) not accompanied by an adult (18 years or older) or an adult without children, who is homeless (not imprisoned or otherwise detained pursuant to an Act of Congress or a State law), including the following:
            (1) An individual who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence; and
            (2) An individual who has a primary nighttime residence that is:
            (i) A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations (including welfare hotels, congregate shelters, and transitional housing for the mentally ill);
            (ii) An institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized; or
            (iii) A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.
            
              Jurisdiction. A State or unit of general local government.
            
              Large family. Family of five or more persons.
            
              Lead-based paint hazards means lead-based paint hazards as defined in part 35, subpart B of this title.
            
              Low-income families. Low-income families whose incomes do not exceed 50 percent of the median family income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 50 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
            
              Middle-income family. Family whose income is between 80 percent and 95 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 95 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes. (This corresponds to the term “moderate income family” under the CHAS statute, 42 U.S.C. 12705.)
            
              Moderate-income family. Family whose income does not exceed 80 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
            
              Overcrowding. For purposes of describing relative housing needs, a housing unit containing more than one person per room, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, for which data are made available by the Census Bureau. (See 24 CFR 791.402(b).)
            
              Person with a disability. A person who is determined to:
            (1) Have a physical, mental or emotional impairment that:
            (i) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration;
            (ii) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently; and
            (iii) Is of such a nature that the ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions; or
            (2) Have a developmental disability, as defined in section 102(7) of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (42 U.S.C. 6001-6007); or
            (3) Be the surviving member or members of any family that had been living in an assisted unit with the deceased member of the family who had a disability at the time of his or her death.
            
              Poverty level family. Family with an income below the poverty line, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and revised annually.
            
              Rapid re-housing assistance. The provision of housing relocation and stabilization services and short- and/or medium-term rental assistance as necessary to help a homeless individual or family move as quickly as possible into permanent housing and achieve stability in that housing.
            
              Severe cost burden. The extent to which gross housing costs, including utility costs, exceed 50 percent of gross income, based on data available from the U.S. Census Bureau.
            
              State. Any State of the United States and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
            
              Transitional housing. A project that is designed to provide housing and appropriate supportive services to homeless persons to facilitate movement to independent living within 24 months, or a longer period approved by HUD. For purposes of the HOME program, there is no HUD-approved time period for moving to independent living.
            
              Victim service provider. A private nonprofit organization whose primary mission is to provide services to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. This term includes rape crisis centers, battered women's shelters, domestic violence transitional housing programs, and other programs.
            
              Unit of general local government. A city, town, township, county, parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a State; an urban county; and a consortium of such political subdivisions recognized by HUD in accordance with the HOME program (24 CFR part 92) or the CDBG program (24 CFR part 570).
            
              Urban county. See definition in 24 CFR 570.3.
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996; 64 FR 50223, Sept. 15, 1999; 71 FR 6961, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75966, 76013, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42360, July 16, 2015; 80 FR 75804, Dec. 4, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.10
            Consolidated program year.
            (a) Each of the following programs shall be administered by a jurisdiction on a single consolidated program year, established by the jurisdiction: CDBG, ESG, HOME, HOPWA, and HTF. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the program year shall run for a twelve month period and begin on the first calendar day of a month.
            (b) Once a program year is established, the jurisdiction may either shorten or lengthen its program year to change the beginning date of the following program year, provided that it notifies HUD in writing at least two months before the date the program year would have ended if it had not been lengthened or at least two months before the end of a proposed shortened program year.
            (c) See subpart E of this part for requirements concerning program year for units of general local government that are part of a consortium.
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 80 FR 5219, Jan. 30, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.15
            Submission date.
            (a) General. (1) In order to facilitate continuity in its program and to provide accountability to citizens, each jurisdiction should submit its consolidated plan to HUD at least 45 days before the start of its program year. (But see § 92.104 of this subtitle with respect to newly eligible jurisdictions under the HOME program.) With the exception of the August 16 date noted in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, HUD may grant a jurisdiction an extension of the submission deadline for good cause.
            (2) In no event will HUD accept a submission earlier than November 15 or later than August 16 of the federal fiscal year for which the grant funds are appropriated. Failure to receive the plan by August 16 will automatically result in a loss of the CDBG funds to which the jurisdiction would otherwise be entitled.
            (3) A jurisdiction may have a program year that coincides with the federal fiscal year (e.g., October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2006, for federal fiscal year 2006 funds). However, the consolidated plan may not be submitted earlier than November 15 of the federal fiscal year and HUD has the period specified in § 91.500 to review the consolidated plan.
            (4) See § 91.20 for HUD field office authorization to grant exceptions to these provisions.
            (b) Frequency of submission. (1) The summary of the citizen participation and consultation process, the action plan, and the certifications must be submitted on an annual basis.

            (2) The housing, and homeless needs assessment, market analysis, and strategic plan must be submitted at least once every five years, or as such time agreed upon by HUD and the jurisdiction in order to facilitate orderly program management, coordinate consolidated plans with time periods used for cooperation agreements, other plans, or the availability of data.
            (3) A jurisdiction may make amendments that extend the time period covered by their plan if agreed upon by HUD.
            [71 FR 6961, Feb. 9, 2006]
          
          
            § 91.20
            Exceptions.
            The HUD Field Office may grant a jurisdiction an exception from the submission deadline for plans and reports and from a requirement in the implementation guidelines for good cause, as determined by the field office and reported in writing to HUD Headquarters, unless the requirement is required by statute or regulation.
            [71 FR 6962, Feb. 9, 2006]
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Citizen Participation and Consultation
          
            § 91.100
            Consultation; local governments.
            (a) General. (1) When preparing the AFH and the consolidated plan, the jurisdiction shall consult with other public and private agencies that provide assisted housing, health services, and social services (including those focusing on services to children, elderly persons, persons with disabilities, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, homeless persons), community-based and regionally-based organizations that represent protected class members, and organizations that enforce fair housing laws. When preparing the consolidated plan, the jurisdiction shall also consult with public and private organizations. Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, such consultations shall include broadband internet service providers, organizations engaged in narrowing the digital divide, agencies whose primary responsibilities include the management of flood prone areas, public land or water resources, and emergency management agencies.
            (2) When preparing the portions of the consolidated plan describing the jurisdiction's homeless strategy and the resources available to address the needs of homeless persons (particularly chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) and persons at risk of homelessness, the jurisdiction must consult with:
            (i) The Continuum(s) of Care that serve(s) the jurisdiction's geographic area;
            (ii) Public and private agencies that address housing, health, social service, victim services, employment, or education needs of low-income individuals and families; homeless individuals and families, including homeless veterans; youth; and/or other persons with special needs;
            (iii) Publicly funded institutions and systems of care that may discharge persons into homelessness (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions); and
            (iv) Business and civic leaders.
            (3) When preparing the portion of its consolidated plan concerning lead-based paint hazards, the jurisdiction shall consult with state or local health and child welfare agencies and examine existing data related to lead-based paint hazards and poisonings, including health department data on the addresses of housing units in which children have been identified as lead poisoned.
            (4) When preparing the description of priority nonhousing community development needs, a unit of general local government must notify adjacent units of general local government, to the extent practicable. The nonhousing community development plan must be submitted to the state, and, if the jurisdiction is a CDBG entitlement grantee other than an urban county, to the county.

            (5) The jurisdiction also should consult with adjacent units of general local government and local and regional government agencies, including local government agencies with metropolitan-wide planning and transportation responsibilities, particularly for problems and solutions that go beyond a single jurisdiction.
            (b) HOPWA. The largest city in each eligible metropolitan statistical area (EMSA) that is eligible to receive a HOPWA formula allocation must consult broadly to develop a metropolitan-wide strategy for addressing the needs of persons with HIV/AIDS and their families living throughout the EMSA. All jurisdictions within the EMSA must assist the jurisdiction that is applying for a HOPWA allocation in the preparation of the HOPWA submission.
            (c) Public housing agencies (PHAs). (1) The jurisdiction shall consult with local PHAs operating in the jurisdiction regarding consideration of public housing needs, planned programs and activities, the AFH, strategies for affirmatively furthering fair housing, and proposed actions to affirmatively further fair housing in the consolidated plan. (See also 24 CFR 5.158 for coordination when preparing an AFH jointly with a PHA.) This consultation will help provide a better basis for the certification by the authorized official that the PHA Plan is consistent with the consolidated plan and the local government's description of its strategy for affirmatively furthering fair housing and the manner in which it will address the needs of public housing and, where necessary, the manner in which it will provide financial or other assistance to a troubled PHA to improve the PHA's operations and remove the designation of troubled, as well as obtaining PHA input on addressing fair housing issues in the Public Housing and Housing Choice Voucher programs.
            (2) This consultation will also help ensure that activities with regard to affirmatively furthering fair housing, local drug elimination, neighborhood improvement programs, and resident programs and services, those funded under a PHA's program and those funded under a program covered by the consolidated plan, are fully coordinated to achieve comprehensive community development goals and affirmatively further fair housing. If a PHA is required to implement remedies under a Voluntary Compliance Agreement, the local jurisdiction should work with or consult with the PHA, as appropriate, to identify actions the jurisdiction may take, if any, to assist the PHA in implementing the required remedies. A local jurisdiction may use CDBG funds for eligible activities or other funds to implement remedies required under a Voluntary Compliance Agreement.
            (d) Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG). A jurisdiction that receives an ESG grant must consult with the Continuum of Care in determining how to allocate its ESG grant for eligible activities; in developing the performance standards for, and evaluating the outcomes of, projects and activities assisted by ESG funds; and in developing funding, policies, and procedures for the operation and administration of the HMIS.
            (e) Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing. (1) The jurisdiction shall consult with community-based and regionally-based organizations that represent protected class members, and organizations that enforce fair housing laws, such as State or local fair housing enforcement agencies (including participants in the Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP)), fair housing organizations and other nonprofit organizations that receive funding under the Fair Housing Initiative Program (FHIP), and other public and private fair housing service agencies, to the extent that such entities operate within its jurisdiction. This consultation will help provide a better basis for the jurisdiction's AFH, its certification to affirmatively further fair housing, and other portions of the consolidated plan concerning affirmatively furthering fair housing.
            (2) This consultation must occur with any organizations that have relevant knowledge or data to inform the AFH and that are sufficiently independent and representative to provide meaningful feedback to a jurisdiction on the AFH, the consolidated plan, and their implementation.

            (3) Consultation must occur at various points in the fair housing planning process, meaning that, at a minimum, the jurisdiction will consult with the organizations described in this paragraph (e) in the development of both the AFH and the consolidated plan. Consultation on the consolidated plan shall specifically seek input into how the goals identified in an accepted AFH inform the priorities and objectives of the consolidated plan.
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6962, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75967, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42360, July 16, 2015; 81 FR 91011, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.105
            Citizen participation plan; local governments.
            (a) Applicability and adoption of the citizen participation plan. (1) The jurisdiction is required to adopt a citizen participation plan that sets forth the jurisdiction's policies and procedures for citizen participation. (Where a jurisdiction, before August 17, 2015, adopted a citizen participation plan it, will need to amend the citizen participation plan to comply with provisions of this section.)
            (2) Encouragement of citizen participation. (i) The citizen participation plan must provide for and encourage citizens to participate in the development of the AFH, any revisions to the AFH, the consolidated plan, any substantial amendment to the consolidated plan, and the performance report. These requirements are designed especially to encourage participation by low- and moderate-income persons, particularly those persons living in areas designated by the jurisdiction as a revitalization area or in a slum and blighted area and in areas where CDBG funds are proposed to be used, and by residents of predominantly low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, as defined by the jurisdiction. A jurisdiction must take appropriate actions to encourage the participation of all its citizens, including minorities and non-English speaking persons, as provided in paragraph (a)(4) of this section, as well as persons with disabilities.
            (ii) The jurisdiction shall encourage the participation of local and regional institutions, Continuums of Care, and other organizations (including businesses, developers, nonprofit organizations, philanthropic organizations, and community-based and faith-based organizations) in the process of developing and implementing the AFH and the consolidated plan. The jurisdiction shall encourage the participation of public and private organizations. Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, such consultations shall include broadband internet service providers, organizations engaged in narrowing the digital divide, agencies whose primary responsibilities include the management of flood prone areas, public land or water resources, and emergency management agencies in the process of developing the consolidated plan.
            (iii) The jurisdiction shall encourage, in conjunction with consultation with public housing agencies, the participation of residents of public and assisted housing developments (including any resident advisory boards, resident councils, and resident management corporations) in the process of developing and implementing the AFH and the consolidated plan, along with other low-income residents of targeted revitalization areas in which the developments are located. The jurisdictions shall make an effort to provide information to the PHA about the AFH, AFFH strategy, and consolidated plan activities related to its developments and surrounding communities so that the PHA can make this information available at the annual public hearing(s) required for the PHA Plan.

            (iv) The jurisdiction should explore alternative public involvement techniques and quantitative ways to measure efforts that encourage citizen participation in a shared vision for change in communities and neighborhoods, and the review of program performance; e.g., use of focus groups and the Internet.
            (3) Citizen comment on the citizen participation plan and amendments. The jurisdiction must provide citizens with a reasonable opportunity to comment on the original citizen participation plan and on substantial amendments to the citizen participation plan, and must make the citizen participation plan public. The citizen participation plan must be in a format accessible to persons with disabilities, upon request.

            (4) The citizen participation plan shall describe the jurisdiction's procedures for assessing its language needs and identify any need for translation of notices and other vital documents. At a minimum, the citizen participation plan shall require that the jurisdiction take reasonable steps to provide language assistance to ensure meaningful access to participation by non-English-speaking residents of the community.
            (b) Development of the AFH and the consolidated plan. The citizen participation plan must include the following minimum requirements for the development of the AFH and the consolidated plan:
            (1)(i) The citizen participation plan must require that at or as soon as feasible after the start of the public participation process the jurisdiction will make the HUD-provided data and any other supplemental information the jurisdiction plans to incorporate into its AFH available to its residents, public agencies, and other interested parties. The jurisdiction may make the HUD-provided data available to the public by cross-referencing to the data on HUD's Web site.
            (ii) The citizen participation plan must require that, before the jurisdiction adopts a consolidated plan, the jurisdiction will make available to residents, public agencies, and other interested parties information that includes the amount of assistance the jurisdiction expects to receive (including grant funds and program income) and the range of activities that may be undertaken, including the estimated amount that will benefit persons of low- and moderate-income. The citizen participation plan also must set forth the jurisdiction's plans to minimize displacement of persons and to assist any persons displaced, specifying the types and levels of assistance the jurisdiction will make available (or require others to make available) to persons displaced, even if the jurisdiction expects no displacement to occur.
            (iii) The citizen participation plan must state when and how the jurisdiction will make this information available.
            (2) The citizen participation plan must require the jurisdiction to publish the proposed AFH and the proposed consolidated plan in a manner that affords its residents, public agencies, and other interested parties a reasonable opportunity to examine its content and to submit comments. The citizen participation plan must set forth how the jurisdiction will publish the proposed AFH and the proposed consolidated plan and give reasonable opportunity to examine each document's content. The requirement for publishing may be met by publishing a summary of each document in one or more newspapers of general circulation, and by making copies of each document available on the Internet, on the jurisdiction's official government Web site, and as well at libraries, government offices, and public places. The summary must describe the content and purpose of the AFH or the consolidated plan (as applicable), and must include a list of the locations where copies of the entire proposed document may be examined. In addition, the jurisdiction must provide a reasonable number of free copies of the plan or the AFH (as applicable) to residents and groups that request it.
            (3) The citizen participation plan must provide for at least one public hearing during the development of the AFH or the consolidated plan (as applicable). See paragraph (e) of this section for public hearing requirements, generally.
            (4) The citizen participation plan must provide a period, not less than 30 calendar days, to receive comments from residents of the community on the consolidated plan or the AFH (as applicable).
            (5) The citizen participation plan shall require the jurisdiction to consider any comments or views of residents of the community received in writing, or orally at the public hearings, in preparing the final AFH or the final consolidated plan (as applicable). A summary of these comments or views, and a summary of any comments or views not accepted and the reasons why, shall be attached to the final AFH or the final consolidated plan (as applicable).
            (c) Consolidated plan amendments and AFH revisions—(1)(i) Criteria for amendment to consolidated plan. The citizen participation plan must specify the criteria the jurisdiction will use for determining what changes in the jurisdiction's planned or actual activities constitute a substantial amendment to the consolidated plan. (See § 91.505.) The citizen participation plan must include, among the criteria for a substantial amendment, changes in the use of CDBG funds from one eligible activity to another.
            (ii) Criteria for revision to the AFH. The jurisdiction must specify the criteria the jurisdiction will use for determining when revisions to the AFH will be required. (At a minimum, the specified criteria must include the situations described in 24 CFR 5.164.)
            (2) The citizen participation plan must provide community residents with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on substantial amendments to the consolidated plan and revisions to the AFH. The citizen participation plan must state how reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment will be given. The citizen participation plan must provide a period, of not less than 30 calendar days, to receive comments on the consolidated plan substantial amendment or any revision to the AFH before the consolidated plan substantial amendment is implemented or the revised AFH is submitted to HUD for review.
            (3) The citizen participation plan shall require the jurisdiction to consider any comments or views of residents of the community received in writing, or orally at public hearings, if any, in preparing the substantial amendment of the consolidated plan or significant revision to the AFH (as applicable). A summary of these comments or views, and a summary of any comments or views not accepted and the reasons why, shall be attached to the substantial amendment of the consolidated plan or revision to the AFH (as applicable).
            (d) Performance reports. (1) The citizen participation plan must provide citizens with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on performance reports. The citizen participation plan must state how reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment will be given. The citizen participation plan must provide a period, not less than 15 days, to receive comments on the performance report that is to be submitted to HUD before its submission.
            (2) The citizen participation plan shall require the jurisdiction to consider any comments or views of citizens received in writing, or orally at public hearings in preparing the performance report. A summary of these comments or views shall be attached to the performance report.
            (e) Public hearings—(1)(i) Consolidated plan. The citizen participation plan must provide for at least two public hearings per year to obtain residents' views and to respond to proposals and questions, to be conducted at a minimum of two different stages of the program year. Together, the hearings must address housing and community development needs, development of proposed activities, proposed strategies and actions for affirmatively furthering fair housing consistent with the AFH, and a review of program performance.
            (ii) Minimum number of hearings. To obtain the views of residents of the community on housing and community development needs, including priority nonhousing community development needs and affirmatively furthering fair housing, the citizen participation plan must provide that at least one of these hearings is held before the proposed consolidated plan is published for comment.
            (iii) Assessment of Fair Housing. To obtain the views of the community on AFH-related data and affirmatively furthering fair housing in the jurisdiction's housing and community development programs, the citizen participation plan must provide that at least one public hearing is held before the proposed AFH is published for comment.
            (2) The citizen participation plan must state how and when adequate advance notice will be given to citizens of each hearing, with sufficient information published about the subject of the hearing to permit informed comment. (Publishing small print notices in the newspaper a few days before the hearing does not constitute adequate notice. Although HUD is not specifying the length of notice required, it would consider two weeks adequate.)

            (3) The citizen participation plan must provide that hearings be held at times and locations convenient to potential and actual beneficiaries, and with accommodation for persons with disabilities. The citizen participation plan must specify how it will meet these requirements.
            
            (4) The citizen participation plan must identify how the needs of non-English speaking residents will be met in the case of public hearings where a significant number of non-English speaking residents can be reasonably expected to participate.
            (f) Meetings. The citizen participation plan must provide residents of the community with reasonable and timely access to local meetings, consistent with accessibility and reasonable accommodation requirements, in accordance with section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the regulations at 24 CFR part 8; and the Americans with Disabilities Act and the regulations at 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, as applicable.
            (g) Availability to the public. The citizen participation plan must provide that the consolidated plan as adopted, consolidated plan substantial amendments, HUD-accepted AFH, revisions to the AFH, and the performance report will be available to the public, including the availability of materials in a form accessible to persons with disabilities, upon request. The citizen participation plan must state how these documents will be available to the public.
            (h) Access to records. The citizen participation plan must require the jurisdiction to provide residents of the community, public agencies, and other interested parties with reasonable and timely access to information and records relating to the jurisdiction's AFH, consolidated plan, and use of assistance under the programs covered by this part during the preceding 5 years.
            (i) Technical assistance. The citizen participation plan must provide for technical assistance to groups representative of persons of low- and moderate-income that request such assistance in commenting on the AFH and in developing proposals for funding assistance under any of the programs covered by the consolidated plan, with the level and type of assistance determined by the jurisdiction. The assistance need not include the provision of funds to the groups.
            (j) Complaints. The citizen participation plan shall describe the jurisdiction's appropriate and practicable procedures to handle complaints from its residents related to the consolidated plan, amendments, AFH, revisions, and the performance report. At a minimum, the citizen participation plan shall require that the jurisdiction must provide a timely, substantive written response to every written resident complaint, within an established period of time (within 15 working days, where practicable, if the jurisdiction is a CDBG grant recipient).
            (k) Use of citizen participation plan. The jurisdiction must follow its citizen participation plan.
            (l) Jurisdiction responsibility. The requirements for citizen participation do not restrict the responsibility or authority of the jurisdiction for the development and execution of its consolidated plan or AFH.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 10427, Feb. 24, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6962, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75967, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42360, July 16, 2015; 81 FR 91011, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.110
            Consultation; States.
            (a) When preparing the AFH and the consolidated plan, the State shall consult with public and private agencies that provide assisted housing (including any State housing agency administering public housing), health services, social services (including those focusing on services to children, elderly persons, persons with disabilities, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and homeless persons), and State-based and regionally-based organizations that represent protected class members and organizations that enforce fair housing laws during preparation of the consolidated plan.

            (1) With respect to public housing or Housing Choice Voucher programs, the State shall consult with any housing agency administering public housing or the section 8 program on a Statewide basis as well as all PHAs that certify consistency with the State's consolidated plan. State consultation with these entities may consider public housing needs, planned programs and activities, the AFH, strategies for affirmatively furthering fair housing, and proposed actions to affirmatively further fair housing. This consultation helps provide a better basis for the certification by the authorized official that the PHA Plan is consistent with the consolidated plan and the State's description of its strategy for affirmatively furthering fair housing, and the manner in which the State will address the needs of public housing and, where applicable, the manner in which the State may provide financial or other assistance to a troubled PHA to improve its operations and remove such designation, as well as in obtaining PHA input on addressing fair housing issues in public housing and the Housing Choice Voucher programs. This consultation also helps ensure that activities with regard to affirmatively furthering fair housing, local drug elimination, neighborhood improvement programs, and resident programs and services, funded under a PHA's program and those funded under a program covered by the consolidated plan, are fully coordinated to achieve comprehensive community development goals and affirmatively further fair housing. If a PHA is required to implement remedies under a Voluntary Compliance Agreement, the State should consult with the PHA and identify actions the State may take, if any, to assist the PHA in implementing the required remedies.
            (2) The State shall consult with State-based and regionally-based organizations that represent protected class members, and organizations that enforce fair housing laws, such as State fair housing enforcement agencies (including participants in the Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP)), fair housing organizations and other nonprofit organizations that receive funding under the Fair Housing Initiative Program (FHIP), and other public and private fair housing service agencies, to the extent such entities operate within the State. This consultation will help provide a better basis for the State's AFH, its certification to affirmatively further fair housing, and other portions of the consolidated plan concerning affirmatively furthering fair housing. This consultation should occur with organizations that have the capacity to engage with data informing the AFH and be sufficiently independent and representative to provide meaningful feedback on the AFH, the consolidated plan, and their implementation. Consultation must occur at various points in the fair housing planning process, meaning that, at a minimum, the jurisdiction will consult with the organizations described in this paragraph (a)(2) in the development of both the AFH and the consolidated plan. Consultation on the consolidated plan shall specifically seek input into how the goals identified in an accepted AFH inform the priorities and objectives of the consolidated plan. When preparing the consolidated plan, the State shall also consult with public and private organizations. Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, such consultations shall include broadband internet service providers, organizations engaged in narrowing the digital divide, agencies whose primary responsibilities include the management of flood prone areas, public land or water resources, and emergency management agencies.
            (b) When preparing the portions of the consolidated plan describing the State's homeless strategy and the resources available to address the needs of homeless persons (particularly chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) and persons at risk of homelessness, the State must consult with:
            (1) Each Continuum of Care within the state;
            (2) Public and private agencies that address housing, health, social services, victim services, employment, or education needs of low-income individuals and families; of homeless individuals and families, including homeless veterans; youth; and/or of other persons with special needs;
            (3) Publicly funded institutions and systems of care that may discharge persons into homelessness (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions); and
            (4) Business and civic leaders.

            (c) When preparing the portion of its consolidated plan concerning lead-based paint hazards, the State shall consult with state or local health and child welfare agencies and examine existing data related to lead-based paint hazards and poisonings, including health department data on the addresses of housing units in which children have been identified as lead-poisoned.
            (d) When preparing its method of distribution of assistance under the CDBG program, a State must consult with local governments in nonentitlement areas of the state.
            (e) The State must also consult with each Continuum of Care within the state in determining how to allocate its ESG grant for eligible activities; developing the performance standards for, and evaluating the outcomes of, projects and activities assisted by ESG funds; and developing funding, policies, and procedures for the operation and administration of the HMIS.
            [76 FR 75968, Dec. 5, 2011, as amended at 80 FR 42362, July 16, 2015; 81 FR 91011, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.115
            Citizen participation plan; States.
            (a) Applicability and adoption of the citizen participation plan—(1) When citizen participation plan must be amended. The State is required to adopt a citizen participation plan that sets forth the State's policies and procedures for citizen participation. (Where a State, before August 17, 2015, adopted a citizen participation plan, it will need to amend the citizen participation plan to comply with provisions of this section.)
            (2) Encouragement of citizen participation. (i) The citizen participation plan must provide for and encourage citizens to participate in the development of the AFH, any revision to the AFH, the consolidated plan, any substantial amendments to the consolidated plan, and the performance report. These requirements are designed especially to encourage participation by low- and moderate-income persons, particularly those living in slum and blighted areas and in areas where CDBG funds are proposed to be used and by residents of predominantly low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. A State must take appropriate actions to encourage the participation of all its residents, including minorities and non-English speaking persons, as provided in paragraph (a)(4) of this section, as well as persons with disabilities.
            (ii) The State shall encourage the participation of Statewide and regional institutions, Continuums of Care, and other organizations (including businesses, developers, nonprofit organizations, philanthropic organizations, and community-based and faith-based organizations) that are involved with or affected by the programs or activities covered by the consolidated plan in the process of developing and implementing the AFH and the consolidated plan. Commencing with consolidated plans submitted in or after January 1, 2018, the State shall also encourage the participation of public and private organizations, including broadband internet service providers, organizations engaged in narrowing the digital divide, agencies whose primary responsibilities include the management of flood prone areas, public land or water resources, and emergency management agencies in the process of developing the consolidated plan.
            (iii) The State should also explore alternative public involvement techniques that encourage a shared vision of change for the community and the review of program performance; e.g., use of focus groups and use of the Internet.
            (3) Citizen and local government comment on the citizen participation plan and amendments. The State must provide citizens and units of general local government a reasonable opportunity to comment on the original citizen participation plan and on substantial amendments to the citizen participation plan, and must make the citizen participation plan public. The citizen participation plan must be in a format accessible to persons with disabilities, upon request.
            (4) Language assistance for those with limited English proficiency. The citizen participation plan shall describe the State's procedures for assessing its language needs and identify any need for translation of notices and other vital documents. At a minimum, the citizen participation plan shall require the State to make reasonable efforts to provide language assistance to ensure meaningful access to participation by non-English speaking persons.
            
            (b) Development of the AFH and the consolidated plan. The citizen participation plan must include the following minimum requirements for the development of the AFH and consolidated plan:
            (1)(i) The citizen participation plan must require that at or as soon as feasible after the start of the public participation process the State will make HUD-provided data and any other supplemental information the State intends to incorporate into its AFH available to the public, public agencies, and other interested parties. The State may make the HUD-provided data available to the public by cross-referencing to the data on HUD's Web site.
            (ii) The citizen participation plan must require that, before the State adopts an AFH or consolidated plan, the State will make available to its residents, public agencies, and other interested parties information that includes the amount of assistance the State expects to receive and the range of activities that may be undertaken, including the estimated amount that will benefit persons of low- and moderate-income and the plans to minimize displacement of persons and to assist any persons displaced. The citizen participation plan must state when and how the State will make this information available.
            (2) The citizen participation plan must require the State to publish the proposed AFH and the proposed consolidated plan in a manner that affords residents, units of general local governments, public agencies, and other interested parties a reasonable opportunity to examine the document's content and to submit comments. The citizen participation plan must set forth how the State will make publicly available the proposed AFH and the proposed consolidated plan and give reasonable opportunity to examine each document's content. To ensure that the AFH, the consolidated plan, and the PHA plan are informed by meaningful community participation, program participants should employ communications means designed to reach the broadest audience. Such communications may be met by publishing a summary of each document in one or more newspapers of general circulation, and by making copies of each document available on the Internet, on the grantee's official government Web site, and as well at libraries, government offices, and public places. The summary must describe the content and purpose of the AFH or the consolidated plan (as applicable), and must include a list of the locations where copies of the entire proposed document(s) may be examined. In addition, the State must provide a reasonable number of free copies of the plan or the AFH (as applicable) to its residents and groups that request a copy of the plan or the AFH.
            (3) The citizen participation plan must provide for at least one public hearing on housing and community development needs and proposed strategies and actions for affirmatively furthering fair housing consistent with the AFH, before the proposed consolidated plan is published for comment. To obtain the public's views on AFH-related data and affirmatively furthering fair housing in the State's housing and community development programs, the citizen participation plan must provide that at least one public hearing is held before the proposed AFH is published for comment.
            (i) The citizen participation plan must state how and when adequate advance notice of the hearing will be given to residents, with sufficient information published about the subject of the hearing to permit informed comment. (Publishing small print notices in the newspaper a few days before the hearing does not constitute adequate notice. Although HUD is not specifying the length of notice required, HUD would consider 2 weeks adequate.)
            (ii) The citizen participation plan must provide that the hearing be held at a time and accessible location convenient to potential and actual beneficiaries, and with accommodation for persons with disabilities. The citizen participation plan must specify how it will meet these requirements.

            (iii) The citizen participation plan must identify how the needs of non-English speaking residents will be met in the case of a public hearing where a significant number of non-English speaking residents can be reasonably expected to participate.
            
            (4) The citizen participation plan must provide a period, of not less than 30 calendar days, to receive comments from residents and units of general local government on the consolidated plan or the AFH (as applicable).
            (5) The citizen participation plan shall require the State to consider any comments or views of its residents and units of general local government received in writing, or orally at the public hearings, in preparing the final AFH and the final consolidated plan. A summary of these comments or views, and a summary of any comments or views not accepted and the reasons therefore, shall be attached to the final AFH or the final consolidated plan (as applicable).
            (c) Amendments—(1)(i) Criteria for amendment to consolidated plan. The citizen participation plan must specify the criteria the State will use for determining what changes in the State's planned or actual activities constitute a substantial amendment to the consolidated plan. (See § 91.505.) The citizen participation plan must include, among the criteria for a consolidated plan, substantial amendment changes in the method of distribution of such funds.
            (ii) Criteria for revision to the AFH. The State must specify the criteria it will use for determining when revision to the AFH will be appropriate. (At a minimum, the specified criteria must include the situations described in 24 CFR 5.164.)
            (2) The citizen participation plan must provide residents and units of general local government with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on consolidated plan substantial amendments and any revision to the AFH. The citizen participation plan must state how reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment will be given. The citizen participation plan must provide a period, of not less than 30 calendar days, to receive comments on the consolidated plan substantial amendment or revision to the AFH before the consolidated plan substantial amendment is implemented or the revised AFH is submitted to HUD.
            (3) The citizen participation plan shall require the State to consider any comments or views of its residents and units of general local government received in writing, or orally at public hearings, if any, in preparing the substantial amendment of the consolidated plan or revision to the AFH (as applicable). A summary of these comments or views, and a summary of any comments or views not accepted and the reasons why, shall be attached to the substantial amendment of the consolidated plan or any revision to the AFH (as applicable).
            (d) Performance Reports. (1) The citizen participation plan must provide citizens with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on performance reports. The citizen participation plan must state how reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment will be given. The citizen participation plan must provide a period, not less than 15 days, to receive comments on the performance report that is to be submitted to HUD before its submission.
            (2) The citizen participation plan shall require the state to consider any comments or views of citizens received in writing, or orally at public hearings in preparing the performance report. A summary of these comments or views shall be attached to the performance report.
            (e) Citizen participation requirements for local governments. The citizen participation plan must describe the citizen participation requirements for units of general local government receiving CDBG funds from the State in 24 CFR 570.486. The citizen participation plan must explain how the requirements will be met.
            (f) Availability to the public. The citizen participation plan must provide that the consolidated plan as adopted, consolidated plan substantial amendments, the HUD-accepted AFH, any revision to the AFH, and the performance report will be available to the public, including the availability of materials in a form accessible to persons with disabilities, upon request. The citizen participation plan must state how these documents will be available to the public.
            (g) Access to records. The citizen participation plan must require the State to provide its residents, public agencies, and other interested parties with reasonable and timely access to information and records relating to the State's AFH, consolidated plan and use of assistance under the programs covered by this part during the preceding 5 years.
            (h) Complaints. The citizen participation plan shall describe the State's appropriate and practicable procedures to handle complaints from its residents related to the consolidated plan, consolidated plan amendments, the AFH, any revisions to the AFH, and the performance report. At a minimum, the citizen participation plan shall require that the State must provide a timely, substantive written response to every written resident complaint, within an established period of time (within 15 working days, where practicable, if the State is a CDBG grant recipient).
            (i) Use of citizen participation plan. The State must follow its citizen participation plan.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6963, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75968, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42363, July 16, 2015; 81 FR 91011, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Local Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan
          
            § 91.200
            General.
            (a) A complete consolidated plan consists of the information required in § 91.200 through § 91.230, submitted in accordance with instructions prescribed by HUD (including tables and narratives), or in such other format as jointly agreed upon by HUD and the jurisdiction. A comprehensive housing affordability strategy consists of the information required in § 91.200 through § 91.215(e), § 91.215(h) through § 91.215(l), § 91.220(c), § 91.220(g), § 91.225 and § 91.230.
            (b) The jurisdiction shall describe:
            (1) The lead agency or entity responsible for overseeing the development of the plan and the significant aspects of the process by which the consolidated plan was developed;
            (2) The identity of the agencies, groups, organizations, and others who participated in the process; and
            (3) A jurisdiction's consultations with:
            (i) The Continuum of Care that serves the jurisdiction's geographic area;
            (ii) Public and private agencies that address housing, health, social services, employment, or education needs of low-income individuals and families, of homeless individuals and families, of youth, and/or of other persons with special needs;
            (iii) Publicly funded institutions and systems of care that may discharge persons into homelessness (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions);
            (iv) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, public and private organizations, including broadband internet service providers and organizations engaged in narrowing the digital divide;
            (v) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, agencies whose primary responsibilities include the management of flood prone areas, public land or water resources, and emergency management agencies; and
            (vi) Other entities.
            (c) In order to facilitate citizen review and comment each year, the plan shall contain a concise executive summary that includes the objectives and outcomes identified in the plan as well as an evaluation of past performance. The plan shall also include a concise summary of the citizen participation process, public comments, and efforts made to broaden public participation in the development of the consolidated plan.
            [71 FR 6963, Feb. 9, 2006, as amended at 76 FR 75968, Dec. 5, 2011; 81 FR 91011, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.205
            Housing and homeless needs assessment.
            (a) General. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the jurisdiction's estimated housing needs projected for the ensuing five-year period. Housing data included in this portion of the plan shall be based on U.S. Census data, as provided by HUD, as updated by any properly conducted local study, or any other reliable source that the jurisdiction clearly identifies, and should reflect the consultation with social service agencies and other entities conducted in accordance with § 91.100 and the citizen participation process conducted in accordance with § 91.105. For a jurisdiction seeking funding on behalf of an eligible metropolitan statistical area under the HOPWA program, the needs described for housing and supportive services must address the unmet needs of low-income persons with HIV/AIDS and their families throughout the eligible metropolitan statistical area.
            (b) Categories of persons affected. (1)(i) The plan shall estimate the number and type of families in need of housing assistance for:
            (A) Extremely low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and middle-income families;
            (B) Renters and owners;
            (C) Elderly persons;
            (D) Single persons;
            (E) Large families;
            (F) Public housing residents;
            (G) Families on the public housing and Section 8 tenant-based waiting list;
            (H) Persons with HIV/AIDS and their families;
            (I) Victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking;
            (J) Persons with disabilities; and
            (K) Formerly homeless families and individuals who are receiving rapid re-housing assistance and are nearing the termination of that assistance.
            (ii) The description of housing needs shall include a concise summary of the cost burden and severe cost burden, overcrowding (especially for large families), and substandard housing conditions being experienced by extremely low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and middle-income renters and owners compared to the jurisdiction as a whole. (The jurisdiction must define in its consolidated plan the terms “standard condition” and “substandard condition but suitable for rehabilitation.”)
            (2) Until the jurisdiction has submitted an AFH, which includes an assessment of disproportionate housing needs in accordance with 24 CFR 5.154(d)(2)(iv), the following assessment shall continue to be included in the consolidated plan. For any of the income categories enumerated in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, to the extent that any racial or ethnic group has disproportionately greater need in comparison to the needs of that category as a whole, assessment of that specific need shall be included. For this purpose, disproportionately greater need exists when the percentage of persons in a category of need who are members of a particular racial or ethnic group in a category of need is at least 10 percentage points higher than the percentage of persons in the category as a whole. Once the jurisdiction has submitted an AFH, however, this assessment need not be included in the consolidated plan.
            (c) Persons who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. (1) The plan must describe, in a form prescribed by HUD, the nature and extent of unsheltered and sheltered homelessness, including rural homelessness, within the jurisdiction. At a minimum, the recipient must use data from the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) and data from the Point-In-Time (PIT) count conducted in accordance with HUD standards.
            (i) The description must include, for each category of homeless persons specified by HUD (including chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth), the number of persons experiencing homelessness on a given night, the number of persons who experience homelessness each year, the number of persons who lose their housing and become homeless each year, the number of persons who exit homelessness each year, the number of days that persons experience homelessness, and other measures specified by HUD.
            (ii) The plan also must contain a brief narrative description of the nature and extent of homelessness by racial and ethnic group, to the extent information is available.

            (2) The plan must include a narrative description of the characteristics and needs of low-income individuals and families with children (especially extremely low-income) who are currently housed but threatened with homelessness. This information may be evidenced by the characteristics and needs of individuals and families with children who are currently entering the homeless assistance system or appearing for the first time on the streets. The description must also specify particular housing characteristics that have been linked with instability and an increased risk of homelessness.
            (d) Other special needs. (1) The jurisdiction shall estimate, to the extent practicable, the number of persons who are not homeless but require supportive housing, including the elderly, frail elderly, persons with disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons with alcohol or other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, public housing residents, and any other categories the jurisdiction may specify, and describe their supportive housing needs.
            (2) With respect to a jurisdiction seeking funding on behalf of an eligible metropolitan statistical area under the HOPWA program, the plan must identify the size and characteristics of the population with HIV/AIDS and their families within the eligible metropolitan statistical area it will serve.
            (e) Lead-based paint hazards. The plan must estimate the number of housing units within the jurisdiction that are occupied by low-income families or moderate-income families that contain lead-based paint hazards, as defined in this part.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 51760, Oct. 3, 1996; 71 FR 6963, Feb. 9, 2006; 73 FR 72342, Nov. 28, 2008; 75 FR 66260, Oct. 27, 2010; 76 FR 75968, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42364, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.210
            Housing market analysis.
            (a) General characteristics. (1) Based on information available to the jurisdiction, the plan must describe the significant characteristics of the jurisdiction's housing market, including the supply, demand, and condition and cost of housing and the housing stock available to serve persons with disabilities, and to serve other low-income persons with special needs, including persons with HIV/AIDS and their families.
            (2) Data on the housing market should include, to the extent information is available, an estimate of the number of vacant or abandoned buildings and whether units in these buildings are suitable for rehabilitation.
            (3) The jurisdiction must also identify and describe any areas within the jurisdiction with concentrations of racial/ethnic minorities and/or low-income families, stating how it defines the terms “area of low-income concentration” and “area of minority concentration” for this purpose. The locations and degree of these concentrations must be identified, either in a narrative or on one or more maps.
            (4) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, the jurisdiction must also describe the broadband needs of housing occupied by low- and moderate-income households based on an analysis of data, identified by the jurisdiction, for its low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. These needs include the need for broadband wiring and for connection to the broadband service in the household units and the need for increased competition by having more than one broadband Internet service provider serve the jurisdiction.
            (5) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, the jurisdiction must also describe the vulnerability of housing occupied by low- and moderate-income households to increased natural hazard risks associated with climate change based on an analysis of data, findings, and methods identified by the jurisdiction in its consolidated plan.
            (b) Public and assisted housing. (1) The plan must describe and identify the public housing developments and the number of public housing units in the jurisdiction, the physical condition of such units, the restoration and revitalization needs, results from the Section 504 needs assessment (i.e., assessment of needs of tenants and applicants on waiting list for accessible units, as required by 24 CFR 8.25), and the public housing agency's strategy for improving the management and operation of such public housing and for improving the living environment of low- and moderate-income families residing in public housing. The consolidated plan must identify the public housing developments in the jurisdictions that are participating in an approved PHA Plan.
            (2) The jurisdiction shall include a description of the number and targeting (income level and type of family served) of units currently assisted by local, state, or federally funded programs, and an assessment of whether any such units are expected to be lost from the assisted housing inventory for any reason, such as expiration of Section 8 contracts.
            (c) Facilities, housing, and services for homeless persons. The plan must include a brief inventory of facilities, housing, and services that meet the needs of homeless persons within the jurisdiction, particularly chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth.
            (1) The inventory of facilities and housing (e.g., emergency shelter, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing) must be presented in a form specified by HUD.
            (2) The inventory of services must include both services targeted to homeless persons and mainstream services, such as health, mental health, and employment services to the extent those services are used to complement services targeted to homeless persons.
            (d) Special need facilities and services. The plan must describe, to the extent information is available, the facilities and services that assist persons who are not homeless but who require supportive housing, and programs for ensuring that persons returning from mental and physical health institutions receive appropriate supportive housing.
            (e) Barriers to affordable housing. The plan must explain whether the cost of housing or the incentives to develop, maintain, or improve affordable housing in the jurisdiction are affected by public policies, particularly by policies of the jurisdiction, including tax policies affecting land and other property, land use controls, zoning ordinances, building codes, fees and charges, growth limits, and policies that affect the return on residential investment.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6964, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75969, Dec. 5, 2011; 81 FR 91012, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.215
            Strategic plan.
            (a) General. For the categories described in paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this section, the consolidated plan must do the following:
            (1) Indicate the general priorities for allocating investment geographically within the jurisdiction (or within the EMSA for the HOPWA program) and among different activities and needs, as identified in tables prescribed by HUD.
            (2) Describe the rationale for establishing the allocation priorities given to each category of priority needs, particularly among extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income households;
            (3) Identify any obstacles to meeting underserved needs;
            (4) Summarize the priorities and specific objectives the jurisdiction intends to initiate and/or complete during the time period covered by the strategic plan and how funds that are reasonably expected to be available will be used to address identified needs. For each specific objective statement, identify proposed accomplishments and outcomes the jurisdiction hopes to achieve in quantitative terms over a specified time period (e.g., one, two, three or more years), or in other measurable terms as identified and defined by the jurisdiction. This information is to be provided in accordance with guidance to be issued by HUD.
            (5)(i) Describe how the priorities and specific objectives of the jurisdiction under paragraph (a)(4) of this section will affirmatively further fair housing by setting forth strategies and actions consistent with the goals and other elements identified in an AFH conducted in accordance with 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180.

            (ii) For AFH goals not addressed by these priorities and objectives, identify any additional objectives and priorities for affirmatively furthering fair housing.
            
            (b) Affordable housing. With respect to affordable housing, the consolidated plan must include the priority housing needs table prescribed by HUD and must do the following:
            (1) The affordable housing section shall describe how the characteristics of the housing market and the severity of housing problems and needs of extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income renters and owners, persons at risk of homelessness, and homeless persons identified in accordance with § 91.205 provided the rationale for establishing allocation priorities and use of funds made available for rental assistance, production of new units, rehabilitation of existing units, or acquisition of existing units (including preserving affordable housing units that may be lost from the assisted housing inventory for any reason). Household and income types may be grouped together for discussion where the analysis would apply to more than one of them. If the jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for tenant-based assistance, the jurisdiction must specify local market conditions that led to the choice of that option.
            (2) The affordable housing section shall include specific objectives that describe proposed accomplishments the jurisdiction hopes to achieve and must specify the number of extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income families to whom the jurisdiction will provide affordable housing as defined in 24 CFR 92.252 for rental housing, 24 CFR 92.254 for homeownership, and 24 CFR 93.302 and 24 CFR 93.304 (if the jurisdiction receives HTF funds from the State) over a specific time period.
            (c) Public housing. The consolidated plan must describe the manner in which the plan of the jurisdiction will address the needs of public housing, including the need to increase the number of accessible units where required by a Section 504 Voluntarily Compliance Agreement. The consolidated plan must also describe the jurisdiction's activities to encourage public housing residents to become more involved in management and participate in homeownership. If the public housing agency is designated as “troubled” by HUD under 24 CFR part 902, the jurisdiction must describe the manner in which it will provide financial or other assistance to improve its operations and remove the “troubled” designation.
            (d) Homelessness. The consolidated plan must include the priority homeless needs table prescribed by HUD and must describe the jurisdiction's strategy for reducing and ending homelessness through:
            (1) Reaching out to homeless persons (especially unsheltered persons) and assessing their individual needs;
            (2) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs of homeless persons;
            (3) Helping homeless persons (especially chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) make the transition to permanent housing and independent living, including shortening the period of time individuals and families experience homelessness, facilitating access for homeless individuals and families to affordable housing units, and preventing individuals and families who were recently homeless from becoming homeless again; and
            (4) Helping low-income individuals and families avoid becoming homeless, especially extremely low-income individuals and families who are:
            (i) Likely to become homeless after being discharged from publicly funded institutions and systems of care into homelessness (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions) or
            (ii) Receiving assistance from public and private agencies that address housing, health, social services, employment, education, or youth needs.
            (e) Other special needs. With respect to special needs of the non-homeless, the consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the priority housing and supportive service needs of persons who are not homeless but who may or may not require supportive housing (i.e., elderly, frail elderly, persons with disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons with alcohol or other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and public housing residents). If the jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for tenant-based assistance to assist one or more of these subpopulations, it must specify local market conditions that led to the choice of this option.
            (f) Nonhousing community development plan. If the jurisdiction seeks assistance under the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, the consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the jurisdiction's priority non-housing community development needs eligible for assistance under HUD's community development programs by CDBG eligibility category, in accordance with a table prescribed by HUD. This community development component of the plan must state the jurisdiction's specific long-term and short-term community development objectives (including economic development activities that create jobs), which must be developed in accordance with the primary objective of the CDBG program to develop viable urban communities by providing decent housing and a suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities, principally for low-income and moderate-income persons.
            (g) Neighborhood Revitalization. Jurisdictions are encouraged to identify locally designated areas where geographically targeted revitalization efforts are carried out through multiple activities in a concentrated and coordinated manner. In addition, a jurisdiction may elect to carry out a HUD-approved neighborhood revitalization strategy that includes the economic empowerment of low-income residents with respect to one or more of its areas. If HUD approves such a strategy, the jurisdiction can obtain greater flexibility in the use of the CDBG funds in the revitalization area(s) as described in 24 CFR part 570, subpart C. This strategy must identify long-term and short-term objectives (e.g., physical improvements, social initiatives and economic empowerment), expressing them in terms of measures of outputs and outcomes the jurisdiction expects to achieve in the neighborhood through the use of HUD programs.
            (h) Barriers to affordable housing. The consolidated plan must describe the jurisdiction's strategy to remove or ameliorate negative effects of public policies that serve as barriers to affordable housing, as identified in accordance with § 91.210(e), except that, if a State requires a unit of general local government to submit a regulatory barrier assessment that is substantially equivalent to the information required under this paragraph (h), as determined by HUD, the unit of general local government may submit its assessment submitted to the State to HUD and shall be considered to have complied with this requirement.
            (i) Lead-based paint hazards. The consolidated plan must outline actions proposed or being taken to evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards and increase access to housing without such health hazards, how the plan for the reduction of lead-based hazards is related to the extent of lead poisoning and hazards, and how the plan for the reduction of lead-based hazards will be integrated into housing policies and programs.
            (j) Anti-poverty strategy. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the jurisdiction's goals, programs, and policies for reducing the number of poverty-level families and how the jurisdiction's goals, programs, and policies for producing and preserving affordable housing, set forth in the housing component of the consolidated plan, will be coordinated with other programs and services for which the jurisdiction is responsible and the extent to which they will reduce (or assist in reducing) the number of poverty-level families, taking into consideration factors over which the jurisdiction has control. These policies may include the jurisdiction's policies for providing employment and training opportunities to section 3 residents pursuant to 24 CFR part 135.
            (k) Institutional structure. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the institutional structure, including private industry; nonprofit organizations; community and faith-based organizations; philanthropic organizations; the Continuum of Care; and public institutions, departments and agencies through which the jurisdiction will carry out its housing, homeless, and community development plan; a brief assessment of the strengths and gaps in that delivery system; and a concise summary of what the jurisdiction will do to overcome gaps in the institutional structure for carrying out its strategy for addressing its priority needs.
            (l) Coordination. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the jurisdiction's activities to enhance coordination among the Continuum of Care, public and assisted housing providers, and private and governmental health, mental health, and service agencies. The summary must address the jurisdiction's efforts to coordinate housing assistance and services for homeless persons (especially chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) and persons who were recently homeless but now live in permanent housing. With respect to the public entities involved, the plan must describe the means of cooperation and coordination among the State and any units of general local government in the metropolitan area in the implementation of its consolidated plan. With respect to economic development, the jurisdiction should describe efforts to enhance coordination with private industry, businesses, developers, and social service agencies.
            [71 FR 6964, Feb. 9, 2006, as amended at 76 FR 75969, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 5219, Jan. 30, 2015; 80 FR 42364, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.220
            Action plan.
            The action plan must include the following:
            (a) Standard Form 424;
            (b) A concise executive summary that includes the objectives and outcomes identified in the plan as well as an evaluation of past performance, a summary of the citizen participation and consultation process (including efforts to broaden public participation) (24 CFR 91.200 (b)), a summary of comments or views, and a summary of comments or views not accepted and the reasons therefore (24 CFR 91.105 (b)(5)).
            (c) Resources and objectives—(1) Federal resources. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the federal resources (including grant funds and program income) expected to be made available. Federal resources should include Section 8 funds made available to jurisdictions, Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, and competitive McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act funds, expected to be available to address priority needs and specific objectives identified in the strategic plan.
            (2) Other resources. The consolidated plan must indicate resources from private and state and local sources that are reasonably expected to be made available to address the needs identified in the plan. The plan must explain how federal funds will leverage those additional resources, including a description of how matching requirements of the HUD programs will be satisfied. Where the jurisdiction deems it appropriate, the jurisdiction may indicate publicly owned land or property located within the jurisdiction that may be used to address the needs identified in the plan;
            (3) Annual objectives. The consolidated plan must contain a summary of the annual objectives the jurisdiction expects to achieve during the forthcoming program year.
            (d) Activities to be undertaken. The action plan must provide a description of the activities the jurisdiction will undertake during the next year to address priority needs and objectives. This description of activities shall estimate the number and type of families that will benefit from the proposed activities, the specific local objectives and priority needs (identified in accordance with § 91.215) that will be addressed by the activities using formula grant funds and program income the jurisdiction expects to receive during the program year, proposed accomplishments, and a target date for completion of the activity. This information is to be presented in the form of a table prescribed by HUD. The plan must also describe the reasons for the allocation priorities and identify any obstacles to addressing underserved needs;
            (e) Outcome measures. Each jurisdiction must provide outcome measures for activities included in its action plan in accordance with guidance to be issued by HUD.
            
            (f) Geographic distribution. A description of the geographic areas of the jurisdiction (including areas of low-income and minority concentration) in which it will direct assistance during the ensuing program year, giving the rationale for the priorities for allocating investment geographically. When appropriate, jurisdictions should estimate the percentage of funds they plan to dedicate to target areas.
            (g) Affordable housing. The jurisdiction must specify one-year goals for the number of homeless, non-homeless, and special-needs households to be provided affordable housing using funds made available to the jurisdiction and one-year goals for the number of households to be provided affordable housing through activities that provide rental assistance, production of new units, rehabilitation of existing units, or acquisition of existing units using funds made available to the jurisdiction. The term affordable housing shall be as defined in 24 CFR 92.252 for rental housing and 24 CFR 92.254 for homeownership.
            (h) Public housing. Actions it plans to take during the next year to address the needs of public housing and actions to encourage public housing residents to become more involved in management and participate in homeownership. If the public housing agency is designated as “troubled” by HUD under part 902 of this title, the jurisdiction must describe the manner in which it will provide financial or other assistance to improve its operations and remove the “troubled” designation.
            (i) Homeless and other special needs activities. (1) The jurisdiction must describe its one-year goals and specific actions steps for reducing and ending homelessness through:
            (i) Reaching out to homeless persons (especially unsheltered persons) and assessing their individual needs;
            (ii) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs of homeless persons; and
            (iii) Helping homeless persons (especially chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) make the transition to permanent housing and independent living, including shortening the period of time that individuals and families experience homelessness, facilitating access for homeless individuals and families to affordable housing units, and preventing individuals and families who were recently homeless from becoming homeless again; and
            (iv) Helping low-income individuals and families avoid becoming homeless, especially extremely low-income individuals and families who are:
            (A) Being discharged from publicly funded institutions and systems of care, such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions; or
            (B) Receiving assistance from public and private agencies that address housing, health, social services, employment, education, or youth needs.
            (2) The jurisdiction must specify the activities that it plans to undertake during the next year to address the housing and supportive service needs identified in accordance with § 91.215(e) with respect to persons who are not homeless but have other special needs.
            (j) Barriers to affordable housing. Actions it plans to take during the next year to remove or ameliorate the negative effects of public policies that serve as barriers to affordable housing. Such policies, procedures and processes include, but are not limited to, land use controls, tax policies affecting land, zoning ordinances, building codes, fees and charges, growth limitations, and policies affecting the return on residential investment.
            (k)(1) Affirmatively furthering fair housing. Actions it plans to take during the next year that address fair housing goals identified in the AFH.
            (2) Other actions. Actions it plans to take during the next year to address obstacles to meeting underserved needs, foster and maintain affordable housing, evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards, reduce the number of poverty-level families, develop institutional structure, and enhance coordination between public and private housing and social service agencies (see § 91.215(a), (b), (i), (j), (k), and (l)).
            (l) Program-specific requirements—(1) CDBG. (i) A jurisdiction must describe activities planned with respect to all CDBG funds expected to be available during the program year, except that an amount generally not to exceed 10 percent of such total available CDBG funds may be excluded from the funds for which eligible activities are described if it has been identified for the contingency of cost overruns.
            (ii) “CDBG funds expected to be available during the program year” includes all of the following:
            (A) The CDBG origin year grant.
            (B) Any program income expected to be received during the program year.
            (C) Any program income amounts not included in a prior action plan.
            (D) Any program income previously generated under a lump sum drawdown agreement for which a new agreement will be executed during the program year pursuant to 24 CFR 570.513(b).
            (E) Proceeds from Section 108 loan guarantees that will be used during the year to address the priority needs and specific objectives identified in its strategic plan.
            (F) Surplus from urban renewal settlements.
            (G) Reimbursements, other than program income, made to a local account.
            (H) Income from float-funded activities: The full amount of income expected to be generated by a float-funded activity must be shown, whether or not some or all of the income is expected to be received in a future program year. To assure that citizens understand the risks inherent in undertaking float-funded activities, the recipient must specify the total amount of program income expected to be received and the month(s) and year(s) that it expects the float-funded activity to generate such program income.
            (iii) An “urgent needs” activity (one that is expected to qualify under § 570.208(c) of this title) may be included only if the jurisdiction identifies the activity in the action plan and certifies that the activity is designed to meet other community development needs having a particular urgency because existing conditions pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or welfare of the community and because other financial resources are not available.
            (iv) The plan shall identify the estimated amount of CDBG funds that will be used for activities that benefit persons of low- and moderate-income. The information about activities shall be in sufficient detail, including location, to allow citizens to determine the degree to which they are affected.
            (2) HOME. (i) The HOME program resources that the participating jurisdiction must describe in the action plan are the fiscal year HOME allocation plus the amount of program income, repayments, and recaptured funds in the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local account (see 24 CFR 92.500(c)(1)) at the beginning of the participating jurisdiction's program year. The jurisdiction may choose to include program income, repayments, and recaptured funds that are expected to be received during the program year if the jurisdiction plans to commit these funds during the program year.
            (ii) For HOME funds, a participating jurisdiction shall describe other forms of investment that are not described in 24 CFR 92.205(b). HUD's specific written approval to the jurisdiction is required for other forms of investment, as provided in § 92.205(b). Approval of the consolidated plan or action plan under § 91.500 or the failure to disapprove the consolidated plan or action plan does not satisfy the requirement for specific HUD approval for other forms of investment.
            (iii) If the participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for homebuyers, it must set forth the guidelines for resale or recapture, and obtain HUD's specific, written approval, as required in 24 CFR 92.254. Approval of the consolidated plan or action plan under § 91.500 or the failure to disapprove the consolidated plan or action does not satisfy the requirement for specific HUD approval for resale or recapture guidelines.

            (iv) If the participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds to refinance existing debt secured by multifamily housing that is being rehabilitated with HOME funds, it must state its refinancing guidelines required under 24 CFR 92.206(b). The guidelines shall describe the conditions under which the participating jurisdictions will refinance existing debt. At minimum, the guidelines must:
            
            (A) Demonstrate that rehabilitation is the primary eligible activity and ensure that this requirement is met by establishing a minimum level of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between rehabilitation and refinancing.
            (B) Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that disinvestment in the property has not occurred; that the long-term needs of the project can be met; and that the feasibility of serving the targeted population over an extended affordability period can be demonstrated.
            (C) State whether the new investment is being made to maintain current affordable units, create additional affordable units, or both.
            (D) Specify the required period of affordability, whether it is the minimum 15 years or longer.
            (E) Specify whether the investment of HOME funds may be jurisdiction-wide or limited to a specific geographic area, such as a neighborhood identified in a neighborhood revitalization strategy under 24 CFR 91.215(g) or a federally designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community.
            (F) State that HOME funds cannot be used to refinance multifamily loans made or insured by any federal program, including CDBG.
            (v) If the participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for homebuyer assistance or for rehabilitation of owner-occupied single family housing and does not use the HOME affordable homeownership limits for the area provided by HUD, it must determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price and set forth the information in accordance with 24 CFR 92.254(a)(2)(iii).
            (vi) The jurisdiction must describe eligible applicants (e.g., categories of eligible applicants), describe its process for soliciting and funding applications or proposals (e.g., competition, first-come first-serve) and state where detailed information may be obtained (e.g., application packages are available at the office of the jurisdiction or on the jurisdiction's Web site).
            (vii) The participating jurisdiction may limit the beneficiaries or give preferences to a particular segment of the low-income population only if described in the action plan.
            (A) Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 92.350, and the participating jurisdiction must not limit or give preferences to students.
            (B) A limitation or preference may include, in addition to targeting tenant- based rental assistance to persons with special needs, as provided in 24 CFR 92.209(c)(2), limiting beneficiaries or giving preferences to such professions as police officers, teachers, or artists.
            (C) The participating jurisdiction must not limit beneficiaries or give a preference to all employees of the jurisdiction.
            (D) The participating jurisdiction may permit rental housing owners to limit tenants or give a preference in accordance with 24 CFR 92.253(d) only if such limitation or preference is described in the action plan.
            (viii) If the participating jurisdiction will receive funding under the American Dream Downpayment Initiative (ADDI) (see 24 CFR part 92, subpart M), it must include:
            (A) A description of the planned use of the ADDI funds;
            (B) A plan for conducting targeted outreach to residents and tenants of public and manufactured housing and to other families assisted by public housing agencies, for the purposes of ensuring that the ADDI funds are used to provide downpayment assistance for such residents, tenants, and families; and
            (C) A description of the actions to be taken to ensure the suitability of families receiving ADDI funds to undertake and maintain homeownership.
            (3) HOPWA. For HOPWA funds, the jurisdiction must specify one-year goals for the number of households to be provided housing through the use of HOPWA activities for: short-term rent, mortgage, and utility assistance payments to prevent homelessness of the individual or family; tenant-based rental assistance; and units provided in housing facilities that are being developed, leased, or operated with HOPWA funds and shall identify the method of selecting project sponsors (including providing full access to grassroots faith-based and other community organizations).
            
            (4) ESG. (i) The jurisdiction must include its written standards for providing ESG assistance. The minimum requirements regarding these standards are set forth in 24 CFR 576.400(e)(1) and (e)(3).
            (ii) If the Continuum of Care for the jurisdiction's area has established a centralized or coordinated assessment system that meets HUD requirements, the jurisdiction must describe that centralized or coordinated assessment system. The requirements for using a centralized or coordinated assessment system, including the exception for victim service providers, are set forth under 24 CFR 576.400(d).
            (iii) The jurisdiction must identify its process for making subawards and a description of how the jurisdiction intends to make its allocation available to private nonprofit organizations (including community and faith-based organizations), and in the case of urban counties, funding to participating units of local government.
            (iv) If the jurisdiction is unable to meet the homeless participation requirement in 24 CFR 576.405(a), the jurisdiction must specify its plan for reaching out to and consulting with homeless or formerly homeless individuals in considering and making policies and decisions regarding any facilities or services that receive funding under ESG.
            (v) The jurisdiction must describe the performance standards for evaluating ESG activities.
            (vi) The jurisdiction must describe its consultation with each Continuum of Care that serves the jurisdiction in determining how to allocate ESG funds each program year; developing the performance standards for, and evaluating the outcomes of, projects and activities assisted by ESG funds; and developing funding, policies, and procedures for the administration and operation of the HMIS.
            (5) Housing Trust Fund. (i) If the jurisdiction receives HTF funds from the State under 24 CFR 93.105, the action plan must include the HTF allocation plan (consistent with the State's HTF requirements) that describes the distribution of the HTF funds, and establishes the application requirements and the criteria for selection of applications submitted by eligible recipients that meet the jurisdiction's priority housing needs. The plan must include the following:
            (A) The plan must identify priority factors for funding that shall include the following: geographic distribution which is a description of the geographic areas of the State (including areas of low-income and minority concentration) in which it will direct assistance during the ensuing program year; the applicant's ability to obligate HTF funds and undertake eligible activities in a timely manner; in the case of rental housing projects, the extent to which rents for units in the project are affordable to extremely low-income families; in the case of rental housing projects, the duration of the units' affordability period; the merits of the application in meeting the priority housing needs of the jurisdiction (such as housing that is accessible to transit or employment centers, housing that includes green building and sustainable development features, and housing that serves special needs populations); the location of existing affordable housing, and the extent to which the application makes use of non-federal funding sources.
            (B) The plan must include the requirement that the application contain a description of the eligible activities to be conducted with the HTF funds (as provided in 24 CFR 93.200) and contain a certification by each eligible recipient that housing units assisted with the HTF will comply with HTF requirements. The plan must also describe eligibility requirements for recipients (as defined in 24 CFR 93.2).
            (C) The plan must provide for performance goals, consistent with the jurisdiction's goals established under 24 CFR 91.215(b)(2).
            (D) The plan must provide the jurisdiction's rehabilitation standards, as required by 24 CFR 93.301(b).

            (E) If the jurisdiction intends to use HTF funds for first-time homebuyers, it must set forth the guidelines for resale or recapture, and obtain HUD's specific, written approval, as required in § 93.304(f). Approval of the consolidated plan or action plan under § 91.500 or the failure to disapprove the consolidated plan or action plan does not satisfy the requirement for specific HUD approval for resale or recapture guidelines.
            (F) If the jurisdiction intends to use HTF funds for homebuyer assistance and does not use the HTF affordable homeownership limits for the area provided by HUD, it must determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price and set forth the information in accordance with § 93.305.
            (G) The jurisdiction may limit the beneficiaries or give preferences to a particular segment of the extremely low- or very low-income population only if described in the action plan.
            (1) Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 93.350, and the jurisdiction must not limit or give preferences to students.
            (2) The jurisdiction may permit rental housing owners to limit tenants or give a preference in accordance with 24 CFR 93.303 only if such limitation or preference is described in the action plan.
            (H) The plan must describe the conditions under which the jurisdiction will refinance existing rental housing project debt.
            (ii) [Reserved].
            [71 FR 6965, Feb. 9, 2006, as amended at 76 FR 75970, Dec. 5, 2011; 78 FR 44663, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 5219, Jan. 30, 2015; 80 FR 42364, July 16, 2015; 80 FR 69869, Nov. 12, 2015; 81 FR 86951, Dec. 2, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.225
            Certifications.
            (a) General. The following certifications, satisfactory to HUD, must be included in the annual submission to HUD. (See definition of “certification” in § 91.5.)
            (1) Affirmatively furthering fair housing. Each jurisdiction is required to submit a certification that it will affirmatively further fair housing, which means that it will take meaningful actions to further the goals identified in the AFH conducted in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180, and that it will take no action that is materially inconsistent with its obligation to affirmatively further fair housing.
            (2) Anti-displacement and relocation plan. Each jurisdiction is required to submit a certification that it has in effect and is following a residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan in connection with any activity assisted with funding under the CDBG or HOME programs.
            (3) Anti-lobbying. The jurisdiction must submit a certification with regard to compliance with restrictions on lobbying required by 24 CFR part 87, together with disclosure forms, if required by that part.
            (4) Authority of jurisdiction. The jurisdiction must submit a certification that the consolidated plan is authorized under State and local law (as applicable) and that the jurisdiction possesses the legal authority to carry out the programs for which it is seeking funding, in accordance with applicable HUD regulations.
            (5) Consistency with plan. The jurisdiction must submit a certification that the housing activities to be undertaken with CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA funds are consistent with the strategic plan. Where the HOPWA funds are to be received by a city that is the most populous unit of general local government in an EMSA, it must obtain and keep on file certifications of consistency from the authorized public officials for each other locality in the EMSA in which housing assistance is provided.
            (6) Acquisition and relocation. The jurisdiction must submit a certification that it will comply with the acquisition and relocation requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4601), and implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24.
            (7) Section 3. The jurisdiction must submit a certification that it will comply with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u), and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135.
            (b) Community Development Block Grant program. For jurisdictions that seek funding under CDBG, the following certifications are required:
            (1) Citizen participation. Each jurisdiction must certify that it is in full compliance and following a detailed citizen participation plan that satisfies the requirements of § 91.105.
            (2) Community development plan. A certification that this consolidated housing and community development plan identifies community development and housing needs and specifies both short-term and long-term community development objectives that have been developed in accordance with the primary objective of the statute authorizing the CDBG program, as described in 24 CFR 570.2, and requirements of this part and 24 CFR part 570.
            (3) Following a plan. A certification that the jurisdiction is following a current consolidated plan (or Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy) that has been approved by HUD.
            (4) Use of funds. A certification that the jurisdiction has complied with the following criteria:
            (i) With respect to activities expected to be assisted with CDBG funds, the Action Plan has been developed so as to give the maximum feasible priority to activities that will benefit low- and moderate-income families or aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight. The plan may also include CDBG-assisted activities that are certified to be designed to meet other community development needs having particular urgency because existing conditions pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or welfare of the community where other financial resources are not available to meet such needs;
            (ii) The aggregate use of CDBG funds, including section 108 guaranteed loans, during a period specified by the jurisdiction, consisting of one, two, or three specific consecutive program years, shall principally benefit low- and moderate-income families in a manner that ensures that at least 70 percent of the amount is expended for activities that benefit such persons during the designated period (see 24 CFR 570.3 for definition of “CDBG funds”); and
            (iii) The jurisdiction will not attempt to recover any capital costs of public improvements assisted with CDBG funds, including Section 108 loan guaranteed funds, by assessing any amount against properties owned and occupied by persons of low- and moderate-income, including any fee charged or assessment made as a condition of obtaining access to such public improvements. However, if CDBG funds are used to pay the proportion of a fee or assessment attributable to the capital costs of public improvements (assisted in part with CDBG funds) financed from other revenue sources, an assessment or charge may be made against the property with respect to the public improvements financed by a source other than CDBG funds. In addition, with respect to properties owned and occupied by moderate-income (but not low-income) families, an assessment or charge may be made against the property with respect to the public improvements financed by a source other than CDBG funds if the jurisdiction certifies that it lacks CDBG funds to cover the assessment.
            (5) Excessive force. A certification that the jurisdiction has adopted and is enforcing:
            (i) A policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by law enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individuals engaged in non-violent civil rights demonstrations; and
            (ii) A policy of enforcing applicable State and local laws against physically barring entrance to or exit from, a facility or location that is the subject of such non-violent civil rights demonstrations within its jurisdiction.
            (6) Compliance with anti-discrimination laws. The jurisdiction must submit a certification that the grant will be conducted and administered in conformity with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d), the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619), and implementing regulations.
            (7) Compliance with lead-based paint procedures. The jurisdiction must submit a certification that its activities concerning lead-based paint will comply with the requirements of part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, and R of this title.
            (8) Compliance with laws. A certification that the jurisdiction will comply with applicable laws.
            (c) ESG. For jurisdictions that seek ESG funding under 24 CFR part 576, the following certifications are required:

            (1) If an emergency shelter's rehabilitation costs exceed 75 percent of the value of the building before rehabilitation, the jurisdiction will maintain the building as a shelter for homeless individuals and families for a minimum of 10 years after the date the building is first occupied by a homeless individual or family after the completed rehabilitation;
            (2) If the cost to convert a building into an emergency shelter exceeds 75 percent of the value of the building after conversion, the jurisdiction will maintain the building as a shelter for homeless individuals and families for a minimum of 10 years after the date the building is first occupied by a homeless individual or family after the completed conversion;
            (3) In all other cases where ESG funds are used for renovation, the jurisdiction will maintain the building as a shelter for homeless individuals and families for a minimum of 3 years after the date the building is first occupied by a homeless individual or family after the completed renovation;

            (4) In the case of assistance involving shelter operations or essential services related to street outreach or emergency shelter, the jurisdiction will provide services or shelter to homeless individuals and families for the period during which the ESG assistance is provided, without regard to a particular site or structure, so long as the jurisdiction serves the same type of persons (e.g., families with children, unaccompanied youth, disabled individuals, or victims of domestic violence) or persons in the same geographic area;
            (5) Any renovation carried out with ESG assistance shall be sufficient to ensure that the building involved is safe and sanitary;
            (6) The jurisdiction will assist homeless individuals in obtaining permanent housing, appropriate supportive services (including medical and mental health treatment, victim services, counseling, supervision, and other services essential for achieving independent living), and other Federal, State, local, and private assistance available for these individuals;
            (7) The jurisdiction will obtain matching amounts required under 24 CFR 576.201;
            (8) The jurisdiction has established and is implementing procedures to ensure the confidentiality of records pertaining to any individual provided family violence prevention or treatment services under any project assisted under the ESG program, including protection against the release of the address or location of any family violence shelter project, except with the written authorization of the person responsible for the operation of that shelter;
            (9) To the maximum extent practicable, the jurisdiction will involve, through employment, volunteer services, or otherwise, homeless individuals and families in constructing, renovating, maintaining, and operating facilities assisted under the ESG program, in providing services assisted under the program, and in providing services for occupants of facilities assisted under the program;
            (10) All activities the jurisdiction undertakes with assistance under ESG are consistent with the jurisdiction's consolidated plan; and
            (11) The jurisdiction will establish and implement, to the maximum extent practicable and where appropriate, policies and protocols for the discharge of persons from publicly funded institutions or systems of care (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care or other youth facilities, or correction programs and institutions) in order to prevent this discharge from immediately resulting in homelessness for these persons.
            (d) HOME program. Each participating jurisdiction must provide the following certifications:
            (1) If it plans to use HOME funds for tenant-based rental assistance, a certification that rental-based assistance is an essential element of its consolidated plan;
            (2) A certification that it is using and will use HOME funds for eligible activities and costs, as described in §§ 92.205 through 92.209 of this subtitle and that it is not using and will not use HOME funds for prohibited activities, as described in § 92.214 of this subtitle; and

            (3) A certification that before committing funds to a project, the participating jurisdiction will evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines that it adopts for this purpose and will not invest any more HOME funds in combination with other federal assistance than is necessary to provide affordable housing.
            (e) Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS. For jurisdictions that seek funding under the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS program, a certification is required by the jurisdiction that:
            (1) Activities funded under the program will meet urgent needs that are not being met by available public and private sources; and
            (2) Any building or structure assisted under that program shall be operated for the purpose specified in the plan:
            (i) For a period of not less than 10 years in the case of assistance involving new construction, substantial rehabilitation, or acquisition of a facility; or
            (ii) For a period of not less than three years in the case of assistance involving non-substantial rehabilitation or repair of a building or structure.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995, as amended at 64 FR 50224, Sept. 15, 1999; 71 FR 6967, Feb. 9, 2006; 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007; 76 FR 75970, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.230
            Monitoring.
            The plan must describe the standards and procedures that the jurisdiction will use to monitor activities carried out in furtherance of the plan, including strategies and actions that address the fair housing issues and goals identified in the AFH, and that the jurisdiction will use to ensure long-term compliance with requirements of the programs involved, including civil rights related program requirements, minority business outreach, and the comprehensive planning requirements.
            [80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.235
            Special case; abbreviated consolidated plan.
            (a) Who may submit an abbreviated plan? A jurisdiction that is not a CDBG entitlement community under 24 CFR part 570, subpart D, and is not expected to be a participating jurisdiction in the HOME program under 24 CFR part 92, as well as an Insular Area that is a HOME or CDBG grantee, may submit an abbreviated consolidated plan that is appropriate to the types and amounts of assistance sought from HUD, instead of a full consolidated plan.
            (b) When is an abbreviated plan necessary?—(1) Jurisdiction. When a jurisdiction that is permitted to use an abbreviated plan applies to HUD for funds under a program that requires an approved consolidated plan (see § 91.2(b)), it must obtain approval of an abbreviated plan (or full consolidated plan) and submit a certification that the housing activities are consistent with the plan.
            (2) Other applicants. When an eligible applicant other than a jurisdiction (e.g., a public housing agency or nonprofit organization) seeks to apply for funding under a program requiring certification of consistency with an approved consolidated plan, the jurisdiction—if it is permitted to use an abbreviated plan—may prepare an abbreviated plan appropriate to the project. See § 91.510.
            (3) Limitation. For the HOME program, an abbreviated consolidated plan is permitted only with respect to reallocations to other than participating jurisdictions (see 24 CFR part 92, subpart J), and for Insular Area grantees that submit an abbreviated consolidated plan pursuant to 24 CFR 570.440. For the CDBG program, an abbreviated plan may be submitted for the HUD-administered Small Cities program (except that an abbreviated plan may not be submitted for the HUD-administered Small Cities program in the state of Hawaii), and for Insular Area grantees pursuant to 24 CFR 570.440.
            (c) What is an abbreviated plan?—(1) Assessment of needs, resources, and planned activities. An abbreviated plan must contain sufficient information about needs, resources, and planned activities to address the needs to cover the type and amount of assistance anticipated to be funded by HUD. The plan must describe how the jurisdiction will affirmatively further fair housing by addressing issues identified in an AFH conducted in accordance with 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180.
            
            (2) Nonhousing community development plan. If the jurisdiction seeks assistance under the Community Development Block Grant program, it must describe the jurisdiction's priority non-housing community development needs eligible for assistance under HUD's community development programs by CDBG eligibility category, reflecting the needs of families for each type of activity, as appropriate, in terms of dollar amounts estimated to meet the priority need for the type of activity, in accordance with a table prescribed by HUD. This community development component of the plan must state the jurisdiction's specific long-term and short-term community development objectives (including economic development activities that create jobs), which must be developed in accordance with the statutory goals described in § 91.1 and the primary objective of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301(c), of the development of viable urban communities by providing decent housing and a suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities, principally for low-income and moderate-income persons.
            (3) Separate application for funding. In addition to submission of the abbreviated consolidated plan, an application must be submitted for funding is sought under a competitive program. The applicable program requirements are found in the regulations for the program and in the Notice of Funding Availability published for the applicable fiscal year. For the CDBG Small Cities program, the applicable regulations are found at 24 CFR part 570, subpart F.
            (4) Submissions, certifications, amendments, and performance reports. An Insular Area grantee that submits an abbreviated consolidated plan under this section must comply with the submission, certification, amendment, and performance report requirements of 24 CFR 570.440. This includes certification that the grantee will affirmatively further fair housing, which means that it will take meaningful actions to further the goals identified in an AFH conducted in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180, and that it will take no action that is materially inconsistent with its obligation to affirmatively further fair housing.
            (d) What consultation is applicable? The jurisdiction must make reasonable efforts to consult with appropriate public and private social service agencies regarding the needs to be served with the funding sought from HUD. The jurisdiction must attempt some consultation with the State. (Section 91.100 does not apply.)
            (e) Citizen Participation. An Insular Area grantee that submits an abbreviated consolidated plan under this section must comply with the citizen participation requirements of 24 CFR 570.441.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995; 72 FR 12535, Mar. 15, 2007; 80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.236
            Special case; District of Columbia.
            For consolidated planning purposes, the District of Columbia must follow the requirements applicable to local jurisdictions (§§ 91.100, 91.105, and 91.200 through 91.230). In addition, it must submit the component of the State requirements dealing with the use of Low Income Housing Tax Credits (§ 91.315(j)).
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
          
        
        
          Subpart D—State Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan
          
            § 91.300
            General.
            (a) A complete consolidated plan consists of the information required in § 91.300 through § 91.330, submitted in accordance with instructions prescribed by HUD (including tables and narratives), or in such other format as jointly agreed upon by HUD and the state. A comprehensive housing affordability strategy consists of the information required in §§ 91.300 through 91.315(e), 91.315(h) through 91.315(m), 91.320(c), 91.320 (g), 91.225 and 91.330.
            (b) The State shall describe:

            (1) The lead agency or entity responsible for overseeing the development of the plan and the significant aspects of the process by which the consolidated plan was developed;
            (2) The identity of the agencies, groups, organizations, and others who participated in the process;
            (3) The State's consultations with:
            (i) Continuums of Care;
            (ii) Public and private agencies that address housing, health, social services, employment, or education needs of low-income individuals and families, homeless individuals and families, youth, and/or other persons with special needs;
            (iii) Publicly funded institutions and systems of care that may discharge persons into homelessness (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions);
            (iv) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, public and private organizations, including broadband internet service providers and organizations engaged in narrowing the digital divide;
            (v) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, agencies whose primary responsibilities include the management of flood prone areas, public land or water resources, and emergency management agencies; and
            (vi) Other entities.
            (c) The plan shall contain a concise executive summary that includes the objectives and outcomes identified in the plan as well as an evaluation of past performance. The plan shall also contain a concise summary of the citizen participation process, public comments, and efforts made to broaden public participation in the development of the consolidated plan.
            [71 FR 6967, Feb. 9, 2006, as amended at 76 FR 75970, Dec. 5, 2011; 81 FR 91012, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.305
            Housing and homeless needs assessment.
            (a) General. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the state's estimated housing needs projected for the ensuing five-year period. Housing data included in this portion of the plan shall be based on U.S. Census data, as provided by HUD, as updated by any properly conducted local study, or any other reliable source that the state clearly identifies and should reflect the consultation with social service agencies and other entities conducted in accordance with § 91.110 and the citizen participation process conducted in accordance with § 91.115. For a state seeking funding under the HOPWA program, the needs described for housing and supportive services must address the unmet needs of low-income persons with HIV/AIDS and their families in areas outside of eligible metropolitan statistical areas.
            (b) Categories of persons affected. (1)(i) The plan shall estimate the number and type of families in need of housing assistance for:
            (A) Extremely low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and middle-income families;
            (B) Renters and owners;
            (C) Elderly persons;
            (D) Single persons;
            (E) Large families;
            (F) Public housing residents;
            (G) Families on the public housing and Section 8 tenant-based waiting list;
            (H) Persons with HIV/AIDS and their families;
            (I) Victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking;
            (J) Persons with disabilities; and
            (K) Formerly homeless families and individuals who are receiving rapid re-housing assistance and are nearing the termination of that assistance.
            (ii) The description of housing needs shall include a concise summary of the cost burden and severe cost burden, overcrowding (especially for large families), and substandard housing conditions being experienced by extremely low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and middle-income renters and owners compared to the state as a whole. (The state must define in its consolidated plan the terms “standard condition” and “substandard condition but suitable for rehabilitation.”)

            (2) Until the jurisdiction has submitted an AFH, which includes an assessment of disproportionate housing needs in accordance with 24 CFR 5.154(d)(2)(iv), the following assessment shall continue to be included in the consolidated plan. For any of the income categories enumerated in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, to the extent that any racial or ethnic group has disproportionately greater need in comparison to the needs of that category as a whole, assessment of that specific need shall be included. For this purpose, disproportionately greater need exists when the percentage of persons in a category of need who are members of a particular racial or ethnic group in a category of need is at least 10 percentage points higher than the percentage of persons in the category as a whole. Once the jurisdiction has submitted an AFH, however, this assessment need not be included in the consolidated plan.
            (c) Persons who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. (1) The plan must describe, in a form prescribed by HUD, the nature and extent of homelessness, including rural homelessness, within the state.
            (i) The description must include, for each category of homeless persons specified by HUD (including chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth), the number of persons experiencing homelessness on a given night, the number of persons who experience homelessness each year, the number of persons who lose their housing and become homeless each year, the number of persons who exit homelessness each year, and the number of days that persons experience homelessness, and any other measures specified by HUD.
            (ii) The plan also must contain a brief narrative description of the nature and extent of homelessness by racial and ethnic group, to the extent that information is available.
            (2) The plan must include a narrative description of the characteristics and needs of low-income individuals and families with children (especially extremely low-income) who are currently housed but threatened with homelessness. This information may be evidenced by the characteristics and needs of individuals and families with children who are currently entering the homeless assistance system or appearing for the first time on the streets. The description must also include specific housing characteristics linked to instability and an increased risk of homelessness.
            (d) Other special needs. (1) The State shall estimate, to the extent practicable, the number of persons who are not homeless but require supportive housing, including the elderly, frail elderly, persons with disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons with alcohol or other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and any other categories the State may specify, and describe their supportive housing needs.
            (2) With respect to a State seeking assistance under the HOPWA program, the plan must identify the size and characteristics of the population with HIV/AIDS and their families within the area it will serve.
            (e) Lead-based paint hazards. The plan must estimate the number of housing units within the State that are occupied by low-income families or moderate-income families that contain lead-based paint hazards, as defined in this part.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 51760, Oct. 3, 1996; 71 FR 6967, Feb. 9, 2006; 73 FR 72342, Nov. 28, 2008; 75 FR 66260, Oct. 27, 2010; 76 FR 75970, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.310
            Housing market analysis.
            (a) General characteristics. (1) Based on data available to the State, the plan must describe the significant characteristics of the State's housing markets (including such aspects as the supply, demand, and condition and cost of housing).
            (2) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, the State must describe the broadband needs of housing in the State based on an analysis of data identified by the State. These needs include the need for broadband wiring and for connection to the broadband service in the household units, the need for increased competition by having more than one broadband Internet service provider serve the jurisdiction.

            (3) Commencing with consolidated plans submitted on or after January 1, 2018, the State must also describe the vulnerability of housing occupied by low- and moderate-income households to increased natural hazard risks due to climate change based on an analysis of data, findings, and methods identified by the State in its consolidated plan.
            (b) Facilities, housing, and services for homeless persons. The plan must include a brief inventory of facilities and services that meet the needs of homeless persons within the state, particularly chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth.
            (1) The inventory of facilities and housing (e.g., emergency shelter, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing) must be presented in a form specified by HUD.
            (2) The inventory of services must include both services targeted to homeless persons and mainstream services, such as health, mental health, and employment services to the extent those services are used to complement services targeted to homeless persons.
            (c) Special need facilities and services. The plan must describe, to the extent information is available, the facilities and services that assist persons who are not homeless but who require supportive housing, and programs for ensuring that persons returning from mental and physical health institutions receive appropriate supportive housing.
            (d) Barriers to affordable housing. The plan must explain whether the cost of housing or the incentives to develop, maintain, or improve affordable housing in the State are affected by its policies, including tax policies affecting land and other property, land use controls, zoning ordinances, building codes, fees and charges, growth limits, and policies that affect the return on residential investment.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6967, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75971, Dec. 5, 2011; 81 FR 91012, Dec. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.315
            Strategic plan.
            (a) General. For the categories described in paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this section, the consolidated plan must do the following:
            (1) Indicate the general priorities for allocating investment geographically within the state and among different activities and needs.
            (2) Describe the rationale for establishing the allocation priorities given to each category of priority needs, particularly among extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income households.
            (3) Identify any obstacles to meeting underserved needs.
            (4) Summarize the priorities and specific objectives the state intends to initiate and/or complete during the time period covered by the strategic plan describing how the proposed distribution of funds will address identified needs. For each specific objective statement, identify proposed accomplishments and outcomes the state hopes to achieve in quantitative terms over a specified time period (e.g., one, two, three or more years), or in other measurable terms as identified and defined by the state. This information shall be provided in accordance with guidance to be issued by HUD.
            (5)(i) Describe how the priorities and specific objectives of the State under § 91.315(a)(4) will affirmatively further fair housing by setting forth strategies and actions consistent with the goals and other elements identified in an AFH conducted in accordance with 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180.
            (ii) For AFH goals not addressed by these priorities and objectives, identify any additional objectives and priorities for affirmatively furthering fair housing.
            (b) Affordable housing. With respect to affordable housing, the consolidated plan must include the priority housing needs table prescribed by HUD and the following:

            (1) The affordable housing section shall describe how the characteristics of the housing market and the severity of housing problems and needs of extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income renters and owners, persons at risk of homelessness, and homeless persons identified in accordance with § 91.305 provided the rationale for establishing allocation priorities and use of funds made available for rental assistance, production of new units, rehabilitation of existing units, or acquisition of existing units (including preserving affordable housing units that may be lost from the assisted housing inventory for any reason). Household and income types may be grouped together for discussion where the analysis would apply to more than one of them. If the State intends to use HOME funds for tenant-based rental assistance, the State must specify local market conditions that led to the choice of that option.
            (2) The affordable housing section shall include specific objectives that describe proposed accomplishments the State hopes to achieve and must specify the number of extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income families to which the State will provide affordable housing, as defined in 24 CFR 92.252 for rental housing, 24 CFR 92.254 for homeownership, and 24 CFR 93.302 for rental housing and 24 CFR 93.304 for homeownership over a specific time period.
            (c) Public housing. With respect to public housing, the consolidated plan must do the following:
            (1) Resident initiatives. For a state that has a state housing agency administering public housing funds, the consolidated plan must describe the state's activities to encourage public housing residents to become more involved in management and participate in homeownership;
            (2) Public housing needs. The consolidated plan must describe the manner in which the plan of the state will address the needs of public housing; and
            (3) Troubled public housing agencies. If a public housing agency located within a state is designated as “troubled” by HUD under part 902 of this title, the strategy for the state or unit of local government in which any troubled public housing agency is located must describe the manner in which the state or unit of general local government will provide financial or other assistance to improve the public housing agency's operations and remove the “troubled” designation. A state is not required to describe the manner in which financial or other assistance is provided if the troubled public housing agency is located entirely within the boundaries of a unit of general local government that must submit a consolidated plan to HUD.
            (d) Homelessness. The consolidated plan must include the priority homeless needs table prescribed by HUD and must describe the State's strategy for reducing and ending homelessness through:
            (1) Reaching out to homeless persons (especially unsheltered persons) and assessing their individual needs;
            (2) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs of homeless persons;
            (3) Helping homeless persons (especially chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) make the transition to permanent housing and independent living, including shortening the period of time individuals and families experience homelessness, facilitating access for homeless individuals and families to affordable housing units, and preventing individuals and families who were recently homeless from becoming homeless again; and
            (4) Helping low-income individuals and families avoid becoming homeless, especially extremely low-income individuals and families who are:
            (i) Likely to become homeless after being discharged from publicly funded institutions and systems of care (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions); or
            (ii) Receiving assistance from public or private agencies that address housing, health, social services, employment, education, or youth needs.
            (e) Other special needs. With respect to supportive needs of the non-homeless, the consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the priority housing and supportive service needs of persons who are not homeless but require supportive housing, i.e., elderly, frail elderly, persons with disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons with alcohol or other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and public housing residents. If the state intends to use HOME funds for tenant-based assistance to assist one or more of these subpopulations, it must specify local market conditions that led to the choice of this option.
            (f) Nonhousing community development plan. If the state seeks assistance under the CDBG program, the consolidated plan must concisely describe the state's priority nonhousing community development needs that affect more than one unit of general local government. These priority needs must be described by CDBG eligibility category, reflecting the needs of persons or families for each type of activity. This community development component of the plan must identify the state's specific long-term and short-term community development objectives (including economic development activities that create jobs), which must be developed in accordance with the primary objective of the CDBG program to develop viable urban communities by providing decent housing and a suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities, principally for low-income and moderate-income persons.
            (g) Community Revitalization. States are encouraged to identify areas where geographically targeted revitalization efforts are carried out through multiple activities in a concentrated and coordinated manner. In addition, a state may elect to allow units of general local government to carry out a community revitalization strategy that includes the economic empowerment of low-income residents, in order to obtain the additional flexibility available as provided in 24 CFR part 570, subpart I. A state must approve a local government's revitalization strategy before it may be implemented. If a state elects to allow revitalization strategies in its program, the method of distribution contained in a state's action plan pursuant to § 91.320(k)(1) must reflect the state's process and criteria for approving local government's revitalization strategies. The strategy must identify the long-term and short-term objectives (e.g., physical improvements, social initiatives, and economic empowerment), expressing them in terms of measures of outputs and outcomes that are expected through the use of HUD programs. The state's process and criteria are subject to HUD approval.
            (h) Barriers to affordable housing. The consolidated plan must describe the state's strategy to remove or ameliorate negative effects of its policies that serve as barriers to affordable housing, as identified in accordance with § 91.310.
            (i) Lead based paint. The consolidated plan must outline the actions proposed or being taken to evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards, and describe how the lead-based paint hazard reduction will be integrated into housing policies and programs.
            (j) Anti-poverty strategy. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the state's goals, programs, and policies for reducing the number of poverty-level families and how the state's goals, programs, and policies for producing and preserving affordable housing, set forth in the housing component of the consolidated plan, will be coordinated with other programs such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families as well as employment and training programs and services for which the state is responsible and the extent to which they will reduce (or assist in reducing) the number of poverty-level families, taking into consideration factors over which the state has control.
            (k) Institutional structure. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the institutional structure, including businesses, developers, nonprofit organizations, philanthropic organizations, community-based and faith-based organizations, the Continuum of Care, and public institutions, departments, and agencies through which the State will carry out its housing, homeless, and community development plan; a brief assessment of the strengths and gaps in that delivery system; and a concise summary of what the State will do to overcome gaps in the institutional structure for carrying out its strategy for addressing its priority needs.
            (l) Coordination. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the jurisdiction's activities to enhance coordination among Continuums of Care, public and assisted housing providers, and private and governmental health, mental health, and service agencies. The summary must include the jurisdiction's efforts to coordinate housing assistance and services for homeless persons (especially chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) and persons who were recently homeless but now live in permanent housing. With respect to the public entities involved, the plan must describe the means of cooperation and coordination among the State and any units of general local government in the implementation of its consolidated plan. With respect to economic development, the State should describe efforts to enhance coordination with private industry, businesses, developers, and social service agencies.
            (m) Low-income housing tax credit. The consolidated plan must describe the strategy to coordinate the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit with the development of housing that is affordable to low-income and moderate-income families.
            [71 FR 6968, Feb. 9, 2006, as amended at 76 FR 75972, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015; 80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.320
            Action plan.
            The action plan must include the following:
            (a) Standard Form 424;
            (b) A concise executive summary that includes the objectives and outcomes identified in the plan as well as an evaluation of past performance, a summary of the citizen participation and consultation process (including efforts to broaden public participation) (24 CFR 91.300 (b)), a summary of comments or views, and a summary of comments or views not accepted and the reasons therefore (24 CFR 91.115 (b)(5)).
            (c) Resources and objectives—(1) Federal resources. The consolidated plan must provide a concise summary of the federal resources expected to be made available. These resources include grant funds and program income.
            (2) Other resources. The consolidated plan must indicate resources from private and non-federal public sources that are reasonably expected to be made available to address the needs identified in the plan. The plan must explain how federal funds will leverage those additional resources, including a description of how matching requirements of the HUD programs will be satisfied. Where the State deems it appropriate, it may indicate publicly owned land or property located within the State that may be used to carry out the purposes identified in the plan;
            (3) Annual objectives. The consolidated plan must contain a summary of the annual objectives the State expects to achieve during the forthcoming program year.
            (d) Activities. A description of the State's method for distributing funds to local governments and nonprofit organizations to carry out activities, or the activities to be undertaken by the State, using funds that are expected to be received under formula allocations (and related program income) and other HUD assistance during the program year, the reasons for the allocation priorities, how the proposed distribution of funds will address the priority needs and specific objectives described in the consolidated plan, and any obstacles to addressing underserved needs.
            (e) Outcome measures. Each State must provide outcome measures for activities included in its action plan in accordance with guidance issued by HUD. For the CDBG program, this would include activities that are likely to be funded as a result of the implementation of the State's method of distribution.
            (f) Geographic distribution. A description of the geographic areas of the State (including areas of low-income and minority concentration) in which it will direct assistance during the ensuing program year, giving the rationale for the priorities for allocating investment geographically. When appropriate, the State should estimate the percentage of funds they plan to dedicate to target area(s).
            (g) Affordable housing goals. The State must specify one-year goals for the number of households to be provided affordable housing through activities that provide rental assistance, production of new units, rehabilitation of existing units, or acquisition of existing units using funds made available to the State, and one-year goals for the number of homeless, non-homeless, and special-needs households to be provided affordable housing using funds made available to the State. The term affordable housing shall be as defined in 24 CFR 92.252 for rental housing and 24 CFR 92.254 for homeownership.
            (h) Homeless and other special needs activities. (1) The State must describe its one-year goals and specific actions steps for reducing and ending homelessness through:
            (i) Reaching out to homeless persons (especially unsheltered persons) and assessing their individual needs;
            (ii) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs of homeless persons;
            (iii) Helping homeless persons (especially chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) make the transition to permanent housing and independent living, including shortening the period of time that individuals and families experience homelessness, facilitating access for homeless individuals and families to affordable housing units, and preventing individuals and families who were recently homeless from becoming homeless again; and
            (iv) Helping low-income individuals and families avoid becoming homeless, especially extremely low-income individuals and families who are:
            (A) Being discharged from publicly funded institutions and systems of care (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions); or
            (B) Receiving assistance from public or private agencies that address housing, health, social services, employment, education, or youth needs.
            (2) The State must specify the activities that it plans to undertake during the next year to address the housing and supportive service needs identified in accordance with § 91.315(e) with respect to persons who are not homeless but have other special needs.
            (i) Barriers to affordable housing. Actions it plans to take during the next year to remove or ameliorate the negative effects of public policies that serve as barriers to affordable housing. Such policies, procedures, and processes include but are not limited to: land use controls, tax policies affecting land, zoning ordinances, building codes, fees and charges, growth limitations, and policies affecting the return on residential investment.
            (j)(1) Affirmatively furthering fair housing. Actions it plans to take during the next year that address fair housing goals identified in the AFH.
            (2) Other actions. Actions it plans to take during the next year to implement its strategic plan and address obstacles to meeting underserved needs, foster and maintain affordable housing (including allocation plans and policies governing the use of Low-Income Housing Credits under 26 U.S.C. 42, which are more commonly referred to as Low-Income Housing Tax Credits), evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards, reduce the number of poverty-level families, develop institutional structure, enhance coordination between public and private housing and social service agencies, address the needs of public housing (including providing financial or other assistance to troubled PHAs), and encourage public housing residents to become more involved in management and participate in homeownership.
            (k) Program-specific requirements. In addition, the plan must include the following specific information:
            (1) CDBG. The action plan must set forth the State's method of distribution.

            (i) The method of distribution must contain a description of all criteria used to select applications from local governments for funding, including the relative importance of the criteria, where applicable. The method of distribution must provide sufficient information so that units of general local government will be able to understand and comment on it, understand what criteria and information their application will be judged on, and be able to prepare responsive applications. The method of distribution may provide a summary of the selection criteria, provided that all criteria are summarized and the details are set forth in application manuals or other official State publications that are widely distributed to eligible applicants.
            
            (ii) The action plan must include a description of how all CDBG resources will be allocated among funding categories and the threshold factors and grant size limits that are to be applied. The total CDBG resources to be described in the action plan include all of the following:
            (A) The CDBG origin year grant.
            (B) Any program income expected to be returned to the State in accordance with 24 CFR 570.489(e)(3)(i) in the program year or not included in a prior action plan, and any program income expected to be received by any State revolving fund in accordance with 24 CFR 570.489(f)(2) in the program year or not included in a prior action plan.
            (C) Reimbursements, other than program income, made to a local account.
            (iii) If the State intends to help nonentitlement units of general local government apply for guaranteed loan funds under 24 CFR part 570, subpart M, it must describe available guarantee amounts and how applications will be selected for assistance. If a State elects to allow units of general local government to carry out community revitalization strategies, the method of distribution shall reflect the State's process and criteria for approving local government's revitalization strategies.
            (iv) If the State permits units of general local government to retain program income per 24 CFR 570.489(e)(3) or establish local revolving funds per 24 CFR 570.489(f)(1), the State must include a description of each of the local accounts including the name of the local entity administering the funds, contact information for the entity administering the funds, the amounts expected to be available during the program year, the eligible activity type(s) expected to be carried out with the program income, and the national objective(s) served with the funds.
            (iv) HUD may monitor the method of distribution as part of its audit and review responsibilities, as provided in 24 CFR 570.493(a)(1), in order to determine compliance with program requirements.
            (2) HOME. (i) The HOME program resources that the State must describe in the action plan are the fiscal year HOME allocation plus the amount of program income, repayments, and recaptured funds in the State's HOME Investment Trust Fund local account (see 24 CFR 92.500(c)(1)) at the beginning of the State's program year. The State may choose to include program income, repayments, and recaptured funds that are expected to be received during the program year if the State plans to commit these funds during the program year.
            (ii) The State shall describe other forms of investment that are not described in 24 CFR 92.205(b). HUD's specific written approval is required for other forms of investment, as provided in § 92.205(b). Approval of the consolidated plan or action plan under § 91.500 or the failure to disapprove the consolidated plan or action plan does not satisfy the requirement for specific HUD approval for resale or recapture guidelines.
            (iii) If the State intends to use HOME funds for homebuyers, it must set forth the guidelines for resale or recapture, and obtain HUD's specific, written approval, as required in 24 CFR 92.254. Approval of the consolidated plan or action plan under § 91.500 or the failure to disapprove the consolidated plan or action does not satisfy the requirement for specific HUD approval for other forms of investment.
            (iv) If the State intends to use HOME funds to refinance existing debt secured by multifamily housing that is being rehabilitated with HOME funds, it must State its refinancing guidelines required under 24 CFR 92.206(b). The guidelines shall describe the conditions under which the State will refinance existing debt. At minimum, the guidelines must:
            (A) Demonstrate that rehabilitation is the primary eligible activity and ensure that this requirement is met by establishing a minimum level of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between rehabilitation and refinancing.

            (B) Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that disinvestment in the property has not occurred; that the long-term needs of the project can be met; and that the feasibility of serving the targeted population over an extended affordability period can be demonstrated.
            
            (C) State whether the new investment is being made to maintain current affordable units, create additional affordable units, or both.
            (D) Specify the required period of affordability, whether it is the minimum 15 years or longer.
            (E) Specify whether the investment of HOME funds may be state-wide or limited to a specific geographic area, such as a community identified in a neighborhood revitalization strategy under 24 CFR 91.315(g), or a federally designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community.
            (F) State that HOME funds cannot be used to refinance multifamily loans made or insured by any federal program, including the CDBG program.
            (v) If the participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for homebuyer assistance or for rehabilitation of owner-occupied single family housing and does not use the HOME affordable homeownership limits for the area provided by HUD, it must determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price and set forth the information in accordance with 24 CFR 92.254(a)(2)(iii).
            (vi) The State must describe eligible applicants (e.g., categories of eligible applicants), describe its process for soliciting and funding applications or proposals (e.g., competition, first-come first-serve; subgrants to local jurisdictions) and State where detailed information may be obtained (e.g., application packages are available at the office of the State or on the State's Web site).
            (vii) The participating jurisdiction may limit the beneficiaries or give preferences to a particular segment of the low-income population only if described in the action plan.
            (A) Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 92.350, and the participating jurisdiction must not limit or give preferences to students.
            (B) A limitation or preference may include, in addition to targeting tenant-based rental assistance to persons with special needs as provided in 24 CFR 92.209(c)(2), limiting beneficiaries or giving preferences to persons in certain occupations, such as police officers, firefighters, or teachers.
            (C) The participating jurisdiction must not limit beneficiaries or give a preference to all employees of the jurisdiction.
            (D) The participating jurisdiction may permit rental housing owners to limit tenants or give a preference in accordance with 24 CFR 92.253(d) only if such limitation or preference is described in the action plan.
            (viii) If the State will receive funding under the American Dream Downpayment Initiative (ADDI) (see 24 CFR part 92, subpart M), it must include:
            (A) A description of the planned use of the ADDI funds;
            (B) A plan for conducting targeted outreach to residents and tenants of public and manufactured housing and to other families assisted by public housing agencies, for the purposes of ensuring that the ADDI funds are used to provide downpayment assistance for such residents, tenants, and families; and
            (C) A description of the actions to be taken to ensure the suitability of families receiving ADDI funds to undertake and maintain homeownership, such as provision of housing counseling to homebuyers.
            (3) ESG. (i) The State must either include its written standards for providing Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) assistance or describe its requirements for its subrecipients to establish and implement written standards for providing ESG assistance. The minimum requirements regarding these standards are set forth in 24 CFR 576.400(e)(2) and (e)(3).
            (ii) For each area of the State in which a Continuum of Care has established a centralized or coordinated assessment system that meets HUD requirements, the State must describe that centralized or coordinated assessment system. The requirements for using a centralized or coordinated assessment system, including the exception for victim service providers, are set forth under 24 CFR 576.400(d).

            (iii) The State must identify its process for making subawards and a description of how the State intends to make its allocation available to units of general local government and private nonprofit organizations, including community and faith-based organizations.
            (iv) The State must describe the performance standards for evaluating ESG activities.
            (v) The State must describe its consultation with each Continuum of Care in determining how to allocate ESG funds each program year; developing the performance standards for, and evaluating the outcomes of, projects and activities assisted by ESG funds; and developing funding, policies and procedures for the administration and operation of the HMIS.
            (4) HOPWA. For HOPWA funds, the State must specify one-year goals for the number of households to be provided housing through the use of HOPWA activities for short-term rent; mortgage and utility assistance payments to prevent homelessness of the individual or family; tenant-based rental assistance; and units provided in housing facilities that are being developed, leased or operated with HOPWA funds, and shall identify the method of selecting project sponsors (including providing full access to grassroots faith-based and other community-based organizations).
            (5) Housing Trust Fund. The action plan must include the HTF allocation plan that describes the distribution of the HTF funds, and establishes the application requirements and the criteria for selection of applications submitted by eligible recipients that meet the State's priority housing needs. The plan must also establish the State's maximum per-unit development subsidy limit for housing assisted with HTF funds. If the HTF funds will be used for first-time homebuyers, it must State the guidelines for resale and recapture as required in 24 CFR 93.304. The plan must reflect the State's decision to distribute HTF funds through grants to subgrantees and/or to select applications submitted by eligible recipients. If the State is selecting applications submitted by eligible recipients, the plan must include the following:
            (i) The plan must provide priority for funding based on geographic diversity (as defined by the State in the consolidated plan); the applicant's ability to obligate HTF funds and undertake eligible activities in a timely manner; in the case of rental housing projects, the extent to which the project has Federal, State, or local project-based rental assistance so that rents are affordable to extremely low-income families; in the case of rental housing projects, the duration of the units' affordability period; the merits of the application in meeting the priority housing needs of the State (such as housing that is accessible to transit or employment centers, housing that includes green building and sustainable development features, or housing that serves special needs populations); and the extent to which the application makes use of non-federal funding sources.
            (ii) The plan must include the requirement that the application contain a description of the eligible activities to be conducted with the HTF funds (as provided in 24 CFR 93.200) and contain a certification by each eligible recipient that housing units assisted with the HTF will comply with HTF requirements. The plan must also describe eligibility requirements for recipients (as defined in 24 CFR 93.2).
            (iii) The plan must provide for performance goals and benchmarks against which the State will measure its progress, consistent with the State's goals established under 24 CFR 91.315(b)(2).
            (iv) The plan must include the State's rehabilitation standards, as required by 24 CFR 93.301(b)(1).
            (v) If the State intends to use HTF funds for first-time homebuyers, it must set forth the guidelines for resale or recapture, and obtain HUD's specific, written approval, as required in § 93.304(f). Approval of the consolidated plan or action plan under § 91.500 or the failure to disapprove the consolidated plan or action does not satisfy the requirement for specific HUD approval for resale or recapture guidelines.

            (vi) If the State intends to use HTF funds for homebuyer assistance and does not use the HTF affordable homeownership limits for the area provided by HUD, it must determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price and set forth the information in accordance with § 93.305.
            
            (vii) The State may limit the beneficiaries or give preferences to a particular segment of the extremely low- or very low-income population only if described in the action plan.
            (A) Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 93.350, and the State must not limit or give preferences to students.
            (B) The State may permit rental housing owners to limit tenants or give a preference in accordance with 24 CFR 93.303(d)(3) only if such limitation or preference is described in the action plan.
            (viii) The plan must describe the conditions under which the State will refinance existing debt.
            [71 FR 6969, Feb. 9, 2006, as amended at 76 FR 75972, Dec. 5, 2011; 78 FR 44664, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015; 80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015; 80 FR 69869, Nov. 12, 2015; 81 FR 86951, Dec. 1, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.325
            Certifications.
            (a) General—(1) Affirmatively furthering fair housing. Each State is required to submit a certification that it will affirmatively further fair housing, which means that it will take meaningful actions to further the goals identified in an AFH conducted in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180, and that it will take no action that is materially inconsistent with its obligation to affirmatively further fair housing.
            (2) Anti-displacement and relocation plan. The State is required to submit a certification that it has in effect and is following a residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan in connection with any activity assisted with funding under the CDBG or HOME programs.
            (3) Anti-lobbying. The State must submit a certification with regard to compliance with restrictions on lobbying required by 24 CFR part 87, together with disclosure forms, if required by that part.
            (4) Authority of State. The State must submit a certification that the consolidated plan is authorized under State law and that the State possesses the legal authority to carry out the programs for which it is seeking funding, in accordance with applicable HUD regulations.
            (5) Consistency with plan. The State must submit a certification that the housing activities to be undertaken with CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA funds are consistent with the strategic plan.
            (6) Acquisition and relocation. The State must submit a certification that it will comply with the acquisition and relocation requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, and implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24.
            (7) Section 3. The State must submit a certification that it will comply with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u), and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135.
            (b) Community Development Block Grant program. For States that seek funding under CDBG, the following certifications are required:
            (1) Citizen participation. A certification that the State is following a detailed citizen participation plan that satisfies the requirements of § 91.115, and that each unit of general local government that is receiving assistance from the State is following a detailed citizen participation plan that satisfies the requirements of § 570.486 of this title.
            (2) Consultation with local governments. A certification that:
            (i) It has consulted with affected units of local government in the nonentitlement area of the State in determining the method of distribution of funding;
            (ii) It engages or will engage in planning for community development activities;
            (iii) It provides or will provide technical assistance to units of general local government in connection with community development programs;

            (iv) It will not refuse to distribute funds to any unit of general local government on the basis of the particular eligible activity selected by the unit of general local government to meet its community development needs, except that a State is not prevented from establishing priorities in distributing funding on the basis of the activities selected; and
            (v) Each unit of general local government to be distributed funds will be required to identify its community development and housing needs, including the needs of the low-income and moderate-income families, and the activities to be undertaken to meet these needs.
            (3) Community development plan. A certification that this consolidated plan identifies community development and housing needs and specifies both short-term and long-term community development objectives that have been developed in accordance with the primary objective of the statute authorizing the CDBG program, as described in 24 CFR 570.2, and requirements of this part and 24 CFR part 570.
            (4) Use of funds. A certification that the State has complied with the following criteria:
            (i) With respect to activities expected to be assisted with CDBG funds, the action plan has been developed so as to give the maximum feasible priority to activities that will benefit low- and moderate-income families or aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight. The plan may also include CDBG-assisted activities that are certified to be designed to meet other community development needs having particular urgency because existing conditions pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or welfare of the community where other financial resources are not available to meet such needs;
            (ii) In the aggregate, not less than 70 percent of the CDBG funds received by the State during a period specified by the State, not to exceed three years, will be used for activities that benefit persons of low and moderate income. The period selected and certified to by the State shall be designated by fiscal year of annual grants, and shall be for one, two, or three consecutive annual grants. (See 24 CFR 570.481 for definition of “CDBG funds”); and
            (iii) The State will not attempt to recover any capital costs of public improvements assisted with CDBG funds, including Section 108 loan guaranteed funds, by assessing any amount against properties owned and occupied by persons of low- and moderate-income, including any fee charged or assessment made as a condition of obtaining access to such public improvements. However, if CDBG funds are used to pay the proportion of a fee or assessment attributable to the capital costs of public improvements (assisted in part with CDBG funds) financed from other revenue sources, an assessment or charge may be made against the property with respect to the public improvements financed by a source other than with CDBG funds. In addition, with respect to properties owned and occupied by moderate-income (but not low-income) families, an assessment or charge may be made against the property with respect to the public improvements financed by a source other than CDBG funds if the State certifies that it lacks CDBG funds to cover the assessment.
            (5) Compliance with anti-discrimination laws. A certification that the grant will be conducted and administered in conformity with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d) and the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and implementing regulations.
            (6) Excessive force. A certification that the State will require units of general local government that receive CDBG funds to certify that they have adopted and are enforcing:
            (i) A policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by law enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individuals engaged in non-violent civil rights demonstrations; and
            (ii) A policy of enforcing applicable State and local laws against physically barring entrance to or exit from a facility or location that is the subject of such non-violent civil rights demonstrations within its jurisdiction.
            (7) Compliance with laws. A certification that the State will comply with applicable laws.
            (c) ESG. Each State that seeks funding under ESG must provide the following certifications:

            (1) The State will obtain any matching amounts required under 24 CFR 576.201 in a manner so that its subrecipients that are least capable of providing matching amounts receive the benefit of the exception under 24 CFR 576.201(a)(2);
            
            (2) The State will establish and implement, to the maximum extent practicable and where appropriate, policies, and protocols for the discharge of persons from publicly funded institutions or systems of care (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care or other youth facilities, or correction programs and institutions) in order to prevent this discharge from immediately resulting in homelessness for these persons;
            (3) The State will develop and implement procedures to ensure the confidentiality of records pertaining to any individual provided family violence prevention or treatment services under any project assisted under the ESG program, including protection against the release of the address or location of any family violence shelter project, except with the written authorization of the person responsible for the operation of that shelter; and
            (4) The State will ensure that its subrecipients comply with the following criteria:
            (i) If an emergency shelter's rehabilitation costs exceed 75 percent of the value of the building before rehabilitation, the building will be maintained as a shelter for homeless individuals and families for a minimum of 10 years after the date the building is first occupied by a homeless individual or family after the completed rehabilitation;
            (ii) If the cost to convert a building into an emergency shelter exceeds 75 percent of the value of the building after conversion, the building will be maintained as a shelter for homeless individuals and families for a minimum of 10 years after the date the building is first occupied by a homeless individual or family after the completed conversion;
            (iii) In all other cases where ESG funds are used for renovation, the building will be maintained as a shelter for homeless individuals and families for a minimum of 3 years after the date the date the building is first occupied by a homeless individual or family after the completed renovation;

            (iv) If ESG funds are used for shelter operations or essential services related to street outreach or emergency shelter, the subrecipient will provide services or shelter to homeless individuals and families for the period during which the ESG assistance is provided, without regard to a particular site or structure, so long as the applicant serves the same type of persons (e.g., families with children, unaccompanied youth, veterans, disabled individuals, or victims of domestic violence) or persons in the same geographic area;
            (v) Any renovation carried out with ESG assistance shall be sufficient to ensure that the building involved is safe and sanitary;
            (vi) The subrecipient will assist homeless individuals in obtaining permanent housing, appropriate supportive services (including medical and mental health treatment, counseling, supervision, and other services essential for achieving independent living), and other Federal, State, local, and private assistance available for such individuals;
            (vii) To the maximum extent practicable, the subrecipient will involve, through employment, volunteer services, or otherwise, homeless individuals and families in constructing, renovating, maintaining, and operating facilities assisted under ESG, in providing services assisted under ESG, and in providing services for occupants of facilities assisted under ESG; and
            (viii) All activities the subrecipient undertakes with assistance under ESG are consistent with the State's current HUD-approved consolidated plan.
            (d) HOME program. Each State must provide the following certifications:
            (1) If it plans to use program funds for tenant-based rental assistance, a certification that rental-based assistance is an essential element of its consolidated plan;
            (2) A certification that it is using and will use HOME funds for eligible activities and costs, as described in §§ 92.205 through 92.209 of this subtitle and that it is not using and will not use HOME funds for prohibited activities, as described in § 92.214 of this subtitle; and

            (3) A certification that before committing funds to a project, the State or its recipients will evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines that it adopts for this purpose and will not invest any more HOME funds in combination with other federal assistance than is necessary to provide affordable housing.
            (e) Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS. For States that seek funding under the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS program, a certification is required by the State that:
            (1) Activities funded under the program will meet urgent needs that are not being met by available public and private sources; and
            (2) Any building or structure purchased, leased, rehabilitated, renovated, or converted with assistance under that program shall be operated for not less than 10 years specified in the plan, or for a period of not less than three years in cases involving non-substantial rehabilitation or repair of a building or structure.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6970, Feb. 9, 2006; 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007; 76 FR 75973, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015; 80 FR 69870, Nov. 12, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.330
            Monitoring.
            The consolidated plan must describe the standards and procedures that the State will use to monitor activities carried out in furtherance of the plan and will use to ensure long-term compliance with requirements of the programs involved, including the comprehensive planning requirements.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Consortia; Contents of Consolidated Plan
          
            § 91.400
            Applicability.
            This subpart applies to HOME program consortia, as defined in § 91.5 (see 24 CFR part 92). Units of local government that participate in a consortium must participate in submission of a consolidated plan for the consortium, prepared in accordance with this subpart. CDBG entitlement communities that are members of a consortium must provide additional information for the consolidated plan, as described in this subpart.
          
          
            § 91.401
            Citizen participation plan.
            The consortium must have a citizen participation plan that complies with the requirements of § 91.105. If the consortium contains one or more CDBG entitlement communities, the consortium's citizen participation plan must provide for citizen participation within each CDBG entitlement community, either by the consortium or by the CDBG entitlement community, in a manner sufficient for the CDBG entitlement community to certify that it is following a citizen participation plan.
          
          
            § 91.402
            Consolidated program year.
            (a) Same program year for consortia members. All units of general local government that are members of a consortium must be on the same program year for CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA. The program year shall run for a twelve month period and begin on the first calendar day of a month.
            (b) Transition period. (1) A consortium in existence on February 6, 1995, with all members having aligned program years must comply with paragraph (a) of this section. A consortium in existence on February 6, 1995, in which all members do not have aligned program years will be allowed a transition period during the balance of its current consortium agreement to bring the program year for all members into alignment.
            (2) During any such transition period, the lead agency (if it is a CDBG entitlement community) must submit, as its consolidated plan, a plan that complies with this subpart for the consortium, plus its nonhousing Community Development Plan (in accordance with § 91.215). All other CDBG entitlement communities in the consortium may submit their respective nonhousing Community Development Plans (§ 91.215(e)), an Action Plan (§ 91.220) and the certifications (§ 91.425(a) and (b)) in accordance with their individual program years.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 10427, Feb. 24, 1995]
          
          
            
            § 91.405
            Housing and homeless needs assessment.
            Housing and homeless needs must be described in the consolidated plan in accordance with the provisions of § 91.205 for the entire consortium. In addition to describing these needs for the entire consortium, the consolidated plan may also describe these needs for individual communities that are members of the consortium.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
          
          
            § 91.410
            Housing market analysis.
            Housing market analysis must be described in the consolidated plan in accordance with the provisions of § 91.210 for the entire consortium. In addition to describing market conditions for the entire consortium, the consolidated plan may also describe these conditions for individual communities that are members of the consortium.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
          
          
            § 91.415
            Strategic plan.
            Strategies and priority needs must be described in the consolidated plan, in accordance with the provisions of § 91.215, for the entire consortium. The consortium is not required to submit a nonhousing Community Development Plan; however, if the consortium includes CDBG entitlement communities, the consolidated plan must include the nonhousing Community Development Plans of the CDBG entitlement community members of the consortium. The consortium must set forth its priorities for allocating housing (including CDBG and ESG, where applicable) resources geographically within the consortium, describing how the consolidated plan will address the needs identified (in accordance with § 91.405), setting forth strategies and actions consistent with the goals and other elements identified in an AFH conducted in accordance with 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180, describing the reasons for the consortium's allocation priorities, and identifying any obstacles there are to addressing underserved needs.
            [80 FR 42365, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.420
            Action plan.
            (a) Form application. The action plan for the consortium must include a Standard Form 424 for the consortium for the HOME program. Each entitlement jurisdiction also must submit a Standard Form 424 for its funding under the CDBG program and, if applicable, the ESG and HOPWA programs.
            (b) Description of resources and activities. The action plan must describe the resources to be used and activities to be undertaken to pursue its strategic plan, including actions the consortium plans to take during the next year that address fair housing issues identified in the AFH. The consolidated plan must provide this description for all resources and activities within the entire consortium as a whole, as well as a description for each individual community that is a member of the consortium.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 80 FR 42366, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.425
            Certifications.
            (a) Consortium certifications—(1) General—(i) Affirmatively furthering fair housing. Each consortium must certify that it will affirmatively further fair housing, which means that it will take meaningful actions to further the goals identified in an AFH conducted in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180, and that it will take no action that is materially inconsistent with its obligation to affirmatively further fair housing.
            (ii) Anti-displacement and relocation plan. Each consortium must certify that it has in effect and is following a residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan in connection with any activity assisted with funding under the HOME or CDBG program.
            (iii) Anti-lobbying. The consortium must submit a certification with regard to compliance with restrictions on lobbying required by 24 CFR part 87, together with disclosure forms, if required by that part.
            (iv) Authority of consortium. The consortium must submit a certification that the consolidated plan is authorized under State and local law (as applicable) and that the consortium possesses the legal authority to carry out the programs for which it is seeking funding, in accordance with applicable HUD regulations.
            (v) Consistency with plan. The consortium must certify that the housing activities to be undertaken with CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA funds are consistent with the strategic plan.
            (vi) Acquisition and relocation. The consortium must certify that it will comply with the acquisition and relocation requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4601), and implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24.
            (vii) Section 3. The consortium must certify that it will comply with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u), and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135.
            (2) HOME program. The consortium must provide the following certifications:
            (i) If it plans to use HOME funds for tenant-based rental assistance, a certification that rental-based assistance is an essential element of its consolidated plan;
            (ii) That it is using and will use HOME funds for eligible activities and costs, as described in §§ 92.205 through 92.209 of this subtitle and that it is not using and will not use HOME funds for prohibited activities, as described in § 92.214 of this subtitle; and
            (iii) That before committing funds to a project, the consortium will evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines that it adopts for this purpose and will not invest any more HOME funds in combination with other federal assistance than is necessary to provide affordable housing.
            (b) CDBG entitlement community certifications. A CDBG entitlement community that is a member of a consortium must submit the certifications required by § 91.225 (a) and (b), and, if applicable, of § 91.225 (c) and (d).
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007; 80 FR 42366, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 91.430
            Monitoring.
            The consolidated plan must describe the standards and procedures that the consortium will use to monitor activities carried out in furtherance of the plan and will use to ensure long-term compliance with requirements of the programs involved, including minority business outreach and the comprehensive planning requirements.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Other General Requirements
          
            § 91.500
            HUD approval action.
            (a) General. HUD will review the plan upon receipt. The plan will be deemed approved 45 days after HUD receives the plan, unless before that date HUD has notified the jurisdiction that the plan is disapproved.
            (b) Standard of review. HUD may disapprove a plan or a portion of a plan if it is inconsistent with the purposes of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12703), if it is substantially incomplete, or, in the case of certifications applicable to the CDBG program under §§ 91.225 (a) and (b) or 91.325 (a) and (b), if it is not satisfactory to the Secretary in accordance with §§ 570.304, 570.429(g), or 570.485(c) of this title, as applicable. The following are examples of consolidated plans that are substantially incomplete:
            (1) A plan that was developed without the required citizen participation or the required consultation;
            (2) A plan that fails to satisfy all the required elements in this part; and
            (3) A plan for which a certification is rejected by HUD as inaccurate, after HUD has inspected the evidence and provided due notice and opportunity to the jurisdiction for comment; and

            (4) A plan that does not include a description of the manner in which the unit of general local government or state will provide financial or other assistance to a public housing agency if the public housing agency is designated as “troubled” by HUD.
            
            (c) Written notice of disapproval. Within 15 days after HUD notifies a jurisdiction that it is disapproving its plan, it must inform the jurisdiction in writing of the reasons for disapproval and actions that the jurisdiction could take to meet the criteria for approval. Disapproval of a plan with respect to one program does not affect assistance distributed on the basis of a formula under other programs.
            (d) Revisions and resubmission. The jurisdiction may revise or resubmit a plan within 45 days after the first notification of disapproval. HUD must respond to approve or disapprove the plan within 30 days of receiving the revisions or resubmission.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 56909, Nov. 9, 1995; 61 FR 54920, Oct. 22, 1996; 71 FR 6970, Feb. 9, 2006]
          
          
            § 91.505
            Amendments to the consolidated plan.
            (a) Amendments to the plan. The jurisdiction shall amend its approved plan whenever it makes one of the following decisions:
            (1) To make a change in its allocation priorities or a change in the method of distribution of funds;
            (2) To carry out an activity, using funds from any program covered by the consolidated plan (including program income, reimbursements, repayment, recaptures, or reallocations from HUD), not previously described in the action plan; or
            (3) To change the purpose, scope, location, or beneficiaries of an activity.
            (b) Criteria for substantial amendment. The jurisdiction shall identify in its citizen participation plan the criteria it will use for determining what constitutes a substantial amendment. It is these substantial amendments that are subject to a citizen participation process, in accordance with the jurisdiction's citizen participation plan. (See §§ 91.105 and 91.115.)
            (c) Submission to HUD. (1) Upon completion, the jurisdiction must make the amendment public and must notify HUD that an amendment has been made. The jurisdiction may submit a copy of each amendment to HUD as it occurs, or at the end of the program year. Letters transmitting copies of amendments must be signed by the official representative of the jurisdiction authorized to take such action.
            (2) See subpart B of this part for the public notice procedures applicable to substantial amendments. For any amendment affecting the HOPWA program that would involve acquisition, rehabilitation, conversion, lease, repair or construction of properties to provide housing, an environmental review of the revised proposed use of funds must be completed by HUD in accordance with 24 CFR 574.510.
            (d) The jurisdiction must ensure that amendments to the plan are consistent with its certification to affirmatively further fair housing and the analysis and strategies of the AFH.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 80 FR 42366, July 16, 2015; 80 FR 69870, Nov. 12, 2015; 81 FR 86951, Dec. 2, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.510
            Consistency determinations.
            (a) Applicability. For competitive programs, a certification of consistency of the application with the approved consolidated plan for the jurisdiction may be required, whether the applicant is the jurisdiction or another applicant.
            (b) Certifying authority. (1) The certification must be obtained from the unit of general local government if the project will be located in a unit of general local government that: is required to have a consolidated plan, is authorized to use an abbreviated consolidated plan but elects to prepare and has submitted a full consolidated plan, or is authorized to use an abbreviated consolidated plan and is applying for the same program as the applicant pursuant to the same Notice of Funding Availability (and therefore has or will have an abbreviated consolidated plan for the fiscal year for that program).

            (2) If the project will not be located in a unit of general local government, the certification may be obtained from the State or, if the project will be located in a unit of general local government authorized to use an abbreviated consolidated plan, from the unit of general local government if it is willing to prepare such a plan.
            
            (3) Where the recipient of a HOPWA grant is a city that is the most populous unit of general local government in an EMSA, it also must obtain and keep on file certifications of consistency from such public officials for each other locality in the EMSA in which housing assistance is provided.
            (c) Meaning. A jurisdiction's certification that an application is consistent with its consolidated plan means the jurisdiction's plan shows need, the proposed activities are consistent with the jurisdiction's strategic plan, and the location of the proposed activities is consistent with the geographic areas specified in the plan. The jurisdiction shall provide the reasons for the denial when it fails to provide a certification of consistency.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
          
          
            § 91.515
            Funding determinations by HUD.
            (a) Formula funding. The action plan submitted by the jurisdiction will be considered as the application for the CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA formula grant programs. The Department will make its funding award determination after reviewing the plan submission in accordance with § 91.500.
            (b) Other funding. For other funding, the jurisdiction must still respond to Notices of Funding Availability for the individual programs in order to receive funding.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
          
          
            § 91.520
            Performance reports.
            (a) General. Each jurisdiction that has an approved consolidated plan shall annually review and report, in a form prescribed by HUD, on the progress it has made in carrying out its strategic plan and its action plan. The performance report must include a description of the resources made available, the investment of available resources, the geographic distribution and location of investments, the families and persons assisted (including the racial and ethnic status of persons assisted), actions taken to affirmatively further fair housing, and other actions indicated in the strategic plan and the action plan. This performance report shall be submitted to HUD within 90 days after the close of the jurisdiction's program year.
            (b) Affordable housing. The report shall include an evaluation of the jurisdiction's progress in meeting its specific objective of providing affordable housing, including the number and types of families served. This element of the report must include the number of extremely low-income, low-income, moderate-income, middle-income, and homeless persons served.
            (c) Homelessness. The report must include, in a form prescribed by HUD, an evaluation of the jurisdiction's progress in meeting its specific objectives for reducing and ending homelessness through:
            (1) Reaching out to homeless persons (especially unsheltered persons) and assessing their individual needs;
            (2) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs of homeless persons;
            (3) Helping homeless persons (especially chronically homeless individuals and families, families with children, veterans and their families, and unaccompanied youth) make the transition to permanent housing and independent living, including shortening the period of time that individuals and families experience homelessness, facilitating access for homeless individuals and families to affordable housing units, and preventing individuals and families who were recently homeless from becoming homeless again; and
            (4) Helping low-income individuals and families avoid becoming homeless, especially extremely low-income individuals and families and those who are
            (i) Likely to become homeless after being discharged from publicly funded institutions and systems of care (such as health-care facilities, mental health facilities, foster care and other youth facilities, and corrections programs and institutions);
            (ii) Receiving assistance from public or private agencies that address housing, health, social services, employment, education, or youth needs.
            (d) CDBG. For CDBG recipients, the report shall include a description of the use of CDBG funds during the program year and an assessment by the jurisdiction of the relationship of that use to the priorities and specific objectives identified in the plan, giving special attention to the highest priority activities that were identified. This element of the report must specify the nature of and reasons for any changes in its program objectives and indications of how the jurisdiction would change its programs as a result of its experiences. This element of the report also must include the number of extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income persons served by each activity where information on income by family size is required to determine the eligibility of the activity.
            (e) HOME. For HOME participating jurisdictions, the report shall include the results of on-site inspections of affordable rental housing assisted under the program to determine compliance with housing codes and other applicable regulations, an assessment of the jurisdiction's affirmative marketing actions and outreach to minority-owned and women-owned businesses, data on the amount and use of program income for projects, including the number of projects and owner and tenant characteristics, and data on emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and 24 CFR 92.359, pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, including data on the outcomes of such requests.
            (f) HOPWA. For jurisdictions receiving funding under the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS program, the report must include the number of individuals assisted and the types of assistance provided, as well as data on emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e), pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, including data on the outcomes of such requests.
            (g) ESG. For jurisdictions receiving funding under the ESG program provided in 24 CFR part 576, the report, in a form prescribed by HUD, must include the number of persons assisted, the types of assistance provided, the project or program outcomes data measured under the performance standards developed in consultation with the Continuum(s) of Care, and data on emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and 24 CFR 576.409, pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, including data on the outcomes of such requests.
            (h) HTF. For jurisdictions receiving HTF funds, the report must describe the HTF program's accomplishments, and the extent to which the jurisdiction complied with its approved HTF allocation plan and the requirements of 24 CFR part 93, as well as data on emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and 24 CFR 93.356, pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, including data on the outcomes of such requests.
            (i) Evaluation by HUD. HUD shall review the performance report and determine whether it is satisfactory. If a satisfactory report is not submitted in a timely manner, HUD may suspend funding until a satisfactory report is submitted, or may withdraw and reallocate funding if HUD determines, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, that the jurisdiction will not submit a satisfactory report.
            (j) The report will include a comparison of the proposed versus actual outcomes for each outcome measure submitted with the consolidated plan and explain, if applicable, why progress was not made toward meeting goals and objectives.
            (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2506-0117)
            [60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 71 FR 6971, Feb. 9, 2006; 76 FR 75973, Dec. 5, 2011; 80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015; 81 FR 80803, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 91.525
            Performance review by HUD.
            (a) General. HUD shall review the performance of each jurisdiction covered by this part at least annually, including site visits by employees—insofar as practicable, assessing the following:
            (1) Management of funds made available under programs administered by HUD;
            (2) Compliance with the consolidated plan;
            (3) Accuracy of performance reports;
            
            (4) Extent to which the jurisdiction made progress towards the statutory goals identified in § 91.1; and
            (5) Efforts to ensure that housing assisted under programs administered by HUD is in compliance with contractual agreements and the requirements of law.
            (b) Report by HUD. HUD shall report on the performance review in writing, stating the length of time the jurisdiction has to review and comment on the report, which will be at least 30 days. HUD may revise the report after considering the jurisdiction's views, and shall make the report, the jurisdiction's comments, and any revisions available to the public within 30 days after receipt of the jurisdiction's comments.
          
          
            § 91.600
            Waiver authority.
            Upon determination of good cause, HUD may, subject to statutory limitations, waive any provision of this part. Each such waiver must be in writing and must be supported by documentation of the pertinent facts and grounds.
            [60 FR 50802, Sept. 29, 1995]
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 92
        PART 92—HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIPS PROGRAM
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            92.1
            Overview.
            92.2
            Definitions.
            92.3
            Applicability of 2013 regulatory changes.
            92.4
            Waivers and suspension of requirements for disaster areas.
          
          
            Subpart B—Allocation Formula
            92.50
            Formula allocation.
            
              Insular Areas Program
              92.60
              Allocation amounts for insular areas.
              92.61
              Program description.
              92.62
              Review of program description and certifications.
              92.63
              Amendments to program description.
              92.64
              Applicability of requirements to insular areas.
              92.65
              Funding sanctions.
              92.66
              Reallocation.
            
          
          
            Subpart C—Consortia; Designation and Revocation of Designation as a Participating Jurisdiction
            92.100
            [Reserved]
            92.101
            Consortia.
            92.102
            Participation threshold amount.
            92.103
            Notification of intent to participate.
            92.104
            Submission of a consolidated plan and Assessment of Fair Housing.
            92.105
            Designation as a participating jurisdiction.
            92.106
            Continuous designation as a participating jurisdiction.
            92.107
            Revocation of designation as a participating jurisdiction.
          
          
            Subpart D—Submission Requirements
            92.150
            Submission requirements.
          
          
            Subpart E—Program Requirements
            92.200
            Private-public partnership.
            92.201
            Distribution of assistance.
            92.202
            Site and neighborhood standards.
            92.203
            Income determinations.
            92.204
            Applicability of requirements to entities that receive a reallocation of HOME funds, other than participating jurisdictions.
            
              Eligible and Prohibited Activities
              92.205
              Eligible activities: General.
              92.206
              Eligible project costs.
              92.207
              Eligible administrative and planning costs.
              92.208
              Eligible community housing development organization (CHDO) operating expense and capacity building costs.
              92.209
              Tenant-based rental assistance: Eligible costs and requirements.
              92.210
              Troubled HOME-assisted rental housing projects.
              92.212
              Pre-award costs.
              92.213
              HOME funds and public housing.
              92.214
              Prohibited activities and fees.
              92.215
              Limitation on jurisdictions under court order.
            
            
              Income Targeting
              92.216
              Income targeting: Tenant-based rental assistance and rental units.
              92.217
              Income targeting: Homeownership.
            
            
              Matching Contribution Requirement
              92.218
              Amount of matching contribution.
              92.219
              Recognition of matching contribution.
              92.220
              Form of matching contribution.
              92.221
              Match credit.
              92.222
              Reduction of matching contribution requirement.
            
          
          
            
            Subpart F—Project Requirements
            92.250
            Maximum per-unit subsidy amount, underwriting, and subsidy layering.
            92.251
            Property standards.
            92.252
            Qualification as affordable housing: Rental housing.
            92.253
            Tenant protections and selection.
            92.254
            Qualification as affordable housing: Homeownership.
            92.255
            Converting rental units to homeownership units for existing tenants.
            92.256
            [Reserved]
            92.257
            Equal participation of faith-based organizations.
            92.258
            Elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units.
          
          
            Subpart G—Community Housing Development Organizations
            92.300
            Set-aside for community housing development organizations (CHDOs).
            92.301
            Project-specific assistance to community housing development organizations.
            92.302
            Housing education and organizational support.
            92.303
            Tenant participation plan.
          
          
            Subpart H—Other Federal Requirements
            92.350
            Other Federal requirements and nondiscrimination.
            92.351
            Affirmative marketing; minority outreach program.
            92.352
            Environmental review.
            92.353
            Displacement, relocation, and acquisition.
            92.354
            Labor.
            92.355
            Lead-based paint.
            92.356
            Conflict of interest.
            92.357
            Executive Order 12372.
            92.358
            Consultant activities.
            92.359
            VAWA requirements.
          
          
            Subpart I—Technical Assistance
            92.400
            Coordinated Federal support for housing strategies.
          
          
            Subpart J—Reallocations
            92.450
            General.
            92.451
            Reallocation of HOME funds from a jurisdiction that is not designated a participating jurisdiction or has its designation revoked.
            92.452
            Reallocation of community housing development organization set-aside.
            92.453
            Competitive reallocations.
            92.454
            Reallocations by formula.
          
          
            Subpart K—Program Administration
            92.500
            The HOME Investment Trust Fund.
            92.501
            HOME Investment Partnership Agreement.
            92.502
            Program disbursement and information system.
            92.503
            Program income, repayments, and recaptured funds.
            92.504
            Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written agreements; on-site inspections.
            92.505
            Applicability of uniform administrative requirements.
            92.506
            Audit.
            92.507
            Closeout.
            92.508
            Recordkeeping.
            92.509
            Performance reports.
          
          
            Subpart L—Performance Reviews and Sanctions
            92.550
            Performance reviews.
            92.551
            Corrective and remedial actions.
            92.552
            Notice and opportunity for hearing; sanctions.
          
          
            Subpart M—American Dream Downpayment Initiative
            92.600
            Purpose.
            92.602
            Eligible activities.
            92.604
            ADDI allocation formula.
            92.606
            Reallocations.
            92.608
            Consolidated plan.
            92.610
            Program requirements
            92.612
            Project requirements.
            92.614
            Other Federal requirements.
            92.616
            Program administration.
            92.618
            Performance reviews and sanctions.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 12 U.S.C. 1701x and 4568.
        
        
          Source:
          61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
          Subpart A—General
          
            § 92.1
            Overview.

            This part implements the HOME Investment Partnerships Act (the HOME Investment Partnerships Program). In general, under the HOME Investment Partnerships Program, HUD allocates funds by formula among eligible State and local governments to strengthen public-private partnerships and to expand the supply of decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable housing, with primary attention to rental housing, for very low-income and low-income families. Generally, HOME funds must be matched by nonfederal resources. State and local governments that become participating jurisdictions may use HOME funds to carry out multi-year housing strategies through acquisition, rehabilitation, and new construction of housing, and tenant-based rental assistance. Participating jurisdictions may provide assistance in a number of eligible forms, including loans, advances, equity investments, interest subsidies and other forms of investment that HUD approves.
          
          
            § 92.2
            Definitions.
            The terms 1937 Act, ALJ,
              Fair Housing Act, HUD,
              Indian Housing Authority (IHA), Public housing,
              Public Housing Agency (PHA), and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR 5.100.
            
              Act means the HOME Investment Partnerships Act at title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 12701 et seq.
            
            
              ADDI funds means funds made available under subpart M through allocations and reallocations.
            
              Adjusted income. See § 92.203.
            
              Annual income. See § 92.203.
            
              CDBG program means the Community Development Block Grant program under 24 CFR part 570.
            
              Certification shall have the meaning provided in section 104(21) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 12704.
            
              Commitment means:

            (1) The participating jurisdiction has executed a legally binding written agreement (that includes the date of the signature of each person signing the agreement) that meets the minimum requirements for a written agreement in § 92.504(c). An agreement between the participating jurisdiction and a subrecipient that is controlled by the participating jurisdiction (e.g., an agency whose officials or employees are official or employees of the participating jurisdiction) does not constitute a commitment. An agreement between the representative unit and a member unit of general local government of a consortium does not constitute a commitment. Funds for administrative and planning costs of the HOME program are committed based on the amount in the program disbursement and information system for administration and planning. The written agreement must be:
            (i) With a State recipient or a subrecipient to use a specific amount of HOME funds to produce affordable housing, provide downpayment assistance, or provide tenant-based rental assistance;
            (ii) With a community housing development organization to provide operating expenses;
            (iii) With a community housing development organization to provide project-specific technical assistance and site control loans or project-specific seed money loans, in accordance with § 92.301;
            (iv) To develop the capacity of community housing development organizations in the jurisdiction, in accordance with § 92.300(b); or
            (v) To commit to a specific local project, as defined in paragraph (2) of this definition.
            (2) Commit to a specific local project means:
            (i) If the project consists of rehabilitation or new construction (with or without acquisition) the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or sub recipient) and project owner have executed a written legally binding agreement under which HOME assistance will be provided to the owner for an identifiable project for which all necessary financing has been secured, a budget and schedule have been established, and underwriting has been completed and under which construction is scheduled to start within twelve months of the agreement date. If the project is owned by the participating jurisdiction or State recipient, the project has been set up in the disbursement and information system established by HUD, and construction can reasonably be expected to start within twelve months of the project set-up date.

            (ii)(A) If the project consists of acquisition of standard housing and the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) is acquiring the property with HOME funds, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) and the property owner have executed a legally binding contract for sale of an identifiable property and the property title will be transferred to the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) within six months of the date of the contract.
            
            (B) If the project consists of acquisition of standard housing and the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) is providing HOME funds to a family to acquire single family housing for homeownership or to a purchaser to acquire rental housing, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) and the family or purchaser have executed a written agreement under which HOME assistance will be provided for the purchase of the single family housing or rental housing and the property title will be transferred to the family or purchaser within six months of the agreement date.
            (iii) If the project consists of tenant-based rental assistance, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient, or subrecipient) has entered into a rental assistance contract with the owner or the tenant in accordance with the provisions of § 92.209.
            
              Community housing development organization means a private nonprofit organization that:
            (1) Is organized under State or local laws;
            (2) Has no part of its net earnings inuring to the benefit of any member, founder, contributor, or individual;
            (3) Is neither controlled by, nor under the direction of, individuals or entities seeking to derive profit or gain from the organization. A community housing development organization may be sponsored or created by a for-profit entity, but:
            (i) The for-profit entity may not be an entity whose primary purpose is the development or management of housing, such as a builder, developer, or real estate management firm.
            (ii) The for-profit entity may not have the right to appoint more than one-third of the membership of the organization's governing body. Board members appointed by the for-profit entity may not appoint the remaining two-thirds of the board members;
            (iii) The community housing development organization must be free to contract for goods and services from vendors of its own choosing; and
            (iv) The officers and employees of the for-profit entity may not be officers or employees of the community housing development organization.
            (4) Has a tax exemption ruling from the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 CFR 1.501(c)(3)-1 or 1.501(c)(4)-1)), is classified as a subordinate of a central organization non-profit under section 905 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or if the private nonprofit organization is an wholly owned entity that is disregarded as an entity separate from its owner for tax purposes (e.g., a single member limited liability company that is wholly owned by an organization that qualifies as tax-exempt), the owner organization has a tax exemption ruling from the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and meets the definition of “community housing development organization;”
            (5) Is not a governmental entity (including the participating jurisdiction, other jurisdiction, Indian tribe, public housing authority, Indian housing authority, housing finance agency, or redevelopment authority) and is not controlled by a governmental entity. An organization that is created by a governmental entity may qualify as a community housing development organization; however, the governmental entity may not have the right to appoint more than one-third of the membership of the organization's governing body and no more than one- third of the board members may be public officials or employees of governmental entity. Board members appointed by a governmental entity may not appoint the remaining two-thirds of the board members. The officers or employees of a governmental entity may not be officers or employees of a community housing development organization;
            (6) Has standards of financial accountability that conform to 2 CFR 200.302, ‘Financial Management’ and 2 CFR 200.303, ‘Internal Controls;’
            (7) Has among its purposes the provision of decent housing that is affordable to low-income and moderate-income persons, as evidenced in its charter, articles of incorporation, resolutions or by-laws;
            (8) Maintains accountability to low-income community residents by:

            (i) Maintaining at least one-third of its governing board's membership for residents of low-income neighborhoods, other low-income community residents, or elected representative of low-income neighborhood organizations. For urban areas, “community” may be a neighborhood or neighborhoods, city, county or metropolitan area; for rural areas, it may be a neighborhood or neighborhoods, town, village, county, or multi-county area (but not the entire State); and
            (ii) Providing a formal process for low-income program beneficiaries to advise the organization in its decisions regarding the design, siting, development, and management of affordable housing;
            (9) Has a demonstrated capacity for carrying out housing projects assisted with HOME funds. A designated organization undertaking development activities as a developer or sponsor must satisfy this requirement by having paid employees with housing development experience who will work on projects assisted with HOME funds. For its first year of funding as a community housing development organization, an organization may satisfy this requirement through a contract with a consultant who has housing development experience to train appropriate key staff of the organization. An organization that will own housing must demonstrate capacity to act as owner of a project and meet the requirements of § 92.300(a)(2). A nonprofit organization does not meet the test of demonstrated capacity based on any person who is a volunteer or whose services are donated by another organization; and
            (10) Has a history of serving the community within which housing to be assisted with HOME funds is to be located. In general, an organization must be able to show one year of serving the community before HOME funds are reserved for the organization. However, a newly created organization formed by local churches, service organizations or neighborhood organizations may meet this requirement by demonstrating that its parent organization has at least a year of serving the community.
            
              Consolidated plan means the plan submitted and approved in accordance with 24 CFR part 91.
            
              Displaced homemaker means an individual who:
            (1) Is an adult;
            (2) Has not worked full-time full-year in the labor force for a number of years but has, during such years, worked primarily without remuneration to care for the home and family; and
            (3) Is unemployed or underemployed and is experiencing difficulty in obtaining or upgrading employment.
            
              Family has the same meaning given that term in 24 CFR 5.403.
            
              First-time homebuyer means an individual and his or her spouse who have not owned a home during the three-year period prior to purchase of a home with assistance under the American Dream Downpayment Initiative (ADDI) described in subpart M of this part. The term first-time homebuyer also includes an individual who is a displaced homemaker or single parent, as those terms are defined in this section. An individual shall not be excluded from consideration as a first-time homebuyer on the basis that the individual owns or owned, as a principal residence during the three-year period, a dwelling unit whose structure is not permanently affixed to a permanent foundation in accordance with local or other applicable regulations or is not in compliance with State, local, or model building codes, or other applicable codes, and cannot be brought into compliance with the codes for less than the cost of constructing a permanent structure.
            
              HOME funds means funds made available under this part through allocations and reallocations, plus program income.
            
              Homebuyer counseling has the same meaning as homeownership counseling in 24 CFR 5.100, and is a type of housing counseling.
            
              Homeownership means ownership in fee simple title in a 1- to 4-unit dwelling or in a condominium unit, or equivalent form of ownership approved by HUD.
            (1) The land may be owned in fee simple or the homeowner may have a 99-year ground lease.
            (i) For housing located in the insular areas, the ground lease must be 40 years or more.

            (ii) For housing located on Indian trust or restricted Indian lands or a Community Land Trust, the ground lease must be 50 years or more.
            (iii) For manufactured housing, the ground lease must be for a period at least equal to the applicable period of affordability in § 92.254.
            (2) Right to possession under a contract for deed, installment contract, or land contract (pursuant to which the deed is not given until the final payment is made) is not an equivalent form of ownership.
            (3) The ownership interest may be subject only to the restrictions on resale required under § 92.254(a); mortgages, deeds of trust, or other liens or instruments securing debt on the property as approved by the participating jurisdiction; or any other restrictions or encumbrances that do not impair the good and marketable nature of title to the ownership interest.
            (4) The participating jurisdiction must determine whether or not ownership or membership in a cooperative or mutual housing project constitutes homeownership under State law; however, if the cooperative or mutual housing project receives Low Income Housing Tax Credits, the ownership or membership does not constitute homeownership.
            
              Household means one or more persons occupying a housing unit.
            
              Housing includes manufactured housing and manufactured housing lots, permanent housing for disabled homeless persons, transitional housing, single-room occupancy housing, and group homes. Housing also includes elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units that are small, free- standing, barrier-free, energy-efficient, removable, and designed to be installed adjacent to existing single-family dwellings. Housing does not include emergency shelters (including shelters for disaster victims) or facilities such as nursing homes, convalescent homes, hospitals, residential treatment facilities, correctional facilities, halfway houses, housing for students, or dormitories (including farmworker dormitories).
            
              Housing counseling has the meaning given the term in 24 CFR 5.100.
            
              Insular areas means Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands, and American Samoa.
            
              Jurisdiction means a State or unit of general local government.
            
              Low-income families means families whose annual incomes do not exceed 80 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes. An individual does not qualify as a low-income family if the individual is a student who is not eligible to receive Section 8 assistance under 24 CFR 5.612.
            
              Metropolitan city has the meaning given the term in 24 CFR 570.3.
            
              Neighborhood means a geographic location designated in comprehensive plans, ordinances, or other local documents as a neighborhood, village, or similar geographical designation that is within the boundary but does not encompass the entire area of a unit of general local government; except that if the unit of general local government has a population under 25,000, the neighborhood may, but need not, encompass the entire area of a unit of general local government.
            
              Participating jurisdiction means a jurisdiction (as defined in this section) that has been so designated by HUD in accordance with § 92.105.
            
              Person with disabilities means a household composed of one or more persons, at least one of whom is an adult, who has a disability.
            (1) A person is considered to have a disability if the person has a physical, mental, or emotional impairment that:
            (i) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration;
            (ii) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently; and
            (iii) Is of such a nature that such ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions.
            (2) A person will also be considered to have a disability if he or she has a developmental disability, which is a severe, chronic disability that:

            (i) Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical impairments;
            
            (ii) Is manifested before the person attains age 22;
            (iii) Is likely to continue indefinitely;
            (iv) Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of major life activity: self-care, receptive and expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living, and economic self-sufficiency; and
            (v) Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or generic care, treatment, or other services that are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this definition, the term “person with disabilities” includes two or more persons with disabilities living together, one or more such persons living with another person who is determined to be important to their care or well-being, and the surviving member or members of any household described in the first sentence of this definition who were living, in a unit assisted with HOME funds, with the deceased member of the household at the time of his or her death.
            
              Program income means gross income received by the participating jurisdiction, State recipient, or a subrecipient directly generated from the use of HOME funds or matching contributions. When program income is generated by housing that is only partially assisted with HOME funds or matching funds, the income shall be prorated to reflect the percentage of HOME funds used. Program income includes, but is not limited to, the following:
            (1) Proceeds from the disposition by sale or long-term lease of real property acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed with HOME funds or matching contributions;

            (2) Gross income from the use or rental of real property, owned by the participating jurisdiction, State recipient, or a subrecipient, that was acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed, with HOME funds or matching contributions, less costs incidental to generation of the income (Program income does not include gross income from the use, rental or sale of real property received by the project owner, developer, or sponsor, unless the funds are paid by the project owner, developer, or sponsor to the participating jurisdiction, subrecipient or State recipient);
            (3) Payments of principal and interest on loans made using HOME funds or matching contributions;
            (4) Proceeds from the sale of loans made with HOME funds or matching contributions;
            (5) Proceeds from the sale of obligations secured by loans made with HOME funds or matching contributions;
            (6) Interest earned on program income pending its disposition; and
            (7) Any other interest or return on the investment permitted under § 92.205(b) of HOME funds or matching contributions.
            
              Project means a site or sites together with any building (including a manufactured housing unit) or buildings located on the site(s) that are under common ownership, management, and financing and are to be assisted with HOME funds as a single undertaking under this part. The project includes all the activities associated with the site and building. For tenant-based rental assistance, project means assistance to one or more families.
            
              Project completion means that all necessary title transfer requirements and construction work have been performed; the project complies with the requirements of this part (including the property standards under § 92.251); the final drawdown of HOME funds has been disbursed for the project; and the project completion information has been entered into the disbursement and information system established by HUD, except that with respect to rental housing project completion, for the purposes of § 92.502(d) of this part, project completion occurs upon completion of construction and before occupancy. For tenant-based rental assistance, project completion means the final drawdown has been disbursed for the project.
            
              Reconstruction means the rebuilding, on the same lot, of housing standing on a site at the time of project commitment, except that housing that was destroyed may be rebuilt on the same lot if HOME funds are committed within 12 months of the date of destruction. The number of housing units on the lot may not be decreased or increased as part of a reconstruction project, but the number of rooms per unit may be increased or decreased. Reconstruction also includes replacing an existing substandard unit of manufactured housing with a new or standard unit of manufactured housing. Reconstruction is rehabilitation for purposes of this part.
            
              Single family housing means a one-to four-family residence, condominium unit, cooperative unit, combination of manufactured housing and lot, or manufactured housing lot.
            
              Single parent means an individual who:
            (1) Is unmarried or legally separated from a spouse; and
            (2) Has one or more minor children of whom the individual has custody or joint custody, or is pregnant.
            
              Single room occupancy (SRO) housing means housing (consisting of single- room dwelling units) that is the primary residence of its occupant or occupants. The unit must contain either food preparation or sanitary facilities (and may contain both) if the project consists of new construction, conversion of nonresidential space, or reconstruction. For acquisition or rehabilitation of an existing residential structure or hotel, neither food preparation nor sanitary facilities are required to be in the unit. If the units do not contain sanitary facilities, the building must contain sanitary facilities that are shared by tenants. A project's designation as an SRO cannot be inconsistent with the building's zoning and building code classification.
            
              State means any state of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any agency or instrumentality thereof that is established pursuant to legislation and designated by the chief executive officer to act on behalf of the state with regard to the provisions of this part; however, for purposes of the American Dream Downpayment Initiative (ADDI) described in subpart M of this part, the term “state” does not include the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (except for FY2003 ADDI funds).
            
              State recipient. See § 92.201(b)(2).
            
              Subrecipient means a public agency or nonprofit organization selected by the participating jurisdiction to administer all or some of the participating jurisdiction's HOME programs to produce affordable housing, provide downpayment assistance, or provide tenant-based rental assistance. A public agency or nonprofit organization that receives HOME funds solely as a developer or owner of a housing project is not a subrecipient. The participating jurisdiction's selection of a subrecipient is not subject to the procurement procedures and requirements.
            
              Tenant-based rental assistance is a form of rental assistance in which the assisted tenant may move from a dwelling unit with a right to continued assistance. Tenant-based rental assistance under this part also includes security deposits for rental of dwelling units.
            
              Transitional housing means housing that:
            (1) Is designed to provide housing and appropriate supportive services to persons, including (but not limited to) deinstitutionalized individuals with disabilities, homeless individuals with disabilities, and homeless families with children; and
            (2) Has as its purpose facilitating the movement of individuals and families to independent living within a time period that is set by the participating jurisdiction or project owner before occupancy.
            
              Uniform Physical Condition Standards (UPCS) means uniform national standards established by HUD pursuant to 24 CFR 5.703 for housing that is decent, safe, sanitary, and in good repair. Standards are established for inspectable items for each of the following areas: site, building exterior, building systems, dwelling units, and common areas.
            
              Unit of general local government means a city, town, township, county, parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a State; a consortium of such political subdivisions recognized by HUD in accordance with § 92.101; and any agency or instrumentality thereof that is established pursuant to legislation and designated by the chief executive to act on behalf of the jurisdiction with regard to provisions of this part. When a county is an urban county, the urban county is the unit of general local government for purposes of the HOME Investment Partnerships Program.
            
              Urban county has the meaning given the term in 24 CFR 570.3.
            
              Very low-income families means low- income families whose annual incomes do not exceed 50 percent of the median family income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 50 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes. An individual does not qualify as a very low-income family if the individual is a student who is not eligible to receive Section 8 assistance under 24 CFR 5.612.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 61755, Oct. 1, 2002; 69 FR 16765, Mar. 30, 2004; 72 FR 16685, Apr. 4, 2007; 78 FR 44664, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75934, Dec. 7, 2015; 81 FR 86952, Dec. 2, 2016; 81 FR 90657, Dec. 14, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.3
            Applicability of 2013 regulatory changes.
            The regulations of this part, as revised by final rule published on July 24, 2013 are applicable to projects for which HOME funds are committed on or after August 23, 2013, with the exception of the following provisions;
            (a) Section 92.2, for the definition of commitment, the change which eliminates reservations of funds that are not project-specific to CHDOs as a commitment will be applicable on October 22, 2013 and will be implemented by HUD for deadlines that occur on or after January 1, 2015;
            (b) Section 92.251, Property Standards, will apply to projects to which funds are committed on or after January 24, 2015;
            (c) Section 92.254(f). Homebuyer program policies, for written policies related to underwriting, responsible lending, and refinancing, will be applicable on January 24, 2014;
            (d) Section 92.500(d)(1)(C), establishing the separate 5-year deadline for expenditure of CHDO set-aside funds will be applicable on January 1, 2015 and will be implemented by HUD for all deadlines that occur on or after that date; and
            (e) Section 92.504(a), for written policies, procedures, and systems, will be applicable on July 24, 2014.
            (f) Section 92.504(d)(2), for financial oversight of projects assisted with HOME funds, will be applicable on July 24, 2014.
            [78 FR 44666, Aug. 22, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.4
            Waivers and suspension of requirements for disaster areas.
            HUD's authority for waiver of regulations and for the suspension of requirements to address damage in a Presidentially declared disaster area is described in 24 CFR 5.110 and in section 290 of the Act, respectively.
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Allocation Formula
          
            § 92.50
            Formula allocation.
            (a) Jurisdictions eligible for a formula allocation. HUD will provide allocations of funds in amounts determined by the formula described in this section to units of general local governments that, as of the end of the previous fiscal year, are metropolitan cities, urban counties, or consortia approved under § 92.101; and States.
            (b) Amounts available for allocation; State and local share. The amount of funds that are available for allocation by the formula under this section is equal to the balance of funds remaining after reserving amounts for insular areas, housing education and organizational support, other support for State and local housing strategies, and other purposes authorized by Congress, in accordance with the Act and appropriations.
            (c) Formula factors. The formula for determining allocations uses the following factors. The first and sixth factors are weighted 0.1; the other four factors are weighted 0.2.

            (1) Vacancy-adjusted rental units where the household head is at or below the poverty level. These rental units are multiplied by the ratio of the national rental vacancy rate over a jurisdiction's rental vacancy rate.
            

            (2) Occupied rental units with at least one of four problems (overcrowding, incomplete kitchen facilities, incomplete plumbing, or high rent costs). Overcrowding is a condition that exists if there is more than one person per room occupying the unit. Incomplete kitchen facilities means the unit lacks a sink with running water, a range, or a refrigerator. Incomplete plumbing means the unit lacks hot and cold piped water, a flush toilet, or a bathtub or shower inside the unit for the exclusive use of the occupants of the unit. High rent costs occur when more than 30 percent of household income is used for rent.
            (3) Rental units built before 1950 occupied by poor households.
            (4) Rental units described in paragraph (c)(2) of this section multiplied by the ratio of the cost of producing housing for a jurisdiction divided by the national cost.
            (5) Number of families at or below the poverty level.
            (6) Population of a jurisdiction multiplied by a net per capita income (pci). To compute net pci for a jurisdiction or for the nation, the pci of a three person family at the poverty threshold is subtracted from the pci of the jurisdiction or of the nation. The index is constructed by dividing the national net pci by the net pci of a jurisdiction.
            (d) Calculating formula allocations for units of general local government. (1) Initial allocation amounts for units of general local government described in paragraph (a) of this section are determined by multiplying the sum of the shares of the six factors in paragraph (c) of this section by 60 percent of the amount available under paragraph (b) of this section for formula allocation. The shares are the ratio of the weighted factor for each jurisdiction over the corresponding factor for the total for all of these units of general local government.
            (2) If any of the initial amounts for such units of general local government in Puerto Rico exceeds twice the national average, on a per rental unit basis, that amount is capped at twice the national average.
            (3) To determine the maximum number of units of general local government that receive a formula allocation, only one jurisdiction (the unit of general local government with the smallest allocation of HOME funds) is dropped from the pool of eligible jurisdictions on each successive recalculation, except that jurisdictions that are participating jurisdictions (other than consortia that fail to renew the membership of all of their member jurisdictions) are not dropped. Then the amount of funds available for units of general local government is redistributed to all others. This recalculation/redistribution continues until all remaining units of general local government receive an allocation of $500,000 or more or are participating jurisdictions. Only units of general local government which receive an allocation of $500,000 or more under the formula or which are participating jurisdictions will be awarded an allocation. In fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion of HOME funds, $335,000 is substituted for $500,000.

            (4) The allocation amounts determined under paragraph (d)(3) of this section are reduced by any amounts that are necessary to provide increased allocations to States that have no unit of general local government receiving a formula allocation (see paragraph (e)(4) of this section). These reductions are made on a pro rata basis, except that no unit of general local government allocation is reduced below $500,000 (or $335,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion of HOME funds) and no participating jurisdiction allocation which is below this amount is reduced.
            (e) Calculating formula allocations for States. (1) Forty percent of the funds available for allocation under paragraph (b) of this section are allocated to States. The allocation amounts for States are calculated by determining initial amounts for each State, based on the sum of the shares of the six factors. For 20 percent of the funds to be allocated to States, the shares are the ratio of the weighted factor for the entire State over the corresponding factor for the total for all States. For 80 percent of the funds to be allocated to States, the shares are the ratio of the weighted factor for all units of general local government within the State that do not receive a formula allocation over the corresponding factor for the total for all States.
            (2) If the initial amounts for Puerto Rico (based on either or both the 80 percent of funds or 20 percent of funds calculation) exceed twice the national average, on a per rental unit basis, each amount that exceeds the national average is capped at twice the national average, and the resultant funds are reallocated to other States on a prorata basis.
            (3) If the initial amounts when combined for any State are less than the $3,000,000, the allocation to that State is increased to the $3,000,000 and all other State allocations are reduced by an equal amount on a prorata basis, except that no State allocation is reduced below $3,000,000.
            (4) The allocation amount for each State that has no unit of general local government within the State receiving an allocation under paragraph (d) of this section is increased by $500,000. Funds for this increase are derived from the funds available for units of general local government, in accordance with paragraph (d)(4) of this section.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997; 67 FR 61755, Oct. 1, 2002]
          
          
            Insular Areas Program
            
              § 92.60
              Allocation amounts for insular areas.
              (a) Initial allocation amount for each insular area. The initial allocation amount for each insular area is determined based upon the insular area's population and occupied rental units compared to all insular areas.
              (b) Threshold requirements. The HUD Field Office shall review each insular area's progress on outstanding allocations made under this section, based on the insular area's performance report, the timeliness of close-outs, and compliance with fund management requirements and regulations, taking into consideration the size of the allocation and the degree and complexity of the program. If HUD determines from this review that the insular area does not have the capacity to administer effectively a new allocation, or a portion of a new allocation, in addition to allocations currently under administration, HUD may reduce the insular area's initial allocation amount.
              (c) Previous audit findings and outstanding monetary obligations. HUD shall not make an allocation to an insular area that has either an outstanding audit finding for any HUD program, or an outstanding monetary obligation to HUD that is in arrears, or for which a repayment schedule has not been established. This restriction does not apply if the HUD Field Office finds that the insular area has made a good faith effort to clear the audit and, when there is an outstanding monetary obligation to HUD, the insular area has made a satisfactory arrangement for repayment of the funds due HUD and payments are current.
              (d) Increases to the initial allocation amount. If funds reserved for the insular areas are available because HUD has decreased the amount for one or more insular areas in accordance with paragraphs (b) or (c) of this section, or for any other reason, HUD may increase the allocation amount for one or more of the remaining insular areas based upon the insular area's performance in committing HOME funds within the 24 month deadline, producing housing units described in its program description, and meeting HOME program requirements. Funds that become available but which are not used to increase the allocation amount for one or more of the remaining insular areas will be reallocated in accordance with § 92.66.
              (e) Notice of allocation amounts. HUD will notify each insular area, in writing, as to the amount of its HOME allocation.
            
            
              § 92.61
              Program description.
              (a) Submission requirement. Not later than 90 days after HUD notifies the insular area of the amount of its allocation, the insular area must submit a program description and certifications to HUD.
              (b) Content of program description. The program description must contain the following:
              (1) An executed Standard Form 424;

              (2) The estimated use of HOME funds and a description of projects and eligible activities, including number of units to be assisted, estimated costs, and tenure type (rental or owner occupied) and, for tenant assistance, number of households to be assisted;
              (3) A timetable for the implementation of the projects or eligible activities;
              (4) If the insular area intends to use HOME funds for homebuyers, the guidelines for resale or recapture as required in § 92.254(a)(5);
              (5) If the insular area intends to use HOME funds for tenant-based rental assistance, a description of how the program will be administered consistent with the minimum guidelines described in § 92.209;
              (6) If an insular area intends to use other forms of investment not described in § 92.205(b), a description of the other forms of investment;
              (7) A statement of the policy and procedures to be followed by the insular area to meet the requirements for affirmative marketing, and establishing and overseeing a minority and women business outreach program under § 92.351;
              (8) If the insular intends to use HOME funds for refinancing along with rehabilitation, the insular area's guidelines described in § 92.206(b).
              (c) Certifications. The following certifications must accompany the program description:
              (1) A certification that, before committing funds to a project, the insular area will evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines that it adopts for this purpose and will not invest any more HOME funds in combination with other governmental assistance than is necessary to provide affordable housing;
              (2) If the insular area intends to provide tenant-based rental assistance, the certification required by § 92.209;
              (3) A certification that the submission of the program description is authorized under applicable law and the insular area possesses the legal authority to carry out the HOME Investment Partnerships Program, in accordance with the HOME regulations;
              (4) A certification that it will comply with the acquisition and relocation requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24 and the requirements of § 92.353;
              (5) A certification that the insular area will use HOME funds in compliance with all requirements of this part;
              (6) The certification required with regard to lobbying required by 24 CFR part 87, together with disclosure forms, if required by 24 CFR part 87.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007]
            
            
              § 92.62
              Review of program description and certifications.
              (a) Review of program description. The responsible HUD Field Office will review an insular area's program description and will approve the description unless the insular area has failed to submit information sufficient to allow HUD to make the necessary determinations required for § 92.61 (b)(4), (b)(6), and (b)(7), or the guidelines under (b)(8) are not satisfactory to HUD, if applicable; or if the level of proposed projects or eligible activities is not within the management capability demonstrated by past performance in housing and community development programs. If the insular area has not submitted information on § 92.61 (b)(4), (b)(6), and (b)(7), or the guidelines under (b)(8) are not satisfactory to HUD, if applicable; or if the level of proposed projects or eligible activities is not within the management capability demonstrated by past performance in housing and community development programs, the insular area may be required to furnish such further information or assurances as HUD may consider necessary to find the program description and certifications satisfactory. The HUD Field Office shall work with the insular area to achieve a complete and satisfactory program description.
              (b) Review period. Within thirty days of receipt of the program description, the HUD Field Office will notify the insular area if determinations cannot be made under § 92.61 (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), or (b)(8) with the supporting information submitted, or if the proposed projects or activities are beyond currently demonstrated capability. The insular area will have a reasonable period of time, agreed upon mutually, to submit the necessary supporting information or to revise the proposed projects or activities in its program description.
              (c) HOME Investment Partnership Agreement. After HUD Field Office approval under this section, a HOME funds allocation is made by HUD execution of the agreement, subject to execution by the insular area. The funds are obligated on the date HUD notifies the insular area of HUD's execution of the agreement.
            
            
              § 92.63
              Amendments to program description.
              An insular area must submit to HUD for approval any substantial change in its HUD-approved program description that it makes and must document any other changes in its file. A substantial change involves a change in the guidelines for resale or recapture (§ 92.61(b)(4)), other forms of investment (§ 92.61(b)(6)), minority and women business outreach program (§ 92.61(b)(7)) or refinancing (§ 92.61(b)(8)); or a change in the tenure type of the project or activities; or a funding increase to a project or activity of $100,000 or 50% (whichever is greater). The HUD Field Office will notify the insular area if its program description, as amended, does not permit determinations to be made under § 92.61 (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), or (b)(8), or if the level of proposed projects or eligible activities is not within the management capability demonstrated by past performance in housing and community development programs, within 30 days of receipt. The insular area will have a reasonable period of time, agreed upon mutually, to submit the necessary supporting information to revise the proposed projects or activities in its program description.
            
            
              § 92.64
              Applicability of requirements to insular areas.
              (a) Insular areas are subject to the same requirements in subpart E (Program Requirements), subpart F (Project Requirements), subpart K (Program Administration), and subpart L (Performance Reviews and Sanctions) of this part as participating jurisdictions, except for the following:
              (1) Subpart E (Program Requirements): Administrative costs, as described in § 92.207, are eligible costs for insular areas in an amount not to exceed 15 percent of the HOME funds provided to the insular area. The matching contribution requirements in this part do not apply.
              (2) Subpart K (Program Administration):
              (i) Section 92.500 (The HOME Investment Trust Fund) does not apply. HUD will establish a HOME account in the United States Treasury for each insular area and the HOME funds must be used for approved activities. A local account must be established for program income. Each insular area may use either a separate local HOME account or a subsidiary account within its general fund (or other appropriate fund) as the local HOME account. HUD will recapture HOME funds in the HOME Treasury account by the amount of:
              (A) Any funds that are not committed within 24 months after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the insular area of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement;
              (B) Any funds that are not expended within five years after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the insular area of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement; and
              (C) Any penalties assessed by HUD under § 92.552.
              (ii) Section 92.502 (Program disbursement and information system) applies, except that references to the HOME Investment Trust Fund mean HOME account. In addition, § 92.502(c) does not apply, and instead compliance with Treasury Circular No. 1075 (31 CFR part 205) and 2 CFR 200.305 is required.
              (iii) Section 92.503 (Program income, repayments, and recaptured funds) applies, except that the funds may be retained provided the funds are used for eligible activities in accordance with the requirements of this section.
              (3) Section 92.504 (Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written agreements; on-site inspections) applies, except that the written agreement must ensure compliance with the requirements in this section.

              (4) Section 92.508 (Recordkeeping) applies with respect to the records that relate to the requirements of this section.
              
              (5) Section 92.509 (Performance reports) applies, except that a performance report is required for the fiscal year allocation only after completion of the approved projects funded by the allocation.
              (6) Subpart L (Performance Reviews and Sanctions): Section 92.552 does not apply. Instead, § 92.65 applies.
              (b) The requirements of subpart H (Other Federal Requirements) of this part apply as follows: § 92.357 Executive Order 12372 applies as written, and the requirements of the remaining sections which apply to participating jurisdictions are applicable to the insular areas.
              (c) Subpart B (Allocation Formula), subpart C (Consortia; Designation and Revocation as a Participating Jurisdiction), subpart D (Submission Requirements), and subpart G (Community Housing Development Organizations) of this part do not apply.

              (d) Subpart A (General) applies, except that for the definitions of commitment, program income, and subrecipient, “participating jurisdiction” means “insular area.”
              [69 FR 15673, Mar. 26, 2004, as amended at 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
            
            
              § 92.65
              Funding sanctions.
              Following notice and opportunity for informal consultation, HUD may withhold, reduce or terminate the assistance where any corrective or remedial actions taken under § 92.551 fail to remedy an insular area's performance deficiencies, and the deficiencies are sufficiently substantial, in the judgment of HUD, to warrant sanctions.
            
            
              § 92.66
              Reallocation.
              Any HOME funds which are reduced or recaptured from an insular area's allocation and which are not used to increase the allocation amount for one or more of the remaining insular areas as provided in § 92.60 of this part, will be reallocated by HUD to the States in accordance with the requirements in subpart J for reallocating funds initially allocated to a State.
            
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Consortia; Designation and Revocation of Designation as a Participating Jurisdiction
          
            § 92.100
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 92.101
            Consortia.
            (a) A consortium of geographically contiguous units of general local government is a unit of general local government for purposes of this part if the requirements of this section are met.
            (1) One or more members of a proposed consortium or an existing consortium whose consortium qualification terminates at the end of the fiscal year, must provide written notification to the HUD Field Office of its intent to participate as a consortium in the HOME Program for the following fiscal year. HUD shall establish the deadline for this submission.
            (2) The proposed consortium must provide, at such time and in a manner and form prescribed by HUD, the qualification documents, which will include submission of:
            (i) A written certification by the State that the consortium will direct its activities to alleviation of housing problems within the State; and
            (ii) Documentation which demonstrates that the consortium has executed one legally binding cooperation agreement among its members authorizing one member unit of general local government to act in a representative capacity for all member units of general local government for the purposes of this part and providing that the representative member assumes overall responsibility for ensuring that the consortium's HOME Program is carried out in compliance with the requirements of this part.

            (3) Before the end of the fiscal year in which the notice of intent and documentation are submitted, HUD must determine that a proposed consortium has sufficient authority and administrative capability to carry out the purposes of this part on behalf of its member jurisdictions. HUD will endeavor to make its determination as quickly as practicable after receiving the consortium's documentation in order to provide the consortium an opportunity to correct its submission, if necessary. If the submission is deficient, HUD will work with the consortium to resolve the issue, but will not delay the formula allocations. HUD, at its discretion, may review the performance of an existing consortium that wishes to requalify to determine whether it continues to have sufficient authority and administrative capacity to successfully administer the program.
            (b) A metropolitan city or an urban county may be a member of a consortium. A unit of general local government that is included in an urban county may be part of a consortium, only if the urban county joins the consortium. The included local government cannot join the consortium except through participation in the urban county.
            (c) A non-urban county may be a member of a consortium. However, the county cannot on its own include the whole county in the consortium. A unit of local government located within the non-urban county that wishes to participate as a member of the consortium must sign the HOME consortium agreement.
            (d) If the representative unit of general local government distributes HOME funds to member units of general local government, the representative unit is responsible for applying to the member units of general local government the same requirements as are applicable to subrecipients.
            (e) The consortium's qualification as a unit of general local government continues for a period of three successive Federal fiscal years, or until HUD revokes its designation as a participating jurisdiction, or until an urban county member fails to requalify under the CDBG program as an urban county for a fiscal year included in the consortium's qualification period, or the consortium fails to receive a HOME allocation for the first Federal fiscal year of the consortium's qualification period and does not request to be considered to receive a HOME allocation in each of the subsequent two years. However, if a member urban county's three year CDBG qualification cycle is not the same as the consortium, the consortium may elect a shorter qualification period than three years to synchronize with the urban county's qualification period. During the period of qualification, additional units of general local government may join the consortium, but no included unit of general local government may withdraw from the consortium. See 24 CFR part 91, subpart E, for consolidated plan requirements for consortia, including the requirement that all members of the consortia must be on the same program year.
            (f) The consortium agreement may, at the option of its member units of general local government, contain a provision that authorizes automatic renewals for the successive qualification period of three Federal fiscal years. The provision authorizing automatic renewal must require the lead consortium member to give the consortium members written notice of their right to elect not to continue participation for the new qualification period.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002]
          
          
            § 92.102
            Participation threshold amount.
            (a) To be eligible to become a participating jurisdiction, a unit of general local government must have a formula allocation under § 92.50 that is equal to or greater than $750,000; or
            (b) If a unit of general local government's formula allocation is less than $750,000, HUD must find:
            (1) The unit of general local government has a local PHA and has demonstrated a capacity to carry out the provisions of this part, as evidenced by satisfactory performance under one or more HUD-administered programs that provide assistance for activities comparable to the eligible activities under this part; and
            (2) The State has authorized HUD to transfer to the unit of general local government a portion of the State's allocation or the State, the unit of general local government, or both, has made available its own resources such that the sum of the amounts transferred or made available are equal to or greater than the difference between the unit of general local government's formula allocation and $750,000.

            (c) In fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion for this part, $500,000 is substituted for $750,000 each time it appears in this section.
          
          
            § 92.103
            Notification of intent to participate.
            (a) Not later than 30 days after receiving notice of its formula allocation amount, a jurisdiction must notify HUD in writing of its intention to become a participating jurisdiction.
            (b) A unit of general local government that has a formula allocation of less than $750,000, or less than $500,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion for this part, must submit, with its notice, one or more of the following, as appropriate, as evidence that it has met the threshold allocation requirements in § 92.102(b):
            (1) Authorization from the State to transfer a portion of its allocation to the unit of general local government;
            (2) A letter from the governor or designee indicating that the required funds have been approved and budgeted for the unit of general local government;
            (3) A letter from the chief executive officer of the unit of general local government indicating that the required funds have been approved and budgeted.
          
          
            § 92.104
            Submission of a consolidated plan and Assessment of Fair Housing.
            A jurisdiction that has not submitted a consolidated plan to HUD must submit to HUD, not later than 90 calendar days after providing notification under § 92.103, a consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR part 91 and an Assessment of Fair Housing (AFH) in accordance with 24 CFR 5.150 through 5.180.
            [80 FR 42366, July 16, 2015]
          
          
            § 92.105
            Designation as a participating jurisdiction.
            When a jurisdiction has complied with the requirements of §§ 92.102 through 92.104 and HUD has approved the jurisdiction's consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR part 91, HUD will designate the jurisdiction as a participating jurisdiction.
          
          
            § 92.106
            Continuous designation as a participating jurisdiction.
            Once a State or unit of general local government is designated a participating jurisdiction, it remains a participating jurisdiction for subsequent fiscal years and the requirements of §§ 92.102 through 92.105 do not apply, unless HUD revokes the designation in accordance with § 92.107.
          
          
            § 92.107
            Revocation of designation as a participating jurisdiction.
            HUD may revoke a jurisdiction's designation as a participating jurisdiction if:
            (a) HUD finds, after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing as provided in § 92.552(b) that the jurisdiction is unwilling or unable to carry out the provisions of this part, including failure to meet matching contribution requirements; or
            (b) The jurisdiction's formula allocation falls below $750,000 (or below $500,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion for this part) for three consecutive years, below $625,000 (or below $410,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion for this part) for two consecutive years, or the jurisdiction does not receive a formula allocation in any one year.
            (c) When HUD revokes a participating jurisdiction's designation as a participating jurisdiction, HUD will reallocate any remaining funds in the jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund established under § 92.500 in accordance with § 92.451.
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Submission Requirements
          
            § 92.150
            Submission requirements.
            In order to receive its HOME allocation, a participating jurisdiction must submit a consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR part 91. That part includes requirements for the content of the consolidated plan, the process of developing the consolidated plan, including citizen participation, the submission date, HUD approval, and amendments.
          
        
        
          
          Subpart E—Program Requirements
          
            § 92.200
            Private-public partnership.
            Each participating jurisdiction must make all reasonable efforts to maximize participation by the private sector in accordance with section 221 of the Act.
          
          
            § 92.201
            Distribution of assistance.
            (a) Local. (1) Each local participating jurisdiction must, insofar as is feasible, distribute HOME funds geographically within its boundaries and among different categories of housing need, according to the priorities of housing need identified in its approved consolidated plan.
            (2) The participating jurisdiction may only invest its HOME funds in eligible projects within its boundaries, or in jointly funded projects within the boundaries of contiguous local jurisdictions which serve residents from both jurisdictions. For a project to be jointly funded, both jurisdictions must make a financial contribution to the project. A jurisdiction's financial contribution may take the form of a grant or loan (including a loan of funds that comes from other federal sources and that are in the jurisdiction's control, such as CDBG program funds) or relief of a significant tax or fee (such as waiver of impact fees, property taxes, or other taxes or fees customarily imposed on projects within the jurisdiction).
            (b) State. (1) Each State participating jurisdiction is responsible for distributing HOME funds throughout the State according to the State's assessment of the geographical distribution of the housing needs within the State, as identified in the State's approved consolidated plan. The State must distribute HOME funds to rural areas in amounts that take into account the non-metropolitan share of the State's total population and objective measures of rural housing need, such as poverty and substandard housing, as set forth in the State's approved consolidated plan. To the extent the need is within the boundaries of a participating unit of general local government, the State and the unit of general local government shall coordinate activities to address that need.
            (2) A State may carry out its own HOME program without active participation of units of general local government or may distribute HOME funds to units of general local government to carry out HOME programs in which both the State and all or some of the units of general local government perform specified program functions. A unit of general local government designated by a State to receive HOME funds from a State is a State recipient.
            (3)(i) A State that uses State recipients to perform program functions shall ensure that the State recipients use HOME funds in accordance with the requirements of this part and other applicable laws. The State may require the State recipient to comply with requirements established by the State or may permit the State recipient to establish its own requirements to comply with this part.
            (ii) The State shall conduct such reviews and audit of its State recipients as may be necessary or appropriate to determine whether the State recipient has committed and expended the HOME funds in the United States Treasury account as required by § 92.500, and has met the requirements of this part, particularly eligible activities, income targeting, affordability, and matching contribution requirements.
            (4) A State and local participating jurisdiction may jointly fund a project within the boundaries of the local participating jurisdiction. The State may provide the HOME funds to the project or it may provide the HOME funds to the local participating jurisdiction to fund the project.
            (5) A State may fund projects on Indian reservations located within the State provided that the State includes Indian reservations in its consolidated plan.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44666, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.202
            Site and neighborhood standards.
            (a) General. A participating jurisdiction must administer its HOME program in a manner that provides housing that is suitable from the standpoint of facilitating and furthering full compliance with the applicable provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d—2000d-4), the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq., E.O. 11063 (3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 652), and HUD regulations issued pursuant thereto; and promotes greater choice of housing opportunities.
            (b) New rental housing. In carrying out the site and neighborhood requirements with respect to new construction of rental housing, a participating jurisdiction is responsible for making the determination that proposed sites for new construction meet the requirements in 24 CFR 983.57(e)(2) and (3).
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997; 78 FR 44666, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.203
            Income determinations.
            (a) The HOME program has income targeting requirements for the HOME program and for HOME projects. Therefore, the participating jurisdiction must determine each family is income eligible by determining the family's annual income.
            (1) For families who are tenants in HOME-assisted housing and not receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance, the participating jurisdiction must initially determine annual income using the method in paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section. For subsequent income determinations during the period of affordability, the participating jurisdiction may use any one of the following methods in accordance with § 92.252(h):
            (i) Examine at least 2 months of source documents evidencing annual income (e.g., wage statement, interest statement, unemployment compensation statement) for the family.
            (ii) Obtain from the family a written statement of the amount of the family's annual income and family size, along with a certification that the information is complete and accurate. The certification must state that the family will provide source documents upon request.
            (iii) Obtain a written statement from the administrator of a government program under which the family receives benefits and which examines each year the annual income of the family. The statement must indicate the tenant's family size and state the amount of the family's annual income; or alternatively, the statement must indicate the current dollar limit for very low- or low-income families for the family size of the tenant and state that the tenant's annual income does not exceed this limit.
            (2) For all other families (i.e., homeowners receiving rehabilitation assistance, homebuyers, and recipients of HOME tenant-based rental assistance), the participating jurisdiction must determine annual income by examining at least 2 months of source documents evidencing annual income (e.g., wage statement, interest statement, unemployment compensation statement) for the family.
            (b) When determining whether a family is income eligible, the participating jurisdiction must use one of the following two definitions of “annual income”:
            (1) Annual income as defined at 24 CFR 5.609 (except when determining the income of a homeowner for an owner-occupied rehabilitation project, the value of the homeowner's principal residence may be excluded from the calculation of Net Family Assets, as defined in 24 CFR 5.603); or
            (2) Adjusted gross income as defined for purposes of reporting under Internal Revenue Service Form 1040 series for individual Federal annual income tax purposes.
            (c) Although the participating jurisdiction may use either of the definitions of “annual income” permitted in paragraph (b) of this section to calculate adjusted income, it must apply exclusions from income established at 24 CFR 5.611. The HOME rents for very low-income families established under § 92.252(b)(2) are based on adjusted income. In addition, the participating jurisdiction may base the amount of tenant-based rental assistance on the adjusted income of the family. The participating jurisdiction may use only one definition for each HOME-assisted program (e.g., downpayment assistance program) that it administers and for each rental housing project.

            (d)(1) The participating jurisdiction must calculate the annual income of the family by projecting the prevailing rate of income of the family at the time the participating jurisdiction determines that the family is income eligible. Annual income shall include income from all persons in the household. Income or asset enhancement derived from the HOME-assisted project shall not be considered in calculating annual income.
            (2) The participating jurisdiction is not required to re-examine the family's income at the time the HOME assistance is provided, unless more than six months has elapsed since the participating jurisdiction determined that the family qualified as income eligible.
            (3) The participating jurisdiction must follow the requirements in § 5.617 when making subsequent income determinations of persons with disabilities who are tenants in HOME-assisted rental housing or who receive tenant-based rental assistance.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997; 66 FR 6224, Jan. 19, 2001; 78 FR 44666, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.204
            Applicability of requirements to entities that receive a reallocation of HOME funds, other than participating jurisdictions.
            (a) Jurisdictions other than participating jurisdictions and community housing development organizations receiving competitive reallocations from HUD are subject to the same requirements in subpart E (Program Requirements), subpart F (Project Requirements), subpart K (Program Administration), and subpart L (Performance Reviews and Sanctions) of this part as participating jurisdictions, except for the following:
            (1) Subpart E (Program Requirements): the matching contribution requirements in § 92.218 through § 92.221 do not apply.
            (2) Subpart K (Program Administration):
            (i) Section 92.500 (The HOME Investment Trust Fund) does not apply. HUD will establish a HOME account in the United States Treasury and the HOME funds must be used for approved activities. A local account must be established for program income. HUD will recapture HOME funds in the HOME Treasury account by the amount of:
            (A) Any funds that are not committed within 24 months after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the entity of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement;
            (B) Any funds that are not expended within five years after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the entity of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement; and
            (C) Any penalties assessed by HUD under § 92.552.
            (ii) Section 92.502 (Program disbursement and information system) applies, except that references to the HOME Investment Trust Fund mean HOME account and the reference to 24 CFR part 58 does not apply. In addition, § 92.502(c) does not apply, and instead, compliance with Treasury Circular No. 1075 (31 CFR part 205) and 2 CFR 200.305 is required.
            (iii) Section 92.503 (Program income, repayments, and recaptured funds) applies, except that program income may be retained provided the funds are used for eligible activities in accordance with the requirements of this section.
            (3) Section 92.504 (Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written agreements; on-site inspections) applies, except that the written agreement must ensure compliance with the requirements in this section.
            (4) Section 92.508 (Recordkeeping) applies with respect to the records that relate to the requirements of this section.
            (5) Section 92.509 (Performance reports) applies, except that a performance report is required only after completion of the approved projects.
            (b) The requirements in subpart H (Other Federal Requirements) of this part apply as written, except that jurisdictions and community housing development organizations receiving reallocations from HUD must comply with affirmative marketing requirements, labor requirements, and lead-based paint requirements, applicable to participating jurisdictions.

            (c) Subpart B (Allocation Formula), subpart C (Consortia; Designation and Revocation of Designation as a Participating Jurisdiction), and subpart G (Community Housing Development Organizations) of this part do not apply.
            

            (d) Subpart A (General) applies, except that for the definitions of commitment, program income, and subrecipient, “participating jurisdiction” means jurisdiction or community housing development organization receiving the competitive reallocation.
            [69 FR 15673, Mar. 26, 2004, as amended at 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            Eligible and Prohibited Activities
            
              § 92.205
              Eligible activities: General.
              (a) Eligible activities. (1) HOME funds may be used by a participating jurisdiction to provide incentives to develop and support affordable rental housing and homeownership affordability through the acquisition (including assistance to homebuyers), new construction, reconstruction, or rehabilitation of nonluxury housing with suitable amenities, including real property acquisition, site improvements, conversion, demolition, and other expenses, including financing costs, relocation expenses of any displaced persons, families, businesses, or organizations; to provide tenant-based rental assistance, including security deposits; to provide payment of reasonable administrative and planning costs; and to provide for the payment of operating expenses of community housing development organizations. The housing must be permanent or transitional housing. The specific eligible costs for these activities are set forth in §§ 92.206 through 92.209. The activities and costs are eligible only if the housing meets the property standards in § 92.251 upon project completion.
              (2) Acquisition of vacant land or demolition must be undertaken only with respect to a particular housing project intended to provide affordable housing within the time frames established in paragraph (2) of the definition of “commitment” in § 92.2.
              (3) Conversion of an existing structure to affordable housing is rehabilitation, unless the conversion entails adding one or more units beyond the existing walls, in which case, the project is new construction for purposes of this part.
              (4) Manufactured housing. HOME funds may be used to purchase and/or rehabilitate a manufactured housing unit, or purchase the land upon which a manufactured housing unit is located. Except for existing, owner-occupied manufactured housing that is rehabilitated with HOME funds, the manufactured housing unit must, at the time of project completion, be connected to permanent utility hook-ups and be located on land that is owned by the manufactured housing unit owner or land for which the manufactured housing owner has a lease for a period at least equal to the applicable period of affordability.
              (b) Forms of assistance. (1) A participating jurisdiction may invest HOME funds as equity investments, interest-bearing loans or advances, non-interest-bearing loans or advances, interest subsidies consistent with the purposes of this part, deferred payment loans, grants, or other forms of assistance that HUD determines to be consistent with the purposes of this part and specifically approves in writing. Each participating jurisdiction has the right to establish the terms of assistance, subject to the requirements of this part.
              (2) A participating jurisdiction may invest HOME funds to guarantee loans made by lenders and, if required, the participating jurisdiction may establish a loan guarantee account with HOME funds. The HOME funds may be used to guarantee the timely payment of principal and interest or payment of the outstanding principal and interest upon foreclosure of the loan. The amount of the loan guarantee account must be based on a reasonable estimate of the default rate on the guaranteed loans, but under no circumstances may the amount on deposit exceed 20 percent of the total outstanding principal amount guaranteed; except that the account may include a reasonable minimum balance. While loan funds guaranteed with HOME funds are subject to all HOME requirements, funds which are used to repay the guaranteed loans are not.
              (c) Minimum amount of assistance. The minimum amount of HOME funds that must be invested in a project involving rental housing or homeownership is $1,000 times the number of HOME-assisted units in the project.
              
              (d) Multi-unit projects. HOME funds may be used to assist one or more housing units in a multi-unit project.
              (1) Only the actual HOME eligible development costs of the assisted units may be charged to the HOME program. If the assisted and nonassisted units are not comparable, the actual costs may be determined based on a method of cost allocation. If the assisted and non- assisted units are comparable in terms of size, features, and number of bedrooms, the actual cost of the HOME- assisted units can be determined by prorating the total HOME eligible development costs of the project so that the proportion of the total development costs charged to the HOME program does not exceed the proportion of the HOME-assisted units in the project.
              (2) After project completion, the number of units designated as HOME- assisted may be reduced only in accordance with § 92.210, except that in a project consisting of all HOME- assisted units, one unit may be subsequently converted to an on-site manager's unit if the participating jurisdiction determines that the conversion will contribute to the stability or effectiveness of the housing and that, notwithstanding the loss of one HOME-assisted unit, the costs charged to the HOME program do not exceed the actual costs of the HOME- assisted units and do not exceed the subsidy limit in § 92.250(b).
              (e) Terminated projects. A HOME assisted project that is terminated before completion, either voluntarily or involuntarily, constitutes an ineligible activity, and the participating jurisdiction must repay any HOME funds invested in the project to the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund in accordance with § 92.503(b) (except for project- specific assistance to community housing development organizations as provided in § 92.301(a)(3) and (b)(3)).
              (1) A project that does not meet the requirements for affordable housing must be terminated and the participating jurisdiction must repay all HOME funds invested in the project to the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund in accordance with § 92.503(b).
              (2) If a participating jurisdiction does not complete a project within 4 years of the date of commitment of funds, the project is considered to be terminated and the participating jurisdiction must repay all funds invested in the project to the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund in accordance with § 92.503(b). The participating jurisdiction may request a one-year extension of this deadline in writing, by submitting information about the status of the project, steps being taken to overcome any obstacles to completion, proof of adequate funding to complete the project, and a schedule with milestones for completion of the project for HUD's review and approval.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997; 78 FR 44667, July 24, 2013]
            
            
              § 92.206
              Eligible project costs.
              HOME funds may be used to pay the following eligible costs:
              (a) Development hard costs. The actual cost of constructing or rehabilitating housing. These costs include the following:
              (1) For new construction projects, costs to meet the new construction standards in § 92.251;
              (2) For rehabilitation, costs to meet the property standards for rehabilitation projects in § 92.251;
              (3) For both new construction and rehabilitation projects, costs:
              (i) To demolish existing structures;
              (ii) To make utility connections including off-site connections from the property line to the adjacent street; and
              (iii) To make improvements to the project site that are in keeping with improvements of surrounding, standard projects. Site improvements may include on-site roads and sewer and water lines necessary to the development of the project. The project site is the property, owned by the project owner, upon which the project is located.

              (4) For both new construction and rehabilitation of multifamily rental housing projects, costs to construct or rehabilitate laundry and community facilities that are located within the same building as the housing and which are for the use of the project residents and their guests.
              (5) Costs to make utility connections or to make improvements to the project site, in accordance with the provisions of § 92.206(a)(3) (ii) and (iii) are also eligible in connection with acquisition of standard housing.
              (b) Refinancing costs. The cost to refinance existing debt secured by a housing project that is being rehabilitated with HOME funds. These costs include the following:
              (1) For single-family (one- to four- family) owner-occupied housing, when loaning HOME funds to rehabilitate the housing, if the refinancing is necessary to reduce the overall housing costs to the borrower and make the housing more affordable and if the rehabilitation cost is greater than the amount of debt that is refinanced.
              (2) For single family or multifamily projects, when loaning HOME funds to rehabilitate the units if refinancing is necessary to permit or continue affordability under § 92.252. The participating jurisdiction must establish refinancing guidelines and state them in its consolidated plan described in 24 CFR part 91. Regardless of the amount of HOME funds invested, the minimum affordability period shall be 15 years. The guidelines shall describe the conditions under which the participating jurisdictions will refinance existing debt. At minimum, the guidelines must:
              (i) Demonstrate that rehabilitation is the primary eligible activity and ensure that this requirement is met by establishing a minimum level of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between rehabilitation and refinancing;
              (ii) Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that disinvestment in the property has not occurred, that the long term needs of the project can be met and that the feasibility of serving the targeted population over an extended affordability period can be demonstrated;
              (iii) State whether the new investment is being made to maintain current affordable units, create additional affordable units, or both;
              (iv) Specify the required period of affordability, whether it is the minimum 15 years or longer;
              (v) Specify whether the investment of HOME funds may be jurisdiction-wide or limited to a specific geographic area, such as a neighborhood identified in a neighborhood revitalization strategy under 24 CFR 91.215(e)(2) or a Federally designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community; and
              (vi) State that HOME funds cannot be used to refinance single family or multifamily housing loans made or insured by any Federal program, including CDBG.
              (c) Acquisition costs. Costs of acquiring improved or unimproved real property, including acquisition by homebuyers.
              (d) Related soft costs. Other reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the owner or participating jurisdiction and associated with the financing, or development (or both) of new construction, rehabilitation or acquisition of housing assisted with HOME funds. These costs include, but are not limited to:
              (1) Architectural, engineering, or related professional services required to prepare plans, drawings, specifications, or work write-ups. The costs may be paid if they were incurred not more than 24 months before the date that HOME funds are committed to the project and the participating jurisdiction expressly permits HOME funds to be used to pay the costs in the written agreement committing the funds.
              (2) Costs to process and settle the financing for a project, such as private lender origination fees, credit reports, fees for title evidence, fees for recordation and filing of legal documents, building permits, attorneys fees, private appraisal fees and fees for an independent cost estimate, builders or developers fees.
              (3) Costs of a project audit, including certification of costs performed by a certified public accountant, that the participating jurisdiction may require with respect to the development of the project.
              (4) Costs to provide information services such as affirmative marketing and fair housing information to prospective homeowners and tenants as required by § 92.351.

              (5) For new construction or rehabilitation, the cost of funding an initial operating deficit reserve, which is a reserve to meet any shortfall in project income during the period of project rent-up (not to exceed 18 months) and which may only be used to pay project operating expenses, scheduled payments to a replacement reserve, and debt service. Any HOME funds placed in an operating deficit reserve that remain unexpended after the period of project rent-up may be retained for project reserves if permitted by the participating jurisdiction.
              (6) Staff and overhead costs of the participating jurisdiction directly related to carrying out the project, such as work specifications preparation, loan processing inspections, and other services related to assisting potential owners, tenants, and homebuyers, e.g., housing counseling, may be charged to project costs only if the project is funded and the individual becomes the owner or tenant of the HOME-assisted project. For multi-unit projects, such costs must be allocated among HOME- assisted units in a reasonable manner and documented. Although these costs may be charged as project costs, these costs (except housing counseling) cannot be charged to or paid by low-income families.
              (7) For both new construction and rehabilitation, costs for the payment of impact fees that are charged for all projects within a jurisdiction.
              (8) Costs of environmental review and release of funds in accordance with 24 CFR part 58 which are directly related to the project.
              (e) Community housing development organization costs. Eligible costs of project-specific assistance are set forth in § 92.301.
              (f) Relocation costs. The cost of relocation payments and other relocation assistance to persons displaced by the project are eligible costs.
              (1) Relocation payments include replacement housing payments, payments for moving expenses, and payments for reasonable out-of-pocket costs incurred in the temporary relocation of persons.
              (2) Other relocation assistance means staff and overhead costs directly related to providing advisory and other relocation services to persons displaced by the project, including timely written notices to occupants, referrals to comparable and suitable replacement property, property inspections, counseling, and other assistance necessary to minimize hardship.
              (g) Costs relating to payment of loans. If the HOME funds are not used to directly pay a cost specified in this section, but are used to pay off a construction loan, bridge financing loan, or guaranteed loan, the payment of principal and interest for such loan is an eligible cost only if:
              (1) The loan was used for eligible costs specified in this section, and
              (2) The HOME assistance is part of the original financing for the project and the project meets the requirements of this part.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997; 64 FR 50224, Sept. 15, 1999; 78 FR 44667, July 24, 2013]
            
            
              § 92.207
              Eligible administrative and planning costs.

              A participating jurisdiction may expend, for payment of reasonable administrative and planning costs of the HOME program and ADDI, an amount of HOME funds that is not more than ten percent of the sum of the Fiscal Year HOME basic formula allocation plus any funds received in accordance with § 92.102(b) to meet or exceed participation threshold requirements that Fiscal Year. A state that transfers any HOME funds in accordance with § 92.102(b) must exclude these funds in calculating the amount it may expend for administrative and planning costs. A participating jurisdiction may also expend, for payment of reasonable administrative and planning costs of the HOME program and the ADDI described in subpart M of this part, a sum up to ten percent of the program income deposited into its local account or received and reported by its state recipients or subrecipients during the program year. A participating jurisdiction may expend such funds directly or may authorize its state recipients or subrecipients, if any, to expend all or a portion of such funds, provided total expenditures for planning and administrative costs do not exceed the maximum allowable amount. Reasonable administrative and planning costs include:
              
              (a) General management, oversight and coordination. Reasonable costs of overall program management, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation. Such costs include, but are not limited to, necessary expenditures for the following:

              (1) Salaries, wages, and related costs of the participating jurisdiction's staff. In charging costs to this category the participating jurisdiction may either include the entire salary, wages, and related costs allocable to the program of each person whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program involves program administration assignments, or the prorated share of the salary, wages, and related costs of each person whose job includes any program administration assignments. The participating jurisdiction may use only one of these methods. Program administration includes the following types of assignments:
              (i) Developing systems and schedules for ensuring compliance with program requirements;
              (ii) Developing interagency agreements and agreements with entities receiving HOME funds;
              (iii) Monitoring HOME-assisted housing for progress and compliance with program requirements;
              (iv) Developing agreements and monitoring housing not assisted with HOME funds that the participating jurisdiction designates as a matching contribution in accordance with § 92.219(b) for compliance with applicable program requirements;
              (v) Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for submission to HUD;
              (vi) Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings;
              (vii) Evaluating program results against stated objectives; and
              (viii) Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program include such assignments as those described in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section;
              (2) Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program;
              (3) Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including such services as general legal services, accounting services, and audit services;
              (4) Other costs for goods and services required for administration of the program, including such goods and services as rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and rental and maintenance (but not purchase) of office space; and
              (5) Costs of administering tenant-based rental assistance programs.
              (b) Staff and overhead. Staff and overhead costs of the participating jurisdiction directly related to carrying out the project, such as work specifications preparation, loan processing, inspections, lead-based paint evaluations (visual assessments, inspections, and risk assessments) and other services related to assisting potential owners, tenants, and homebuyers (e.g., housing counseling); and staff and overhead costs directly related to providing advisory and other relocation services to persons displaced by the project, including timely written notices to occupants, referrals to comparable and suitable replacement property, property inspections, counseling, and other assistance necessary to minimize hardship. These costs may be charged as administrative costs or as project costs under § 92.206(d)(6) and (f)(2), at the discretion of the participating jurisdiction; however, these costs (except housing counseling) cannot be charged to or paid by the low-income families.
              (c) Public information. The provision of information and other resources to residents and citizen organizations participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of projects being assisted with HOME funds.
              (d) Fair housing. Activities to affirmatively further fair housing in accordance with the participating jurisdiction's certification under 24 CFR part 91.
              (e) Indirect Costs. Indirect costs may be charged to the HOME program under a cost allocation plan prepared in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart E.
              (f) Preparation of the consolidated plan. Preparation of the consolidated plan required under 24 CFR part 91. Preparation includes the costs of public hearings, consultations, and publication.
              
              (g) Other Federal requirements. Costs of complying with the Federal requirements in subpart H of this part. Project-specific environmental review costs may be charged as administrative costs or as project costs in accordance with § 92.206(d)(8), at the discretion of the participating jurisdiction.
              (h) Preserving affordable housing already assisted with HOME funds. Costs specified under § 92.254(a)(9) may be charged as an administrative cost or may be charged to the project as provided in § 92.254(a)(9). In addition, the foreclosure cost of a HOME-assisted rental housing project with a HOME loan in default is an eligible administrative cost.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002; 69 FR 16766, Mar. 30, 2004; 72 FR 16685, Apr. 4, 2007; 78 FR 44668, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
            
            
              § 92.208
              Eligible community housing development organization (CHDO) operating expense and capacity building costs.
              (a) Up to 5 percent of a participating jurisdiction's fiscal year HOME allocation may be used for the operating expenses of community housing development organizations (CHDOs). This amount is in addition to amounts set aside for housing projects that are owned, developed, or sponsored by CHDOs as described in § 92.300(a). These funds may not be used to pay operating expenses incurred by a CHDO acting as a subrecipient or contractor under the HOME Program. Operating expenses means reasonable and necessary costs for the operation of the community housing development organization. Such costs include salaries, wages, and other employee compensation and benefits; employee education, training, and travel; rent; utilities; communication costs; taxes; insurance; equipment; materials; and supplies. The requirements and limitations on the receipt of these funds by CHDOs are set forth in § 92.300(e) and (f).
              (b) HOME funds may be used for capacity building costs under § 92.300(b).
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44668, July 24, 2013]
            
            
              § 92.209
              Tenant-based rental assistance: Eligible costs and requirements.
              (a) Eligible costs. Eligible costs are the rental assistance and security deposit payments made to provide tenant-based rental assistance for a family pursuant to this section. Eligible costs also include utility deposit assistance, but only if this assistance is provided with tenant-based rental assistance or security deposit payment. Administration of tenant-based rental assistance is eligible only under general management oversight and coordination at § 92.207(a), except that the costs of inspecting the housing and determining the income eligibility of the family are eligible as costs of the tenant-based rental assistance.
              (b) General requirement. A participating jurisdiction may use HOME funds for tenant-based rental assistance only if the participating jurisdiction makes the certification about inclusion of this type of assistance in its consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR 91.225(d)(1), 91.325(d)(1), or 91.425(a)(2)(i), and specifies local market conditions that lead to the choice of this option.
              (c) Tenant selection. The participating jurisdiction must select low-income families in accordance with written tenant selection policies and criteria that are based on local housing needs and priorities established in the participating jurisdiction's consolidated plan.
              (1) Low-income families. Tenant-based rental assistance may only be provided to very low- and low-income families. The participating jurisdiction must determine that the family is very low- or low-income before the assistance is provided. During the period of assistance, the participating jurisdiction must annually determine that the family continues to be low-income.
              (2) Targeted assistance. (i) The participating jurisdiction may establish a preference for individuals with special needs (e.g., homeless persons or elderly persons) or persons with disabilities. The participating jurisdiction may offer, in conjunction with a tenant-based rental assistance program, particular types of nonmandatory services that may be most appropriate for persons with a special need or a particular disability. Generally, tenant-based rental assistance and the related services should be made available to all persons with special needs or disabilities who can benefit from such services. Participation may be limited to persons with a specific disability if necessary to provide as effective housing, aid, benefit, or services as those provided to others in accordance with 24 CFR 8.4(b)(1)(iv).
              (ii) The participating jurisdiction may also provide a preference for a specific category of individuals with disabilities (e.g., persons with HIV/AIDS or chronic mental illness) if the specific category is identified in the participating jurisdiction's consolidated plan as having unmet need and the preference is needed to narrow the gap in benefits and services received by such persons.
              (iii) Self-sufficiency program. The participating jurisdiction may require the family to participate in a self- sufficiency program as a condition of selection for assistance. The family's failure to continue participation in the self-sufficiency program is not a basis for terminating the assistance; however, renewal of the assistance may be conditioned on participation in the program. Tenants living in a HOME- assisted rental project who receive tenant-based rental assistance as relocation assistance must not be required to participate in a self- sufficiency program as a condition of receiving assistance.
              (iv) Homebuyer program. HOME tenant-based rental assistance may assist a tenant who has been identified as a potential low-income homebuyer through a lease-purchase agreement, with monthly rental payments for a period up to 36 months (i.e., 24 months, with a 12-month renewal in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section). The HOME tenant-based rental assistance payment may not be used to accumulate a downpayment or closing costs for the purchase; however, all or a portion of the homebuyer-tenant's monthly contribution toward rent may be set aside for this purpose. If a participating jurisdiction determines that the tenant has met the lease-purchase criteria and is ready to assume ownership, HOME funds may be provided for downpayment assistance in accordance with the requirements of this part.
              (v) Preferences cannot be administered in a manner that limits the opportunities of persons on any basis prohibited by the laws listed under 24 CFR 5.105(a). For example, a participating jurisdiction may not determine that persons given a preference under the program are therefore prohibited from applying for or participating in other programs or forms of assistance. Persons who are eligible for a preference must have the opportunity to participate in all programs of the participating jurisdiction, including programs that are not separate or different.
              (3) Existing tenants in the HOME-assisted projects. A participating jurisdiction may select low-income families currently residing in housing units that are designated for rehabilitation or acquisition under the participating jurisdiction's HOME program. Participating jurisdictions using HOME funds for tenant-based rental assistance programs may establish local preferences for the provision of this assistance. Families so selected may use the tenant-based assistance in the rehabilitated or acquired housing unit or in other qualified housing.
              (d) Portability of assistance. A participating jurisdiction may require the family to use the tenant-based assistance within the participating jurisdiction's boundaries or may permit the family to use the assistance outside its boundaries.
              (e) Term of rental assistance contract. The term of the rental assistance contract providing assistance with HOME funds may not exceed 24 months, but may be renewed, subject to the availability of HOME funds. The term of the rental assistance contract must begin on the first day of the term of the lease. For a rental assistance contract between a participating jurisdiction and an owner, the term of the contract must terminate on termination of the lease. For a rental assistance contract between a participating jurisdiction and a family, the term of the contract need not end on termination of the lease, but no payments may be made after termination of the lease until a family enters into a new lease.
              
              (f) Rent reasonableness. The participating jurisdiction must disapprove a lease if the rent is not reasonable, based on rents that are charged for comparable unassisted rental units.
              (g) Tenant protections. The tenant must have a lease that complies with the requirements in § 92.253 (a) and (b).
              (h) Maximum subsidy. (1) The amount of the monthly assistance that a participating jurisdiction may pay to, or on behalf of, a family may not exceed the difference between a rent standard for the unit size established by the participating jurisdiction and 30 percent of the family's monthly adjusted income.
              (2) The participating jurisdiction must establish a minimum tenant contribution to rent.
              (3) The participating jurisdiction's rent standard for a unit size must be based on:
              (i) Local market conditions; or
              (ii) The Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program (24 CFR part 982).
              (i) Housing quality standards. Housing occupied by a family receiving tenant-based assistance under this section must meet the requirements set forth in 24 CFR 982.401. The participating jurisdiction must inspect the housing initially and re-inspect it annually.
              (j) Security deposits. (1) A participating jurisdiction may use HOME funds provided for tenant-based rental assistance to provide loans or grants to very low- and low-income families for security deposits for rental of dwelling units whether or not the participating jurisdiction provides any other tenant-based rental assistance under this section.
              (2) The relevant State or local definition of “security deposit” in the jurisdiction where the unit is located is applicable for the purposes of this part, except that the amount of HOME funds that may be provided for a security deposit may not exceed the equivalent of two month's rent for the unit.
              (3) Only the prospective tenant may apply for HOME security deposit assistance, although the participating jurisdiction may pay the funds directly to the tenant or to the landlord.
              (4) HOME funds for security deposits may be provided as a grant or as a loan. If they are provided as a loan, the loan repayments are program income to be used in accordance with § 92.503.
              (5) Paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (f), (g), and (i) of this section are applicable to HOME security deposit assistance, except that income determinations pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section and Housing Quality Standard inspections pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section are required only at the time the security deposit assistance is provided.
              (k) Program operation. A tenant-based rental assistance program must be operated consistent with the requirements of this section. The participating jurisdiction may operate the program itself, or may contract with a PHA or other entity with the capacity to operate a rental assistance program. The tenant-based rental assistance may be provided through an assistance contract to an owner that leases a unit to an assisted family or directly to the family. In either case, the participating jurisdiction (or entity operating the program) must approve the lease.
              (l) Use of Section 8 assistance. In any case where assistance under section 8 of the 1937 Act becomes available, recipients of tenant-based rental assistance under this part will qualify for tenant selection preferences to the same extent as when they received the HOME tenant-based rental assistance under this part.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997; 67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002; 78 FR 44668, July 24, 2013]
            
            
              § 92.210
              Troubled HOME-assisted rental housing projects.

              (a) The provisions of this section apply only to an existing HOME- assisted rental project that, within the HOME period of affordability, is no longer financially viable. For purposes of this section, a HOME assisted rental project is no longer financially viable if its operating costs significantly exceed its operating revenue. HUD may approve one or both of the actions described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section to strategically preserve a rental project after consideration of market needs, available resources, and the likelihood of long-term viability of the project.
              
              (b) Notwithstanding § 92.214, a participating jurisdiction may request and HUD may permit, pursuant to a written memorandum of agreement, a participating jurisdiction to invest additional HOME funds in the existing HOME-assisted rental project. The total HOME funding for the project (original investment plus additional investment) must not exceed the per-unit subsidy limit in § 92.250(a). The use of HOME funds may include, but is not limited to, rehabilitation of the HOME units and recapitalization of project reserves for the HOME units (to fund capital costs). If additional HOME funds are invested, HUD may require the period of affordability to be extended, based on such considerations as the amount of additional HOME funds or additional units.
              (c) HUD Headquarters may, through written approval, permit the participating jurisdiction to reduce the number of HOME-assisted units, if the project contains more than the minimum number of units required to be designated as HOME-assisted under § 92.205(d). In determining whether to permit a reduction in the number of HOME-assisted units, HUD will take into account the required period of affordability and the amount of HOME assistance provided to the project.
              [78 FR 44669, July 24, 2013]
            
            
              § 92.212
              Pre-award costs.
              (a) General. Before the effective date of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement, the participating jurisdiction may incur costs which may be charged to the HOME allocation after the award of the HOME allocation, provided the costs are in compliance with the requirements of this part (including environmental review requirements) and with the statutory and regulatory requirements in effect at the time the costs are charged to the HOME allocation.
              (b) Administrative and planning costs. Eligible administrative and planning costs may be incurred as of the beginning of the participating jurisdiction's consolidated program year (see 24 CFR 91.10) or the date the consolidated plan describing the HOME allocation to which the costs will be charged is received by HUD, whichever is later.
              (c) Project costs. Eligible project costs may be incurred during the current program year in an amount not to exceed 25% of the current HOME allocation amount, to be charged to the following year's HOME allocation. Before incurring the pre-award costs, the participating jurisdiction must comply with its citizen participation plan requirements addressing 24 CFR 91.105(b)(2), (4), (5) and (g) (local governments) or 24 CFR 91.115(b)(2), (4), (5) and (f) (States). In lieu of a full action plan, the participating jurisdiction may develop a mini-action plan which describes the proposed pre-award projects and costs in accordance with 24 CFR 91.220(c) and includes, if applicable, 24 CFR 91.220(g)(2) (local governments) or 24 CFR 91.320(c) and, if applicable, 24 CFR 91.320(g)(2) (States). The mini-action plan must state that HOME funding for the project(s) is subject to the future availability of HOME funds. The subsequent action plan (i.e., action plan for the HOME allocation to which the costs will be charged) must also include the use of HOME funds contained in the mini-action plan.
              (d) Subrecipient or State recipient costs. The participating jurisdiction may authorize its subrecipient or State recipient to incur pre-award costs in accordance with the requirements of this section. The authorization must be in writing.
              (e) Other pre-agreement costs. Pre-agreement costs in excess of the amount set forth in paragraph (c) of this section must be approved, in writing, by the HUD Field Office before the costs are incurred.
            
            
              § 92.213
              HOME Funds and Public Housing.
              (a) General rule. HOME funds may not be used for public housing units. HOME-assisted housing units may not receive Operating Fund or Capital Fund assistance under section 9 of the 1937 Act during the HOME period of affordability.
              (b) Exception. HOME funds may be used for the development of public housing units, if the units are developed under section 24 of the 1937 Act (HOPE VI) and no Capital Fund assistance under section 9(d) of the Act is used for the development of the unit. Units developed with both HOME and HOPE VI may receive operating assistance under section 9 of the 1937 Act. Units developed with HOME and HOPE VI funds under this paragraph may subsequently receive Capital Funds for rehabilitation or modernization.
              (c) Using HOME funds in public housing projects. Consistent with § 92.205(d), HOME funds may be used for affordable housing units in a project that also contains public housing units, provided that the HOME funds are not used for the public housing units (except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section) and HOME funds are used only for eligible costs in accordance with this part.
              (d) The HOME funds must be used in accordance with the requirements of this part and the project must meet the requirements of this part, including rent requirements in § 92.252.
              [78 FR 44669, July 24, 2013]
            
            
              § 92.214
              Prohibited activities and fees.
              (a) HOME funds may not be used to:
              (1) Provide project reserve accounts, except as provided in § 92.206(d)(5), or operating subsidies;
              (2) Provide tenant-based rental assistance for the special purposes of the existing section 8 program, in accordance with section 212(d) of the Act;
              (3) Provide non-federal matching contributions required under any other Federal program;
              (4) Provide assistance for uses authorized under section 9 of the 1937 Act (Public Housing Capital and Operating Funds);
              (5) Provide assistance to eligible low-income housing under 24 CFR part 248 (Prepayment of Low Income Housing Mortgages), except that assistance may be provided to priority purchasers as defined in 24 CFR 248.101;
              (6) Provide assistance (other than tenant-based rental assistance, assistance to a homebuyer to acquire housing previously assisted with HOME funds, or assistance to preserve affordability of homeownership housing in accordance with § 92.254(a)(9)) to a project previously assisted with HOME funds during the period of affordability established by the particular jurisdiction in the written agreement under § 92.504. However, additional HOME funds may be committed to a project for up to one year after project completion (see § 92.502), but the amount of HOME funds in the project may not exceed the maximum per-unit subsidy amount established under § 92.250.
              (7) Pay for the acquisition of property owned by the participating jurisdiction, except for property acquired by the participating jurisdiction with HOME funds, or property acquired in anticipation of carrying out a HOME project; or
              (8) Pay delinquent taxes, fees or charges on properties to be assisted with HOME funds.
              (9) Pay for any cost that is not eligible under §§ 92.206 through 92.209.
              (b)(1) Participating jurisdictions may not charge (and must prohibit State recipients, subrecipients, and community housing development organizations from charging) servicing, origination, or other fees for the purpose of covering costs of administering the HOME program (e.g., fees on low-income families for construction management or for inspections for compliance with property standards) (see § 92.206(d)(6) and § 92.207), except that:
              (i) Participating jurisdictions and State recipients may charge owners of rental projects reasonable annual fees for compliance monitoring during the period of affordability. The fees must be based upon the average actual cost of performing the monitoring of HOME-assisted rental projects. The basis for determining the amount of for the fee amount must be documented and the fee must be included in the costs of the project as part of the project underwriting;
              (ii) Participating jurisdictions, subrecipients and State recipients may charge nominal application fees (although these fees are not an eligible HOME cost) to project owners to discourage frivolous applications. The amount of application fees must be appropriate to the type of application and may not create an undue impediment to a low-income family's, subrecipient's, State recipient's, or other entity's participation in the participating jurisdiction's program; and

              (iii) Participating jurisdictions, subrecipients and State recipients may charge homebuyers a fee for housing counseling.
              (2) All fees charged under paragraph (b)(1) of this section are applicable credits under 2 CFR 200.406.
              (3) The participating jurisdiction must prohibit project owners from charging fees that are not customarily charged in rental housing (e.g., laundry room access fees), except that rental project owners may charge:
              (i) Reasonable application fees to prospective tenants;
              (ii) Parking fees to tenants only if such fees are customary for rental housing projects in the neighborhood; and
              (iii) Fees for services such as bus transportation or meals, as long as the services are voluntary and fees are charged for services provided.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997; 67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002; 72 FR 16685, Apr. 4, 2007; 78 FR 44669, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
            
            
              § 92.215
              Limitation on jurisdictions under court order.
              Limitations on the use of HOME funds in connection with litigation involving discrimination or fair housing are set forth in section 224 of the Act.
            
          
          
            Income Targeting
            
              § 92.216
              Income targeting: Tenant-based rental assistance and rental units.
              Each participating jurisdiction must invest HOME funds made available during a fiscal year so that, with respect to tenant-based rental assistance and rental units:
              (a) Not less than 90 percent of:
              (1) The families receiving such rental assistance are families whose annual incomes do not exceed 60 percent of the median family income for the area, as determined and made available by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families (except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 60 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction cost or fair market rent, or unusually high or low family income) at the time of occupancy or at the time funds are invested, whichever is later; or
              (2) The dwelling units assisted with such funds are occupied by families having such incomes; and
              (b) The remainder of:
              (1) The families receiving such rental assistance are households that qualify as low-income families (other than families described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section) at the time of occupancy or at the time funds are invested, whichever is later; or
              (2) The dwelling units assisted with such funds are occupied by such households.
            
            
              § 92.217
              Income targeting: Homeownership.
              Each participating jurisdiction must invest HOME funds made available during a fiscal year so that with respect to homeownership assistance, 100 percent of these funds are invested in dwelling units that are occupied by households that qualify as low-income families.
              [67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002]
            
          
          
            Matching Contribution Requirement
            
              § 92.218
              Amount of matching contribution.
              (a) General. Each participating jurisdiction must make contributions to housing that qualifies as affordable housing under the HOME program, throughout a fiscal year. The contributions must total not less than 25 percent of the funds drawn from the jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account in that fiscal year, excluding funds drawn for purposes identified in paragraph (c) of this section.
              (b) Shortfall amount from State or local resources. Amounts made available under § 92.102(b)(2) from the resources of a State (other than a transfer of the State's formula allocation), the local participating jurisdiction, or both, to enable the local participating jurisdiction to meet the participation threshold amount are not required to be matched and do not constitute matching contributions.
              (c) HOME funds not required to be matched. HOME funds used for administrative and planning costs (pursuant to § 92.207); community housing development organization operating expenses (pursuant to § 92.208); capacity building (pursuant to § 92.300(b)) of community housing development organizations; and project specific assistance to community housing development organizations (pursuant to § 92.301) when the participating jurisdiction waives repayment under the provisions of § 92.301(a)(3) or § 92.301(b)(3) are not required to be matched.
              (d) Match contribution for other programs. Contributions that have been or will be counted as satisfying a matching requirement of another Federal grant or award may not count as satisfying the matching contribution requirement for the HOME program.
            
            
              § 92.219
              Recognition of matching contribution.
              (a) Match contribution to HOME-assisted housing. A contribution is recognized as a matching contribution if it is made with respect to:
              (1) A tenant who is assisted with HOME funds;
              (2) A HOME-assisted unit;
              (3) The portion of a project that is not HOME-assisted provided that at least 50 percent of the housing units in the project are HOME-assisted. If the match contribution to the portion of the project that is not HOME-assisted meets the affordable housing requirements of § 92.219(b)(2), the percentage requirement for HOME-assisted units does not apply; or
              (4) The commercial space in a mixed-use project in which at least 51 percent of the floor space is residential provided that at least 50 percent of the dwelling units are HOME-assisted.
              (b) Match contribution to affordable housing that is not HOME-assisted. The following requirements apply for recognition of matching contributions made to affordable housing that is not HOME-assisted:
              (1) For tenant-based rental assistance that is not HOME-assisted:
              (i) The contribution must be made with respect to a tenant who is assisted with tenant-based rental assistance that meets the requirements of § 92.203 (Income determinations) and paragraphs (a), (c), (f), and (i) of § 92.209 (Tenant-based rental assistance); and
              (ii) The participating jurisdiction must demonstrate in writing that such assistance meets the provisions of §§ 92.203 and 92.209 (except § 92.209(e)).
              (2) For affordable housing that is not HOME-assisted:
              (i) The contribution must be made with respect to housing that qualifies as affordable housing under § 92.252 or § 92.254.
              (ii) The participating jurisdiction or its instrumentality must execute, with the owner of the housing (or, if the participating jurisdiction is the owner, with the manager or developer), a written agreement that imposes and enumerates all of the affordability requirements from § 92.252 and § 92.253(a) and (b) (Tenant protections), or § 92.254, whichever are applicable; the property standards requirements of § 92.251; and income determinations made in accordance with § 92.203. This written agreement must be executed before any match contributions may be made.
              (iii) A participating jurisdiction must establish a procedure to monitor HOME match-eligible housing to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of §§ 92.203 (Income determinations), 92.252 (Qualification as affordable housing: Rental housing), 92.253(a) and (b) (Tenant protections) and 92.254 (Qualification as affordable housing: Homeownership). No other HOME requirements apply.
              (iv) The match may be in any eligible form of match except those in § 92.220(a)(2) (forbearance of fees), (a)(4) (on-site and off-site infrastructure), (a)(10) (direct cost of supportive services) and (a)(11) (direct costs of homebuyer counseling services).
              (v) Match contributions to mixed-use or mixed-income projects that contain affordable housing units will be recognized only if the contribution is made to the project's affordable housing units.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997]
            
            
              § 92.220
              Form of matching contribution.
              (a) Eligible forms. Matching contributions must be made from nonfederal resources and may be in the form of one or more of the following:
              
              (1) Cash contributions from nonfederal sources. To be recognized as a cash contribution, funds must be contributed permanently to the HOME program (or to affordable housing not assisted with HOME funds), regardless of the form of investment provided to the project. Therefore, to receive match credit for the full amount of a loan to a HOME project, all repayment, interest, or other return on investment of the contribution must be deposited in the local account of the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund to be used for eligible HOME activities in accordance with the requirements of this part. A cash contribution to affordable housing that is not assisted with HOME funds must be contributed permanently to the project. Repayments of matching contributions in affordable housing projects, as defined in § 92.219(b), that are not HOME-assisted, must be made to the local account of the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund to get match credit for the full loan amount.
              (i) A cash contribution may be made by the participating jurisdiction, non-Federal public entities, private entities, or individuals, except as prohibited under paragraph (b)(4) of this section. A cash contribution made to a nonprofit organization for use in a HOME project may be counted as a matching contribution.
              (ii) A cash contribution may be made from program income (as defined by 2 CFR 200.80) from a Federal grant earned after the end of the award period if no Federal requirements govern the disposition of the program income. Included in this category are repayments from closed out grants under the Urban Development Action Grant Program (24 CFR part 570, subpart G) and the Housing Development Grant Program (24 CFR part 850), and from the Rental Rehabilitation Grant Program (24 CFR part 511) after all fiscal year Rental Rehabilitation grants have been closed out.
              (iii) The grant equivalent of a below-market interest rate loan to the project that is not repayable to the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund may be counted as a cash contribution, as follows:
              (A) If the loan is made from funds borrowed by a jurisdiction or public agency or corporation the contribution is the present discounted cash value of the difference between the payments to be made on the borrowed funds and payments to be received from the loan to the project based on a discount rate equal to the interest rate on the borrowed funds.
              (B) If the loan is made from funds other than funds borrowed by a jurisdiction or public agency or corporation, the contribution is the present discounted cash value of the yield foregone. In determining the yield foregone, the participating jurisdiction must use as a measure of a market rate yield one of the following, as appropriate:
              (1) With respect to one- to four-unit housing financed with a fixed interest rate mortgage, a rate equal to the 10-year Treasury note rate plus 200 basis points;
              (2) With respect to one- to four-unit housing financed with an adjustable interest rate mortgage, a rate equal to the one-year Treasury bill rate plus 250 basis points;
              (3) With respect to a multifamily project, a rate equal to the 10-year Treasury note rate plus 300 basis points; or
              (4) With respect to housing receiving financing for rehabilitation, a rate equal to the 10-year Treasury note rate plus 400 basis points.
              (iv) Proceeds of bonds that are not repaid with revenue from an affordable housing project (e.g., general obligation bonds) and that are loaned to a HOME-assisted or other qualified affordable housing project constitute a cash contribution under this paragraph.

              (v) A cash contribution may be counted as a matching contribution only if it is used for costs eligible under §§ 92.206 or 92.209, or for the following (which are not HOME eligible costs): the cost of removing and relocating an ECHO housing unit during the period of affordability in accordance with § 92.258(d)(3)(ii), payments to a project reserve account beyond payments permitted by § 92.206(d)(5), operating subsidies, or costs relating to the portion of a mixed-income or mixed-use HOME-assisted project not related to the affordable housing units.
              (2) Forbearance of fees—(i) State and local taxes, charges or fees. The value (based on customary and reasonable means for establishing value) of State or local taxes, fees, or other charges that are normally and customarily imposed or charged by a State or local government on all transactions or projects in the conduct of its operations, which are waived, foregone, or deferred (including State low-income housing tax credits) in a manner that achieves affordability of HOME-assisted projects, may be counted as match. The amount of any real estate taxes may be based on post-improvement property value. For taxes, fees, or charges that are forgiven for future years, the value is the present discounted cash value, based on a rate equal to the rate for the Treasury security with a maturity closest to the number of years for which the taxes, fees, or charges are waived, foregone, or deferred.
              (ii) Other charges or fees. The value of fees or charges associated with the transfer or development of real estate that are normally and customarily imposed or charged by public or private entities, which are waived or foregone, in whole or in part, in a manner that achieves affordability of HOME-assisted projects, may be counted as match. Fees and charges under this paragraph do not include fees or charges for legal or other professional services; professional services which are donated, in whole or in part, are an eligible matching contribution in accordance with paragraph (a)(7) of this section.
              (iii) Fees or charges that are associated with the HOME Program only (rather than normally and customarily imposed or charged on all transactions or projects) are not eligible forms of matching contributions.
              (3) Donated Real Property. The value, before the HOME assistance is provided and minus any debt burden, lien, or other encumbrance, of donated land or other real property may be counted as match. The donation may be made by the participating jurisdiction, non-Federal public entities, private entities, or individuals, except as prohibited under paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
              (i) Donated property not acquired with Federal resources is a contribution in the amount of 100% of the value.
              (ii) Donated property acquired with Federal assistance may provide a partial contribution as follows. The property must be acquired with Federal assistance specifically for a HOME project (or for affordable housing that will be counted as match pursuant to § 92.219(b)(2)). The property must be acquired with the Federal assistance at demonstrably below the appraised value and must be acknowledged by the seller as a donation to affordable housing at the time of the acquisition with the Federal assistance. The amount of the contribution is the difference between the acquisition price and the appraised value at the time of acquisition with the Federal assistance. If the property is acquired with the Federal assistance by someone other than the HOME project (or affordable housing) owner, to continue to qualify as a contribution, the property must be given to the HOME project (or affordable housing) owner at a price that does not exceed the amount of the Federal assistance used to acquire the property.
              (iii) Property must be appraised in conformance with established and generally recognized appraisal practice and procedures in common use by professional appraisers. Opinions of value must be based on the best available data properly analyzed and interpreted. The appraisal of land and structures must be performed by an independent, certified appraiser.
              (4) The cost, not paid with Federal resources, of on-site and off-site infrastructure that the participating jurisdiction documents are directly required for HOME-assisted projects. The infrastructure must have been completed no earlier than 12 months before HOME funds are committed to the project.

              (5) Proceeds from multifamily and single family affordable housing project bond financing validly issued by a State or local government, or an agency or instrumentality of a State or local government or a political subdivision of a State and repayable with revenues from the affordable housing project financed as follows:
              (i) Fifty percent of the loan amount made from bond proceeds to a multifamily affordable housing project owner may qualify as match.
              (ii) Twenty-five percent of the loan amount from bond proceeds made to a single-family affordable housing project owner may qualify as match.
              (iii) Loans made from bond proceeds may not constitute more than 25 percent of a participating jurisdiction's total annual match contribution.
              (6) The reasonable value of donated site-preparation and construction materials, not acquired with Federal resources. The value of site-preparation and construction materials is to be determined in accordance with the participating jurisdiction's cost estimate procedures.
              (7) The reasonable rental value of the donated use of site preparation or construction equipment.
              (8) The value of donated or voluntary labor or professional services (see § 92.354(b)) in connection with the provision of affordable housing. A single rate established by HUD shall be applicable for determining the value of unskilled labor. The value of skilled labor or professional services shall be determined by the rate that the individual or entity performing the labor or service normally charges.
              (9) The value of sweat equity (see § 92.354(c)) provided to a homeownership project, under an established component of a participating jurisdiction's program, up until the time of project completion (i.e., submission of a project completion form). Such labor shall be valued at the rate established for unskilled labor at paragraph (a)(8) of this section.
              (10) The direct cost of supportive services provided to families residing in HOME-assisted units during the period of affordability or receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance during the term of the tenant-based rental assistance contract. The supportive services must be necessary to facilitate independent living or be required as part of a self-sufficiency program. Examples of supportive services include: case management, mental health services, assistance with the tasks of daily living, substance abuse treatment and counseling, day care, and job training and counseling.
              (11) The direct cost of homebuyer counseling services provided to families that acquire properties with HOME funds under the provisions of § 92.254(a), including ongoing counseling services provided during the period of affordability. These services may be provided as part of a homebuyer counseling program that is not specific to the HOME Program, but only the cost of services to families that complete purchases with HOME assistance may be counted as match.
              (b) Ineligible forms. The following are examples that do not meet the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section and do not count toward meeting a participating jurisdiction's matching contribution requirement:
              (1) Contributions made with or derived from Federal resources or funds, regardless of when the Federal resources or funds were received or expended. CDBG funds (defined in 24 CFR 570.3) are Federal funds for this purpose;
              (2) The interest rate subsidy attributable to the Federal tax-exemption on financing or the value attributable to Federal tax credits;
              (3) Owner equity or investment in a project; and
              (4) Cash or other forms of contributions from applicants for or recipients of HOME assistance or contracts, or investors who own, are working on, or are proposing to apply for assistance for a HOME-assisted project. The prohibition in this paragraph (b)(4) does not apply to contractors (who do not own any HOME project) contributing professional services in accordance with paragraph (a)(8) of this section or to persons contributing sweat equity in accordance with paragraph (a)(9) of this section.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997; 62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
            
            
              § 92.221
              Match credit.
              (a) When credit is given. Contributions are credited on a fiscal year basis at the time the contribution is made, as follows:
              (1) A cash contribution is credited when the funds are expended.
              (2) The grant equivalent of a below-market interest rate loan is credited at the time of the loan closing.
              (3) The value of state or local taxes, fees, or other charges that are normally and customarily imposed but are waived, foregone, or deferred is credited at the time the state or local government or other public or private entity officially waives, forgoes, or defers the taxes, fees, or other charges and notifies the project owner.
              (4) The value of donated land or other real property is credited at the time ownership of the property is transferred to the HOME project (or affordable housing) owner.
              (5) The cost of investment in infrastructure directly required for HOME-assisted projects is credited at the time funds are expended for the infrastructure or at the time the HOME funds are committed to the project if the infrastructure was completed before the commitment of HOME funds.
              (6) The value of donated material is credited as match at the time it is used for affordable housing.
              (7) The value of the donate use of site preparation or construction equipment is credited as match at the time the equipment is used for affordable housing.
              (8) The value of donated or voluntary labor or professional services is credited at the time the work is performed.
              (9) A loan made from bond proceeds under § 92.220(a)(5) is credited at the time of the loan closing.
              (10) The direct cost of social services provided to residents of HOME-assisted units is credited at the time that the social services are provided during the period of affordability.
              (11) The direct cost of homebuyer counseling services provided to families that purchase HOME-assisted units is credited at the time that the homebuyer purchases the unit or for post-purchase counseling services, at the time the counseling services are provided.
              (b) Excess match. Contributions made in a fiscal year that exceed the participating jurisdiction's match liability for the fiscal year in which they were made may be carried over and applied to future fiscal years' match liability. Loans made from bond proceeds in excess of 25 percent of a participating jurisdiction's total annual match contribution may be carried over to subsequent fiscal years as excess match, subject to the annual 25 percent limitation.
              (c) Credit for match contributions shall be assigned as follows:
              (1) For HOME-assisted projects involving more than one participating jurisdiction, the participating jurisdiction that makes the match contribution may decide to retain the match credit or permit the other participating jurisdiction to claim the credit.
              (2) For HOME match contributions to affordable housing that is not HOME-assisted (match pursuant to § 92.219(b)) involving more than one participating jurisdiction, the participating jurisdiction that makes the match contribution receives the match credit.
              (3) A State that provides non-Federal funds to a local participating jurisdiction to be used for a contribution to affordable housing, whether or not HOME-assisted, may take the match credit for itself or may permit the local participating jurisdiction to receive the match credit.
              (d) Match credit for the development of affordable homeownership housing for sale to homebuyers. Contributions to the development of homeownership housing may be credited as a match only to the extent that the sales price of the housing is reduced by the amount of the contribution or, if the development costs exceed the fair market value of the housing, the contribution may be credited to the extent that the contributions enable the housing to be sold for less than the cost of development.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44670, July 24, 2013]
            
            
              § 92.222
              Reduction of matching contribution requirement.
              (a) Reduction for fiscal distress. HUD will determine match reductions annually.
              
              (1) Distress criteria for local government participating jurisdictions. If a local government participating jurisdiction satisfies both of the distress factors in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section, it is in severe fiscal distress and its match requirement will be reduced by 100% for the period specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. If a local government participating jurisdiction satisfies either distress factor in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) or (ii) of this section, it is in fiscal distress and its match requirement will be reduced by 50 percent, for the period specified in paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
              (i) Poverty rate. The average poverty rate in the participating jurisdiction was equal to or greater than 125 percent of the average national poverty rate during the calendar year for which the most recent data are available, as determined according to information of the Bureau of the Census.
              (ii) Per capita income. The average per capita income in the participating jurisdiction was less than 75 percent of the average national per capita income, during the calendar year for which the most recent data are available, as determined according to information from the Bureau of the Census.
              (2) Distress criteria for participating jurisdictions that are States. If a State satisfies at least 2 of the 3 distress factors in paragraphs (a)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section, it is in severe fiscal distress and its match requirement will be reduced by 100% for the period specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. If a State satisfies any 1 of the 3 distress factors in paragraphs (a)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section, it is in fiscal distress and its match requirement will be reduced by 50 percent, for the period specified in paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
              (i) Poverty rate. The average poverty rate in the State was equal to or greater than 125 percent of the average national poverty rate during the calendar year for which the most recent data are available, as determined according to information from the Bureau of the Census.
              (ii) Per capita income. The average per capita income in the State was less than 75 percent of the average national per capita income, during the calendar year for which the most recent data are available, as determined according to information from the Bureau of the Census.
              (iii) Personal income growth. The average personal income growth rate in the State over the most recent four quarters for which the data are available was less than 75 percent of the average national personal income growth rate during that period, as determined according to information from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
              (3) Period of match reduction for severe fiscal distress. A 100% match reduction is effective for the fiscal year in which the severe fiscal distress determination is made and for the following fiscal year.
              (4) Period of match reduction for fiscal distress. A 50% match reduction is effective for the fiscal year in which the fiscal distress determination is made and for the following fiscal year, except that if a severe fiscal distress determination is published in that following fiscal year, the participating jurisdiction starts a new two-year match reduction period in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
              (b) Reduction of match for participating jurisdictions in disaster areas. If a participating jurisdiction is located in an area in which a declaration of major disaster is made pursuant to the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121-5206), the participating jurisdiction may request a reduction of its matching requirement.
              (1) In determining whether to grant the request and the amount and duration of the reduction, if any, HUD must consider the fiscal impact of the disaster on the participating jurisdiction.
              (i) For a local participating jurisdiction, the HUD Field office may reduce the matching requirement specified in § 92.218 by up to 100 percent for the fiscal year in which the declaration of major disaster is made and the following fiscal year.

              (ii) For a State participating jurisdiction, the HUD Field office may reduce the matching requirement specified in § 92.218, by up to 100 percent for the fiscal year in which the declaration of major disaster is made and the following fiscal year with respect to any HOME funds expended in an area to which the declaration of a major disaster applies.
              (2) At its discretion and upon request of the participating jurisdiction, the HUD Field Office may extend the reduction for an additional year.
              [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44670, July 24, 2013]
            
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Project Requirements
          
            § 92.250
            Maximum per-unit subsidy amount, underwriting, and subsidy layering.
            (a) Maximum per-unit subsidy amount. The total amount of HOME funds and ADDI funds that a participating jurisdiction may invest on a per-unit basis in affordable housing may not exceed the per-unit dollar limitations established under section 221(d)(3)(ii) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C.17151(d)(3)(ii)) for elevator- type projects that apply to the area in which the housing is located. HUD will allow the per-unit subsidy amount to be increased on a program-wide basis to an amount, up to 240 percent of the original per unit limits, to the extent that the costs of multifamily housing construction exceed the section 221(d)(3)(ii) limit.
            (b) Underwriting and subsidy layering. Before committing funds to a project, the participating jurisdiction must evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines that it has adopted for determining a reasonable level of profit or return on owner's or developer's investment in a project and must not invest any more HOME funds, alone or in combination with other governmental assistance, than is necessary to provide quality affordable housing that is financially viable for a reasonable period (at minimum, the period of affordability in § 92.252 or § 92.254) and that will not provide a profit or return on the owner's or developer's investment that exceeds the participating jurisdiction's established standards for the size, type, and complexity of the project. The participating jurisdiction's guidelines must require the participating jurisdiction to undertake:
            (1) An examination of the sources and uses of funds for the project and a determination that the costs are reasonable; and
            (2) An assessment, at minimum, of the current market demand in the neighborhood in which the project will be located, the experience of the developer, the financial capacity of the developer, and firm written financial commitments for the project.
            (3) For projects involving rehabilitation of owner-occupied housing pursuant to § 92.254(b):
            (i) An underwriting analysis is required only if the HOME-funded rehabilitation loan is an amortizing loan; and
            (ii) A market analysis or evaluation of developer capacity is not required.
            (4) For projects involving HOME-funded downpayment assistance pursuant to § 92.254(a) and which do not include HOME-funded development activity, a market analysis or evaluation of developer capacity is not required.
            [78 FR 44670, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.251
            Property standards.
            (a) New construction projects. (1) State and local codes, ordinances, and zoning requirements. Housing that is newly constructed with HOME funds must meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and zoning requirements. HOME-assisted new construction projects must meet State or local residential and building codes, as applicable or, in the absence of a State or local building code, the International Residential Code or International Building Code (as applicable to the type of housing) of the International Code Council. The housing must meet the applicable requirements upon project completion.
            (2) HUD requirements. All new construction projects must also meet the requirements described in this paragraph:
            (i) Accessibility. The housing must meet the accessibility requirements of 24 CFR part 8, which implements Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), and Titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131-12189) implemented at 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, as applicable. Covered multifamily dwellings, as defined at 24 CFR 100.201, must also meet the design and construction requirements at 24 CFR 100.205, which implements the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619).
            (ii) [Reserved]
            (iii) Disaster mitigation. Where relevant, the housing must be constructed to mitigate the impact of potential disasters (e.g., earthquakes, hurricanes, flooding, and wildfires), in accordance with State and local codes, ordinances, or other State and local requirements, or such other requirements as HUD may establish.
            (iv) Written cost estimates, construction contracts and construction documents. The participating jurisdiction must ensure the construction contract(s) and construction documents describe the work to be undertaken in adequate detail so that inspections can be conducted. The participating jurisdiction must review and approve written cost estimates for construction and determining that costs are reasonable.
            (v) Construction progress inspections. The participating jurisdiction must conduct progress and final inspections of construction to ensure that work is done in accordance with the applicable codes, the construction contract, and construction documents.
            (vi) Broadband infrastructure. For new commitments made after January 19, 2017 for a new construction housing project of a building with more than 4 rental units, the construction must include installation of broadband infrastructure, as this term is defined in 24 CFR 5.100, except where the participating jurisdiction determines and, in accordance with § 92.508(a)(3)(iv), documents the determination that:
            (A) The location of the new construction makes installation of broadband infrastructure infeasible; or
            (B) The cost of installing the infrastructure would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity or in an undue financial burden.
            (b) Rehabilitation projects. All rehabilitation that is performed using HOME funds must meet the requirements of this paragraph (b).
            (1) Rehabilitation standards. The participating jurisdiction must establish rehabilitation standards for all HOME- assisted housing rehabilitation activities that set forth the requirements that the housing must meet upon project completion. The participating jurisdiction's description of its standards must be in sufficient detail to determine the required rehabilitation work including methods and materials. The standards may refer to applicable codes or they may establish requirements that exceed the minimum requirements of the codes. The rehabilitation standards must address each of the following:
            (i) Health and safety. The participating jurisdiction's standards must identify life-threatening deficiencies that must be addressed immediately if the housing is occupied.
            (ii) Major systems. Major systems are: structural support; roofing; cladding and weatherproofing (e.g., windows, doors, siding, gutters); plumbing; electrical; and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. For rental housing, the participating jurisdiction's standards must require the participating jurisdiction to estimate (based on age and condition) the remaining useful life of these systems, upon project completion of each major systems. For multifamily housing projects of 26 units or more, the participating jurisdiction's standards must require the participating jurisdiction to determine the useful life of major systems through a capital needs assessment of the project. For rental housing, if the remaining useful life of one or more major system is less than the applicable period of affordability, the participating jurisdiction's standards must require the participating jurisdiction to ensure that a replacement reserve is established and monthly payments are made to the reserve that are adequate to repair or replace the systems as needed. For homeownership housing, the participating jurisdiction's standards must require, upon project completion, each of the major systems to have a remaining useful life for a minimum of 5 years or for such longer period specified by the participating jurisdiction, or the major systems must be rehabilitated or replaced as part of the rehabilitation work.
            
            (iii) Lead-based paint. The participating jurisdiction's standards must require the housing to meet the lead-based paint requirements at 24 CFR part 35.
            (iv) Accessibility. The participating jurisdiction's standards must require the housing to meet the accessibility requirements in 24 CFR part 8, which implements Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), and Titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131-12189) implemented at 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, as applicable. Covered multifamily dwellings, as defined at 24 CFR 100.201, must also meet the design and construction requirements at 24 CFR 100.205, which implements the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619). Rehabilitation may include improvements that are not required by regulation or statute that permit use by a person with disabilities.
            (v) [Reserved]
            (vi) Disaster mitigation. Where relevant, the participating jurisdiction's standards must require the housing to be improved to mitigate the impact of potential disasters (e.g., earthquake, hurricanes, flooding, and wildfires) in accordance with State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements.
            (vii) State and local codes, ordinances, and zoning requirements. The participating jurisdiction's standards must require the housing to meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements or, in the absence of a State or local building code, the International Existing Building Code of the International Code Council.
            (viii) Uniform Physical Condition Standards. The standards of the participating jurisdiction must be such that, upon completion, the HOME-assisted project and units will be decent, safe, sanitary, and in good repair as described in 24 CFR 5.703. HUD will establish the minimum deficiencies that must be corrected under the participating jurisdiction's rehabilitation standards based on inspectable items and inspected areas from HUD-prescribed physical inspection procedures (Uniform Physical Conditions Standards) pursuant to 24 CFR 5.705.
            (ix) Capital Needs Assessments. For multifamily rental housing projects of 26 or more total units, the participating jurisdiction must determine all work that will be performed in the rehabilitation of the housing and the long-term physical needs of the project through a capital needs assessment of the project.
            (x) Broadband infrastructure. For new commitments made after January 19, 2017 for a substantial rehabilitation project of a building with more than 4 rental units, any substantial rehabilitation, as defined in 24 CFR 5.100, must provide for installation of broadband infrastructure, as this term is also defined in 24 CFR 5.100, except where the participating jurisdiction determines and, in accordance with § 92.508(a)(3)(iv), documents the determination that:
            (A) The location of the substantial rehabilitation makes installation of broadband infrastructure infeasible;
            (B) The cost of installing broadband infrastructure would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity or in an undue financial burden; or
            (C) The structure of the housing to be substantially rehabilitated makes installation of broadband infrastructure infeasible.
            (2) Construction documents and cost estimates. The participating jurisdiction must ensure that the work to be undertaken will meet the participating jurisdiction's rehabilitation standards. The construction documents (i.e., written scope of work to be performed) must be in sufficient detail to establish the basis for a uniform inspection of the housing to determine compliance with the participating jurisdiction's standards. The participating jurisdiction must review and approve a written cost estimate for rehabilitation after determining that costs are reasonable.
            (3) Frequency of inspections. The participating jurisdiction must conduct an initial property inspection to identify the deficiencies that must be addressed. The participating jurisdiction must conduct progress and final inspections to determine that work was done in accordance with work write-ups.
            (c) Acquisition of standard housing. (1) Existing housing that is acquired with HOME assistance for rental housing, and that was newly constructed or rehabilitated less than 12 months before the date of commitment of HOME funds, must meet the property standards of paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this section, as applicable, of this section for new construction and rehabilitation projects. The participating jurisdiction must document this compliance based upon a review of approved building plans and Certificates of Occupancy, and an inspection that is conducted no earlier than 90 days before the commitment of HOME assistance.
            (2) All other existing housing that is acquired with HOME assistance for rental housing must meet the rehabilitation property standards requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. The participating jurisdiction must document this compliance based upon an inspection that is conducted no earlier than 90 days before the commitment of HOME assistance. If the property does not meet these standards, HOME funds cannot be used to acquire the property unless it is rehabilitated to meet the standards of paragraph (b) of this section.
            (3) Existing housing that is acquired for homeownership (e.g., downpayment assistance) must be decent, safe, sanitary, and in good repair. The participating jurisdiction must establish standards to determine that the housing is decent, safe, sanitary, and in good repair. At minimum, the standards must provide that the housing meets all applicable State and local housing quality standards and code requirements and the housing does not contain the specific deficiencies proscribed by HUD based on the applicable inspectable items and inspected areas in HUD-prescribed physical inspection procedures (Uniform Physical Condition Standards) issued pursuant to 24 CFR 5.705. The participating jurisdiction must inspect the housing and document this compliance based upon an inspection that is conducted no earlier than 90 days before the commitment of HOME assistance. If the housing does not meet these standards, the housing must be rehabilitated to meet the standards of this paragraph (c)(3) or it cannot be acquired with HOME funds.
            (d) Occupied housing by tenants receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance. All housing occupied by tenants receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance must meet the standards in 24 CFR 982.401, or the successor requirements as established by HUD.
            (e) Manufactured housing. Construction of all manufactured housing including manufactured housing that replaces an existing substandard unit under the definition of “reconstruction” must meet the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards codified at 24 CFR part 3280. These standards preempt State and local codes which are not identical to the federal standards for the new construction of manufactured housing. Participating jurisdictions providing HOME funds to assist manufactured housing units must comply with applicable State and local laws or codes. In the absence of such laws or codes, the installation must comply with the manufacturer's written instructions for installation of manufactured housing units. All new manufactured housing and all manufactured housing that replaces an existing substandard unit under the definition of “reconstruction” must be on a permanent foundation that meets the requirements for foundation systems as set forth in 24 CFR 203.43f(c)(i). All new manufactured housing and all manufactured housing that replaces an existing substandard unit under the definition of “reconstruction” must, at the time of project completion, be connected to permanent utility hook-ups and be located on land that is owned by the manufactured housing unit owner or land for which the manufactured housing owner has a lease for a period at least equal to the applicable period of affordability. In HOME-funded rehabilitation of existing manufactured housing the foundation and anchoring must meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements or in the absence of local or state codes, the Model Manufactured Home Installation Standards at 24 CFR part 3285. Manufactured housing that is rehabilitated using HOME funds must meet the property standards requirements in paragraph (b) of this section, as applicable. The participating jurisdiction must document this compliance in accordance with inspection procedures that the participating jurisdiction has established pursuant to § 92.251, as applicable.
            (f) Ongoing property condition standards: Rental housing. (1) Ongoing property standards. The participating jurisdiction must establish property standards for rental housing (including manufactured housing) that apply throughout the affordability period. The standards must ensure that owners maintain the housing as decent, safe, and sanitary housing in good repair. The participating jurisdiction's description of its property standards must be in sufficient detail to establish the basis for a uniform inspection of HOME rental projects. The participating jurisdiction's ongoing property standards must address each of the following:
            (i) Compliance with State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements. The participating jurisdiction's standards must require the housing to meet all applicable State and local code requirements and ordinances. In the absence of existing applicable State or local code requirements and ordinances, at a minimum, the participating jurisdiction's ongoing property standards must include all inspectable items and inspectable areas specified by HUD based on the HUD physical inspection procedures (Uniform Physical Condition Standards (UPCS)) prescribed by HUD pursuant to 24 CFR 5.705. The participating jurisdiction's property standards are not required to use any scoring, item weight, or level of criticality used in UPCS.
            (ii) Health and safety. The participating jurisdiction's standards must require the housing to be free of all health and safety defects. The standards must identify life-threatening deficiencies that the owner must immediately correct and the time frames for addressing these deficiencies.
            (iii) Lead-based paint. The participating jurisdiction's standards must require the housing to meet the lead-based paint requirements in 24 CFR part 35.
            (2) Projects to which HOME funds were committed before January 24, 2015 must meet all applicable State or local housing quality standards or code requirements, and if there are no such standard or code requirements, the housing must meet the housing quality standards in 24 CFR 982.401.
            (3) Inspections. The participating jurisdiction must undertake ongoing property inspections, in accordance with § 92.504(d).
            (4) Corrective and remedial actions. The participating jurisdiction must have procedures for ensuring that timely corrective and remedial actions are taken by the project owner to address identified deficiencies.
            (5) Inspection procedures. The participating jurisdiction must establish written inspection procedures inspections. The procedures must include detailed inspection checklists, description of how and by whom inspections will be carried out, and procedures for training and certifying qualified inspectors. The procedures must also describe how frequently the property will be inspected, consistent with this section, § 92.209, and § 92.504(d).
            [78 FR 44670, July 24, 2013, as amended at 81 FR 92635, Dec. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.252
            Qualification as affordable housing: Rental housing.
            The HOME-assisted units in a rental housing project must be occupied by households that are eligible as low- income families and must meet the requirements of this section to qualify as affordable housing. If the housing is not occupied by eligible tenants within six months following the date of project completion, HUD will require the participating jurisdiction to submit marketing information and, if appropriate, submit a marketing plan. HUD will require the participating jurisdiction to repay HOME funds invested in any housing unit that has not been rented to eligible tenants 18 months after the date of project completion. The affordability requirements also apply to the HOME- assisted non-owner-occupied units in single-family housing purchased with HOME funds in accordance with § 92.254. The tenant must have a written lease that complies with § 92.253.
            (a) Rent limitation. HUD provides the following maximum HOME rent limits. The rent limits apply to the rent plus the utilities or the utility allowance. The maximum HOME rents (High HOME Rents) are the lesser of:
            (1) The fair market rent for existing housing for comparable units in the area as established by HUD under 24 CFR 888.111; or
            (2) A rent that does not exceed 30 percent of the adjusted income of a family whose annual income equals 65 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for number of bedrooms in the unit. The HOME rent limits provided by HUD will include average occupancy per unit and adjusted income assumptions.
            (b) Additional rent limitations (Low HOME Rents). The participating jurisdiction may designate (in its written agreement with the project owner) more than the minimum HOME units in a rental housing project, regardless of project size, to have Low HOME Rents that meet the requirements of this paragraph (b). In rental projects with five or more HOME-assisted rental units, at least 20 percent of the HOME-assisted units must be occupied by very low-income families and meet one of the following rent requirements:
            (1) The rent does not exceed 30 percent of the annual income of a family whose income equals 50 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for smaller and larger families. HUD provides the HOME rent limits which include average occupancy per unit and adjusted income assumptions. However, if the rent determined under this paragraph is higher than the applicable rent under paragraph (a) of this section, then the maximum rent for units under this paragraph is that calculated under paragraph (a) of this section.
            (2) The rent does not exceed 30 percent of the family's adjusted income. If the unit receives Federal or State project-based rental subsidy and the very low-income family pays as a contribution toward rent not more than 30 percent of the family's adjusted income, then the maximum rent (i.e., tenant contribution plus project-based rental subsidy) is the rent allowable under the Federal or State project-based rental subsidy program.
            (c) Additional rent limitations for SRO projects. (1) For SRO units that have both sanitary and food preparation facilities, the maximum HOME rent is based on the zero-bedroom fair market rent. The project must meet the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
            (2) For SRO units that have no sanitary or food preparation facilities or only one of the two, the maximum HOME rent is based on 75 percent of the zero-bedroom fair market rent. The project is not required to have low HOME rents in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) or (2) of this section, but must meet the occupancy requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.
            (d) Initial rent schedule and utility allowances. (1) The participating jurisdiction must establish maximum monthly allowances for utilities and services (excluding telephone) and update the allowances annually. The participating jurisdiction must use the HUD Utility Schedule Model or otherwise determine the utility allowance for the project based on the type of utilities used at the project.
            (2) The participating jurisdiction must review and approve rents proposed by the owner for units, subject to the maximum rent limitations in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section. For all units subject to the maximum rent limitations in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section for which the tenant is paying utilities and services, the participating jurisdiction must ensure that the rents do not exceed the maximum rent minus the monthly allowances for utilities and services.
            (e) Periods of affordability. The HOME-assisted units must meet the affordability requirements for not less than the applicable period specified in the following table, beginning after project completion.
            (1) The affordability requirements:
            (i) Apply without regard to the term of any loan or mortgage, repayment of the HOME investment, or the transfer of ownership;

            (ii) Must be imposed by a deed restriction, a covenant running with the land, an agreement restricting the use of the property, or other mechanisms approved by HUD and must give the participating jurisdiction the right to require specific performance (except that the participating jurisdiction may provide that the affordability restrictions may terminate upon foreclosure or transfer in lieu of foreclosure); and
            (iii) Must be recorded in accordance with State recordation laws.
            (2) The participating jurisdiction may use purchase options, rights of first refusal or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing before foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure in order to preserve affordability.
            (3) The affordability restrictions shall be revived according to the original terms if, during the original affordability period, the owner of record before the foreclosure, or deed in lieu of foreclosure, or any entity that includes the former owner or those with whom the former owner has or had family or business ties, obtains an ownership interest in the project or property.
            (4) The termination of the restrictions on the project does not terminate the participating jurisdiction's repayment obligation under § 92.503(b).
            
              
                Rental housing activity
                Minimum period of affordability in years
              
              
                Rehabilitation or acquisition of existing housing per unit amount of HOME funds: Under $15,000
                5
              
              
                $15,000 to $40,000
                10
              
              
                Over $40,000 or rehabilitation involving refinancing
                15
              
              
                New construction or acquisition of newly constructed housing
                20
              
            
            (f) Subsequent rents during the affordability period. (1) The maximum HOME rent limits are recalculated on a periodic basis after HUD determines fair market rents and median incomes. HUD then provides the new maximum HOME rent limits to participating jurisdictions. Regardless of changes in fair market rents and in median income over time, the HOME rents for a project are not required to be lower than the HOME rent limits for the project in effect at the time of project commitment.
            (2) The participating jurisdiction must provide project owners with information on updated HOME rent limits so that rents may be adjusted (not to exceed the maximum HOME rent limits in paragraph (f)(1) of this section) in accordance with the written agreement between the participating jurisdiction and the owner. Owners must annually provide the participating jurisdiction with information on rents and occupancy of HOME-assisted units to demonstrate compliance with this section. The participating jurisdiction must review rents for compliance and approve or disapprove them every year.
            (3) Any increase in rents for HOME-assisted units is subject to the provisions of outstanding leases, and in any event, the owner must provide tenants of those units not less than 30 days prior written notice before implementing any increase in rents.
            (g) Adjustment of HOME rent limits for an existing project. (1) Changes in fair market rents and in median income over time should be sufficient to maintain the financial viability of a project within the HOME rent limits in this section.
            (2) HUD may adjust the HOME rent limits for a project, only if HUD finds that an adjustment is necessary to support the continued financial viability of the project and only by an amount that HUD determines is necessary to maintain continued financial viability of the project. HUD expects that this authority will be used sparingly.
            (h) Tenant income. The income of each tenant must be determined initially in accordance with § 92.203(a)(1)(i). In addition, each year during the period of affordability the project owner must re-examine each tenant's annual income in accordance with one of the options in § 92.203 selected by the participating jurisdiction. An owner of a multifamily project with an affordability period of 10 years or more who re-examines tenant's annual income through a statement and certification in accordance with § 92.203(a)(1)(ii), must examine the income of each tenant, in accordance with § 92.203(a)(1)(i), every sixth year of the affordability period. Otherwise, an owner who accepts the tenant's statement and certification in accordance with § 92.203(a)(1)(ii) is not required to examine the income of tenants in multifamily or single-family projects unless there is evidence that the tenant's written statement failed to completely and accurately state information about the family's size or income.
            (i) Over-income tenants. (1) HOME-assisted units continue to qualify as affordable housing despite a temporary noncompliance caused by increases in the incomes of existing tenants if actions satisfactory to HUD are being taken to ensure that all vacancies are filled in accordance with this section until the noncompliance is corrected.
            (2) Tenants who no longer qualify as low-income families must pay as rent the lesser of the amount payable by the tenant under State or local law or 30 percent of the family's adjusted income, except that tenants of HOME-assisted units that have been allocated low-income housing tax credits by a housing credit agency pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 42) must pay rent governed by section 42. In addition, in projects in which the Home units are designated as floating pursuant to paragraph (j) of this section, tenants who no longer qualify as low-income are not required to pay as rent an amount that exceeds the market rent for comparable, unassisted units in the neighborhood.
            (j) Fixed and floating HOME units. In a project containing HOME-assisted and other units, the participating jurisdiction may designate fixed or floating HOME units. This designation must be made at the time of project commitment in the written agreement between the participating jurisdiction and the owner, and the HOME units must be identified not later than the time of initial unit occupancy. Fixed units remain the same throughout the period of affordability. Floating units are changed to maintain conformity with the requirements of this section during the period of affordability so that the total number of housing units meeting the requirements of this section remains the same, and each substituted unit is comparable in terms of size, features, and number of bedrooms to the originally designated HOME-assisted unit.
            (k) Tenant selection. The tenants must be selected in accordance with § 92.253(d).
            (l) Ongoing responsibilities. The participating jurisdiction's responsibilities for on-site inspections and financial oversight of rental projects are set forth in § 92.504(d).
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997; 62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997; 78 FR 44672, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.253
            Tenant protections and selection.
            (a) Lease. There must be a written lease between the tenant and the owner of rental housing assisted with HOME funds that is for a period of not less than 1 year, unless by mutual agreement between the tenant and the owner a shorter period is specified. The lease must incorporate the VAWA lease term/addendum required under § 92.359(e), except as otherwise provided by § 92.359(b).
            (b) Prohibited lease terms. The lease may not contain any of the following provisions:
            (1) Agreement to be sued. Agreement by the tenant to be sued, to admit guilt, or to a judgment in favor of the owner in a lawsuit brought in connection with the lease;
            (2) Treatment of property. Agreement by the tenant that the owner may take, hold, or sell personal property of household members without notice to the tenant and a court decision on the rights of the parties. This prohibition, however, does not apply to an agreement by the tenant concerning disposition of personal property remaining in the housing unit after the tenant has moved out of the unit. The owner may dispose of this personal property in accordance with State law;
            (3) Excusing owner from responsibility. Agreement by the tenant not to hold the owner or the owner's agents legally responsible for any action or failure to act, whether intentional or negligent;
            (4) Waiver of notice. Agreement of the tenant that the owner may institute a lawsuit without notice to the tenant;
            (5) Waiver of legal proceedings. Agreement by the tenant that the owner may evict the tenant or household members without instituting a civil court proceeding in which the tenant has the opportunity to present a defense, or before a court decision on the rights of the parties;
            (6) Waiver of a jury trial. Agreement by the tenant to waive any right to a trial by jury;
            (7) Waiver of right to appeal court decision. Agreement by the tenant to waive the tenant's right to appeal, or to otherwise challenge in court, a court decision in connection with the lease;
            (8) Tenant chargeable with cost of legal actions regardless of outcome. Agreement by the tenant to pay attorney's fees or other legal costs even if the tenant wins in a court proceeding by the owner against the tenant. The tenant, however, may be obligated to pay costs if the tenant loses; and
            (9) Mandatory supportive services. Agreement by the tenant (other than a tenant in transitional housing) to accept supportive services that are offered.
            (c) Termination of tenancy. An owner may not terminate the tenancy or refuse to renew the lease of a tenant of rental housing assisted with HOME funds, except for serious or repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease; for violation of applicable Federal, State, or local law; for completion of the tenancy period for transitional housing or failure to follow any required transitional housing supportive services plan; or for other good cause. Good cause does not include an increase in the tenant's income or refusal of the tenant to purchase the housing. To terminate or refuse to renew tenancy, the owner must serve written notice upon the tenant specifying the grounds for the action at least 30 days before the termination of tenancy.
            (d) Tenant selection. An owner of rental housing assisted with HOME funds must comply with the affirmative marketing requirements established by the participating jurisdiction pursuant to § 92.351(a). The owner must adopt and follow written tenant selection policies and criteria that:
            (1) Limit the housing to very low- income and low-income families;
            (2) Are reasonably related to the applicants' ability to perform the obligations of the lease (i.e., to pay the rent, not to damage the housing; not to interfere with the rights and quiet enjoyment of other tenants);
            (3) Limit eligibility or give a preference to a particular segment of the population if permitted in its written agreement with the participating jurisdiction (and only if the limitation or preference is described in the participating jurisdiction's consolidated plan).
            (i) Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination requirements in § 92.350. A limitation or preference does not violate nondiscrimination requirements if the housing also receives funding from a Federal program that limits eligibility to a particular segment of the population (e.g., the Housing Opportunity for Persons with AIDS program under 24 CFR part 574, the Shelter Plus Care program under 24 CFR part 582, the Supportive Housing program under 24 CFR part 583, supportive housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities under 24 CFR part 891), and the limit or preference is tailored to serve that segment of the population.
            (ii) If a project does not receive funding from a Federal program that limits eligibility to a particular segment of the population, the project may have a limitation or preference for persons with disabilities who need services offered at a project only if:
            (A) The limitation or preference is limited to the population of families (including individuals) with disabilities that significantly interfere with their ability to obtain and maintain housing;
            (B) Such families will not be able to obtain or maintain themselves in housing without appropriate supportive services; and

            (C) Such services cannot be provided in a nonsegregated setting. The families must not be required to accept the services offered at the project. In advertising the project, the owner may advertise the project as offering services for a particular type of disability; however, the project must be open to all otherwise eligible persons with disabilities who may benefit from the services provided in the project.
            
            (4) Do not exclude an applicant with a certificate or voucher under the Section 8 Tenant-Based Assistance: Housing Choice Voucher Program (24 CFR part 982) or an applicant participating in a HOME tenant-based rental assistance program because of the status of the prospective tenant as a holder of such certificate, voucher, or comparable HOME tenant-based assistance document.
            (5) Provide for the selection of tenants from a written waiting list in the chronological order of their application, insofar as is practicable;
            (6) Give prompt written notification to any rejected applicant of the grounds for any rejection; and
            (7) Comply with the VAWA requirements prescribed in § 92.359.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002; 78 FR 44674, July 24, 2013; 81 FR 80803, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.254
            Qualification as affordable housing: Homeownership.
            (a) Acquisition with or without rehabilitation. Housing that is for acquisition by a family must meet the affordability requirements of this paragraph (a).
            (1) The housing must be single family housing.
            (2) The housing must be modest housing as follows:
            (i) In the case of acquisition of newly constructed housing or standard housing, the housing has a purchase price for the type of single family housing that does not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area, as described in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section.
            (ii) In the case of acquisition with rehabilitation, the housing has an estimated value after rehabilitation that does not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area, described in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section.
            (iii) If a participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for homebuyer assistance or for the rehabilitation of owner-occupied single- family properties, the participating jurisdiction must use the HOME affordable homeownership limits provided by HUD for newly constructed housing and for existing housing. HUD will provide limits for affordable newly constructed housing based on 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area using Federal Housing Administration (FHA) single family mortgage program data for newly constructed housing, with a minimum limit based on 95 percent of the U.S. median purchase price for new construction for nonmetropolitan areas. HUD will provide limits for affordable existing housing based on 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area using Federal FHA single family mortgage program data for existing housing data and other appropriate data that are available nation-wide for sales of existing housing, with a minimum limit based on 95 percent of the state-wide nonmetropolitan area median purchase price using this data. In lieu of the limits provided by HUD, the participating jurisdiction may determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price for single family housing in the jurisdiction annually, as follows. The participating jurisdiction must set forth the price for different types of single family housing for the jurisdiction. The participating jurisdiction may determine separate limits for existing housing and newly constructed housing. For housing located outside of metropolitan areas, a State may aggregate sales data from more than one county, if the counties are contiguous and similarly situated. The following information must be included in the annual action plan of the Consolidated Plan submitted to HUD for review and updated in each action plan.
            (A) The 95 percent of median area purchase price must be established in accordance with a market analysis that ensured that a sufficient number of recent housing sales are included in the survey.
            (B) Sales must cover the requisite number of months based on volume: For 500 or more sales per month, a one- month reporting period; for 250 through 499 sales per month, a 2-month reporting period; for less than 250 sales per month, at least a 3-month reporting period. The data must be listed in ascending order of sales price.

            (C) The address of the listed properties must include the location within the participating jurisdiction. Lot, square, and subdivision data may be substituted for the street address.
            (D) The housing sales data must reflect all, or nearly all, of the one- family house sales in the entire participating jurisdiction.
            (E) To determine the median, take the middle sale on the list if an odd number of sales, and if an even number, take the higher of the middle numbers and consider it the median. After identifying the median sales price, the amount should be multiplied by 0.95 to determine the 95 percent of the median area purchase price.
            (3) The housing must be acquired by a homebuyer whose family qualifies as a low-income family, and the housing must be the principal residence of the family throughout the period described in paragraph (a)(4) of this section. If there is no ratified sales contract with an eligible homebuyer for the housing within 9 months of the date of completion of construction or rehabilitation, the housing must be rented to an eligible tenant in accordance with § 92.252. In determining the income eligibility of the family, the participating jurisdiction must include the income of all persons living in the housing. The homebuyer must receive housing counseling.
            (4) Periods of affordability. The HOME-assisted housing must meet the affordability requirements for not less than the applicable period specified in the following table, beginning after project completion. The per unit amount of HOME funds and the affordability period that they trigger are described more fully in paragraphs (a)(5)(i) (resale) and (ii) (recapture) of this section.
            
              
                Homeownership assistance HOME amount per-unit
                Minimum period of affordability in years
              
              
                Under $15,000
                5
              
              
                $15,000 to $40,000
                10
              
              
                Over $40,000
                15
              
            
            (5) Resale and recapture. The participating jurisdiction must establish the resale or recapture requirements that comply with the standards of this section and set forth the requirements in its consolidated plan. HUD must determine that they are appropriate and must specifically approve them in writing.
            (i) Resale. Resale requirements must ensure, if the housing does not continue to be the principal residence of the family for the duration of the period of affordability that the housing is made available for subsequent purchase only to a buyer whose family qualifies as a low-income family and will use the property as the family's principal residence. The resale requirement must also ensure that the price at resale provides the original HOME-assisted owner a fair return on investment (including the homeowner's investment and any capital improvement) and ensure that the housing will remain affordable to a reasonable range of low- income homebuyers. The participating jurisdiction must specifically define “fair return on investment” and “affordability to a reasonable range of low-income homebuyers,” and specifically address how it will make the housing affordable to a low-income homebuyer in the event that the resale price necessary to provide fair return is not affordable to the subsequent buyer. The period of affordability is based on the total amount of HOME funds invested in the housing.
            (A) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(5)(i)(B) of this section, deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, or other similar mechanisms must be used as the mechanism to impose the resale requirements. The affordability restrictions may terminate upon occurrence of any of the following termination events: foreclosure, transfer in lieu of foreclosure or assignment of an FHA insured mortgage to HUD. The participating jurisdiction may use purchase options, rights of first refusal or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing before foreclosure to preserve affordability. The affordability restrictions shall be revived according to the original terms if, during the original affordability period, the owner of record before the termination event, obtains an ownership interest in the housing.

            (B) Certain housing may be presumed to meet the resale restrictions (i.e., the housing will be available and affordable to a reasonable range of low-income homebuyers; a low-income homebuyer will occupy the housing as the family's principal residence; and the original owner will be afforded a fair return on investment) during the period of affordability without the imposition of enforcement mechanisms by the participating jurisdiction. The presumption must be based upon a market analysis of the neighborhood in which the housing is located. The market analysis must include an evaluation of the location and characteristics of the housing and residents in the neighborhood (e.g., sale prices, age and amenities of the housing stock, incomes of residents, percentage of owner-occupants) in relation to housing and incomes in the housing market area. An analysis of the current and projected incomes of neighborhood residents for an average period of affordability for homebuyers in the neighborhood must support the conclusion that a reasonable range of low-income families will continue to qualify for mortgage financing. For example, an analysis shows that the housing is modestly priced within the housing market area and that families with incomes of 65% to 80% of area median can afford monthly payments under average FHA terms without other government assistance and housing will remain affordable at least during the next five to seven years compared to other housing in the market area; the size and amenities of the housing are modest and substantial rehabilitation will not significantly increase the market value; the neighborhood has housing that is not currently owned by the occupants, but the participating jurisdiction is encouraging homeownership in the neighborhood by providing homeownership assistance and by making improvements to the streets, sidewalks, and other public facilities and services. If a participating jurisdiction in preparing a neighborhood revitalization strategy under § 91.215(e)(2) of its consolidated plan or Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community application under 24 CFR part 597 has incorporated the type of market data described above, that submission may serve as the required analysis under this section. If the participating jurisdiction continues to provide homeownership assistance for housing in the neighborhood, it must periodically update the market analysis to verify the original presumption of continued affordability.
            (ii) Recapture. Recapture provisions must ensure that the participating jurisdiction recoups all or a portion of the HOME assistance to the homebuyers, if the housing does not continue to be the principal residence of the family for the duration of the period of affordability. The participating jurisdiction may structure its recapture provisions based on its program design and market conditions. The period of affordability is based upon the total amount of HOME funds subject to recapture described in paragraph (a)(5)(ii)(A)(5) of this section. Recapture provisions may permit the subsequent homebuyer to assume the HOME assistance (subject to the HOME requirements for the remainder of the period of affordability) if the subsequent homebuyer is low-income, and no additional HOME assistance is provided.
            (A) The following options for recapture requirements are acceptable to HUD. The participating jurisdiction may adopt, modify or develop its own recapture requirements for HUD approval. In establishing its recapture requirements, the participating jurisdiction is subject to the limitation that when the recapture requirement is triggered by a sale (voluntary or involuntary) of the housing unit, the amount recaptured cannot exceed the net proceeds, if any. The net proceeds are the sales price minus superior loan repayment (other than HOME funds) and any closing costs.
            (1) Recapture entire amount. The participating jurisdiction may recapture the entire amount of the HOME investment from the homeowner.
            (2) Reduction during affordability period. The participating jurisdiction may reduce the HOME investment amount to be recaptured on a prorata basis for the time the homeowner has owned and occupied the housing measured against the required affordability period.
            (3) Shared net proceeds. If the net proceeds are not sufficient to recapture the full HOME investment (or a reduced amount as provided for in paragraph (a)(5)(ii)(A)(2) of this section) plus enable the homeowner to recover the amount of the homeowner's downpayment and any capital improvement investment made by the owner since purchase, the participating jurisdiction may share the net proceeds. The net proceeds are the sales price minus loan repayment (other than HOME funds) and closing costs. The net proceeds may be divided proportionally as set forth in the following mathematical formulas:
            
              EC12OC91.007
            
            (4) Owner investment returned first. The participating jurisdiction may permit the homebuyer to recover the homebuyer's entire investment (downpayment and capital improvements made by the owner since purchase) before recapturing the HOME investment.
            (5) Amount subject to recapture. The HOME investment that is subject to recapture is based on the amount of HOME assistance that enabled the homebuyer to buy the dwelling unit. This includes any HOME assistance that reduced the purchase price from fair market value to an affordable price, but excludes the amount between the cost of producing the unit and the market value of the property (i.e., the development subsidy). The recaptured funds must be used to carry out HOME-eligible activities in accordance with the requirements of this part. If the HOME assistance is only used for the development subsidy and therefore not subject to recapture, the resale option must be used.
            (6) Special considerations for single-family properties with more than one unit. If the HOME funds are only used to assist a low-income homebuyer to acquire one unit in single-family housing containing more than one unit and the assisted unit will be the principal residence of the homebuyer, the affordability requirements of this section apply only to the assisted unit. If HOME funds are also used to assist the low-income homebuyer to acquire one or more of the rental units in the single-family housing, the affordability requirements of § 92.252 apply to assisted rental units, except that the participating jurisdiction may impose resale or recapture restrictions on all assisted units (owner-occupied and rental units) in the single family housing. If resale restrictions are used, the affordability requirements on all assisted units continue for the period of affordability. If recapture restrictions are used, the affordability requirements on the assisted rental units may be terminated, at the discretion of the participating jurisdiction, upon recapture of the HOME investment. (If HOME funds are used to assist only the rental units in such a property then the requirements of § 92.252 would apply and the owner-occupied unit would not be subject to the income targeting or affordability provisions of § 92.254.)
            (7) Lease-purchase. HOME funds may be used to assist homebuyers through lease-purchase programs for existing housing and for housing to be constructed. The housing must be purchased by a homebuyer within 36 months of signing the lease'purchase agreement. The homebuyer must qualify as a low-income family at the time the lease-purchase agreement is signed. If HOME funds are used to acquire housing that will be resold to a homebuyer through a lease-purchase program, the HOME affordability requirements for rental housing in § 92.252 shall apply if the housing is not transferred to a homebuyer within forty-two months after project completion.
            (8) Contract to purchase. If HOME funds are used to assist a homebuyer who has entered into a contract to purchase housing to be constructed, the homebuyer must qualify as a low-income family at the time the contract is signed.
            (9) Preserving affordability of housing that was previously assisted with HOME funds.
            
            (i) To preserve the affordability of HOME-assisted housing a participating jurisdiction may use additional HOME funds for the following costs:
            (A) The cost to acquire the housing through a purchase option, right of first refusal, or other preemptive right before foreclosure, or at the foreclosure sale. (The foreclosure costs to acquire housing with a HOME loan in default are eligible. However, HOME funds may not be used to repay a loan made with HOME funds.)
            (B) The cost to undertake any necessary rehabilitation for the housing acquired.
            (C) The cost of owning/holding the housing pending resale to another homebuyer.
            (D) The cost to assist another homebuyer in purchasing the housing.
            (ii) When a participating jurisdiction uses HOME funds to preserve the affordability of such housing, the additional investment must be treated as an amendment to the original project. The housing must be sold to a new eligible homebuyer in accordance with the requirements of § 92.254(a) within a reasonable period of time.
            (iii) The total amount of the original and additional HOME assistance may not exceed the maximum per unit subsidy amount established under § 92.250. Alternatively to charging the cost to the HOME program under § 92.206, the participating jurisdiction may charge the cost to the HOME program under § 92.207 as a reasonable administrative cost of its HOME program, so that the additional HOME funds for the housing are not subject to the maximum per-unit subsidy amount. To the extent administrative funds are used, they may be reimbursed, in whole or in part, when the housing is sold to a new eligible homebuyer.
            (b) Rehabilitation not involving acquisition. Housing that is currently owned by a family qualifies as affordable housing only if:
            (1) The estimated value of the property, after rehabilitation, does not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area, described in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section; and
            (2) The housing is the principal residence of an owner whose family qualifies as a low-income family at the time HOME funds are committed to the housing. In determining the income eligibility of the family, the participating jurisdiction must include the income of all persons living in the housing.
            (c) Ownership interest. The ownership in the housing assisted under this section must meet the definition of “homeownership” in § 92.2, except that housing that is rehabilitated pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section may also include inherited property with multiple owners, life estates, living trusts and beneficiary deeds under the following conditions. The participating jurisdiction has the right to establish the terms of assistance.
            (1) Inherited property. Inherited property with multiple owners: Housing for which title has been passed to several individuals by inheritance, but not all heirs reside in the housing, sharing ownership with other nonresident heirs. (The occupant of the housing has a divided ownership interest.) The participating jurisdiction may assist the owner-occupant if the occupant is low-income, occupies the housing as his or her principal residence, and pays all the costs associated with ownership and maintenance of the housing (e.g., mortgage, taxes, insurance, utilities).
            (2) Life estate. The person who has the life estate has the right to live in the housing for the remainder of his or her life and does not pay rent. The participating jurisdiction may assist the person holding the life estate if the person is low-income and occupies the housing as his or her principal residence.
            (3) Inter vivos trust, also known as a living trust. A living trust is created during the lifetime of a person. A living trust is created when the owner of property conveys his or her property to a trust for his or her own benefit or for that of a third party (the beneficiaries). The trust holds legal title and the beneficiary holds equitable title. The person may name him or herself as the beneficiary. The trustee is under a fiduciary responsibility to hold and manage the trust assets for the beneficiary. The participating jurisdiction may assist if all beneficiaries of the trust qualify as a low-income family and occupy the property as their principal residence (except that contingent beneficiaries, who receive no benefit from the trust nor have any control over the trust assets until the beneficiary is deceased, need not be low-income). The trust must be valid and enforceable and ensure that each beneficiary has the legal right to occupy the property for the remainder of his or her life.
            (4) Beneficiary deed. A beneficiary deed conveys an interest in real property, including any debt secured by a lien on real property, to a grantee beneficiary designated by the owner and that expressly states that the deed is effective on the death of the owner. Upon the death of the owner, the grantee beneficiary receives ownership in the property, subject to all conveyances, assignments, contracts, mortgages, deeds of trust, liens, security pledges, and other encumbrances made by the owner or to which the owner was subject during the owner's lifetime. The participating jurisdiction may assist if the owner qualifies as low-income and the owner occupies the property as his or her principal residence.
            (d) New construction without acquisition. Newly constructed housing that is built on property currently owned by a family which will occupy the housing upon completion, qualifies as affordable housing if it meets the requirements under paragraph (a) of this section.
            (e) Providing homeownership assistance through lenders. Subject to the requirements of this paragraph (e), the participating jurisdiction may provide homeownership assistance through for-profit or nonprofit lending institutions that provide the first mortgage loan to a low-income family.
            (1) The homeownership assistance may be provided only as specified in a written agreement between the participating jurisdiction and the lender. The written agreement must specify the forms and amounts of homeownership assistance that the participating jurisdiction authorizes the lender to provide to families and any conditions that apply to the provision of such homeownership assistance.
            (2) Before the lender provides any homeownership assistance to a family, the participating jurisdiction must verify that the family is low-income and must inspect the housing for compliance with the property standards in § 92.251.
            (3) No fees (e.g., origination fees or points) may be charged to a family for the HOME homeownership assistance provided pursuant to this paragraph (e), and the participating jurisdiction must determine that the fees and other amounts charged to the family by the lender for the first mortgage financing are reasonable. Reasonable administrative costs may be charged to the HOME program as a project cost. If the participating jurisdiction requires lenders to pay a fee to participate in the HOME program, the fee is program income to the HOME program.
            (4) If the nonprofit lender is a subrecipient or contractor that is receiving HOME assistance to determine that the family is eligible for homeownership assistance, but the participating jurisdiction or another entity is making the assistance to the homebuyer (e.g., signing the documents for the loan or the grant), the requirements of paragraphs (e)(2) and (3) of this section are applicable.
            (f) Homebuyer program policies. The participating jurisdiction must have and follow written policies for:
            (1) Underwriting standards for homeownership assistance that evaluate housing debt and overall debt of the family, the appropriateness of the amount of assistance, monthly expenses of the family, assets available to acquire the housing, and financial resources to sustain homeownership;
            (2) Responsible lending, and

            (3) Refinancing loans to which HOME loans are subordinated to ensure that the terms of the new loan are reasonable.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002; 68 FR 10161, Mar. 4, 2003; 69 FR 16766, Mar. 30, 2004; 69 FR 68052, Nov. 22, 2004; 72 FR 16685, Apr. 4, 2007; 78 FR 44674, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.255
            Converting rental units to homeownership units for existing tenants.
            (a) The participating jurisdiction may permit the owner of HOME-assisted rental units to convert the rental units to homeownership units by selling, donating, or otherwise conveying the units to the existing tenants to enable the tenants to become homeowners in accordance with the requirements of § 92.254. However, refusal by the tenant to purchase the housing does not constitute grounds for eviction or for failure to renew the lease.
            (b) If no additional HOME funds are used to enable the tenants to become homeowners, the homeownership units are subject to a minimum period of affordability equal to the remaining affordable period if the units continued as rental units. If additional HOME funds are used to directly assist the tenants to become homeowners, the minimum period of affordability is the affordability period under § 92.254(a)(4), based on the amount of direct homeownership assistance provided.
            [78 FR 44676, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.256
            [Reserved]
          
          
            § 92.257
            Equal participation of faith-based organizations.
            The HUD program requirements in § 5.109 apply to the HOME program, including the requirements regarding disposition and change in use of real property by a faith-based organization.
            [81 FR 19418, Apr. 4, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.258
            Elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units.
            (a) General. HOME funds may be used for the initial purchase and initial placement costs of elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units that meet the requirements of this section, and that are small, free-standing, barrier-free, energy-efficient, removable, and designed to be installed adjacent to existing single-family dwellings.
            (b) Eligible owners. The owner of a HOME-assisted ECHO unit may be:
            (1) The owner-occupant of the single-family host property on which the ECHO unit will be located;
            (2) A participating jurisdiction; or
            (3) A non-profit organization.
            (c) Eligible tenants. During the affordability period, the tenant of a HOME-assisted ECHO unit must be an elderly or disabled family as defined in 24 CFR 5.403 and must also be a low-income family.
            (d) Applicable requirements. The requirements of § 92.252 apply to HOME-assisted ECHO units, with the following modifications:
            (1) Only one ECHO unit may be provided per host property.
            (2) The ECHO unit owner may choose whether or not to charge the tenant of the ECHO unit rent, but if a rent is charged, it must meet the requirements of § 92.252.
            (3) The ECHO housing must remain affordable for the period specified in § 92.252(e). If within the affordability period the original occupant no longer occupies the unit, the ECHO unit owner must:
            (i) Rent the unit to another eligible occupant on site;
            (ii) Move the ECHO unit to another site for occupancy by an eligible occupant; or
            (iii) If the owner of the ECHO unit is the host property owner-occupant, the owner may repay the HOME funds in accordance with the recapture provisions imposed by the participating jurisdiction consistent with § 92.254(a)(5)(ii). The participating jurisdiction must use the recaptured HOME funds for additional HOME activities.
            (4) The participating jurisdiction has the responsibility to enforce the project requirements applicable to ECHO units.
          
        
        
          
          Subpart G—Community Housing Development Organizations
          
            § 92.300
            Set-aside for community housing development organizations (CHDOs).
            (a) Within 24 months after the date that HUD notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnerships Agreement, the participating jurisdiction must reserve not less than 15 percent of the HOME allocation for investment only in housing to be owned, developed or sponsored by community housing development organizations. For a State, the HOME allocation includes funds reallocated under § 92.451(c)(2)(i) and, for a unit of general local government, includes funds transferred from a State under § 92.102(b). The participating jurisdiction must certify the organization as meeting the definition of “community housing development organization” and must document that the organization has capacity to own, develop, or sponsor housing each time it commits funds to the organization. For purposes of this paragraph:
            (1) Funds are reserved when a participating jurisdiction enters into a written agreement with the community housing development organization (or project owner as described in paragraph (a)(4) of this section) committing the funds to a specific local project in accordance with paragraph (2) of the definition of “commitment” in § 92.2.
            (2) Rental housing is “owned” by the community housing development organization if the community housing development organization is the owner in fee simple absolute of multifamily or single family housing (or has a long term ground lease) for rental to low-income families in accordance with § 92.252. If the housing is to be rehabilitated or constructed, the community housing development organization hires and oversees the developer that rehabilitates or constructs the housing. At minimum, the community housing development organization must hire or contract with an experienced project manager to oversee all aspects of the development, including obtaining zoning, securing non-HOME financing, selecting a developer or general contractor, overseeing the progress of the work and determining the reasonableness of costs. The community housing development organization must own the rental housing during development and for a period at least equal to the period of affordability in § 92.252. If the CHDO acquires housing that meets the property standards in § 92.251, the CHDO must own the rental housing for a period at least equal to the period of affordability in § 92.252.
            (3) Rental housing is “developed” by the community development housing organization if the community housing development organization is the owner of multifamily or single family housing in fee simple absolute (or has a long term ground lease) and the developer of new housing that will be constructed or existing substandard housing that will be rehabilitated for rent to low-income families in accordance with § 92.252. To be the “developer,” the community development housing organization must be in sole charge of all aspects of the development process, including obtaining zoning, securing non-HOME financing, selecting architects, engineers and general contractors, overseeing the progress of the work and determining the reasonableness of costs. At a minimum, the community housing development organization must own the housing during development and for a period at least equal to the period of affordability in § 92.252.
            (4) Rental housing is “sponsored” by the community development housing organization if it is rental housing “owned” or “developed” by a subsidiary of a community housing development organization, a limited partnership of which the community housing development organization or its subsidiary is the sole general partner, or a limited liability company of which the community housing development organization or its subsidiary is the sole managing member.

            (i) The subsidiary of the community housing development organization may be a for-profit or nonprofit organization and must be wholly owned by the community housing development organization. If the limited partnership or limited liability company agreement permits the community housing development organization to be removed as general partner or sole managing member, the agreement must provide that the removal must be for cause and that the community housing development organization must be replaced with another community housing development organization.
            (ii) The HOME funds must be provided to the entity that owns the project.
            (5) HOME-assisted rental housing is also “sponsored” by a community housing development organization if the community housing development organization “developed” the rental housing project that it agrees to convey to an identified private nonprofit organization at a predetermined time after completion of the development of the project. Sponsored rental housing, as provided in this paragraph (a)(5), is subject to the following requirements:
            (i) The private nonprofit organization may not be created by a governmental entity.
            (ii) The HOME funds must be invested in the project that is owned by the community housing development organization.
            (iii) Before commitment of HOME funds, the community housing development organization sponsor must select the nonprofit organization that will obtain ownership of the property.
            (A) The nonprofit organization assumes the community housing development organization's HOME obligations (including any repayment of loans) for the rental project at a specified time after completion of development.
            (B) If the housing is not transferred to the nonprofit organization, the community housing development organization sponsor remains responsible for the HOME assistance and the HOME project.
            (6) Housing for homeownership is “developed” by the community development housing organization if the community housing development organization is the owner (in fee simple absolute) and developer of new housing that will be constructed or existing substandard housing that will be rehabilitated for sale to low-income families in accordance with § 92.254.
            (i) To be the “developer” the community development housing organization must arrange financing of the project and be in sole charge of construction. The community housing development organization may provide direct homeownership assistance (e.g., downpayment assistance) when it sells the housing to low-income families and the community housing development organization will not be considered a subrecipient. The HOME funds for downpayment assistance shall not be greater than 10 percent of the amount of HOME funds for development of the housing.
            (ii) The participating jurisdiction must determine and set forth in its written agreement with the community housing development organization the actual sales prices of the housing or the method by which the sales prices for the housing will be established and whether the proceeds must be returned to the participating jurisdiction or may be retained by the community housing development organization.
            (A) While proceeds that the participating jurisdiction permits the community housing development organization to retain are not subject to the requirements of this part, the participating jurisdiction must specify in the written agreement with the community housing development organization whether the proceeds are to be used for HOME-eligible activities or other housing activities to benefit low-income families.
            (B) Funds that are recaptured because the housing no longer meets the affordability requirements under § 92.254(a)(5)(ii) are subject to the requirements of this part in accordance with § 92.503.
            (7) The participating jurisdiction determines the form of assistance (e.g., grant or loan) that it will provide to the community housing development organization receives or, for rental housing projects under paragraph (a)(4) of this section, to the entity that owns the project.

            (b) Each participating jurisdiction must make reasonable efforts to identify community housing development organizations that are capable, or can reasonably be expected to become capable, of carrying out elements of the jurisdiction's approved consolidated plan and to encourage such community housing development organizations to do so. If during the first 24 months of its participation in the HOME Program a participating jurisdiction cannot identify a sufficient number of capable community housing development organizations, up to 20 percent of the minimum community housing development organization setaside of 15 percent specified in paragraph (a) of this section, above, (but not more than $150,000 during the 24 month period) may be committed to develop the capacity of community housing development organizations in the jurisdiction.
            (c) Up to 10 percent of the HOME funds reserved under this section may be used for activities specified under § 92.301.
            (d) HOME funds required to be reserved under this section are subject to reduction, as provided in § 92.500(d).
            (e) If funds for operating expenses are provided under § 92.208 to a community housing development organization that is not also receiving funds under paragraph (a) of this section for housing to be owned, developed or sponsored by the community housing development organization, the participating jurisdiction's written agreement with the community housing development organization must provide that the community housing development organization is expected to receive funds under paragraph (a) of this section for a project within 24 months of the date of receiving the funds for operating expenses, and specifies the terms and conditions upon which this expectation is based.
            (f) The participating jurisdiction must ensure that a community housing development organization does not receive HOME funding for any fiscal year in an amount that provides more than 50 percent or $50,000, whichever is greater, of the community housing development organization's total operating expenses in that fiscal year. This also includes organizational support and housing education provided under section 233(b)(1), (2), and (6) of the Act, as well as funds for operating expenses provided under § 92.208.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997; 78 FR 44677, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.301
            Project-specific assistance to community housing development organizations.
            (a) Project-specific technical assistance and site control loans—(1) General. Within the percentage specified in § 92.300(c), HOME funds may be used by a participating jurisdiction to provide technical assistance and site control loans to community housing development organizations in the early stages of site development for an eligible project. These loans may not exceed amounts that the participating jurisdiction determines to be customary and reasonable project preparation costs allowable under paragraph (a)(2) of this section. All costs must be related to a specific eligible project or projects.
            (2) Allowable costs. A loan may be provided to cover project costs necessary to determine project feasibility (including costs of an initial feasibility study), consulting fees, costs of preliminary financial applications, legal fees, architectural fees, engineering fees, engagement of a development team, option to acquire property, site control and title clearance. General operational expenses of the community housing development organization are not allowable costs.
            (3) Repayment. The community housing development organization must repay the loan to the participating jurisdiction from construction loan proceeds or other project income. The participating jurisdiction may waive repayment of the loan, in part or in whole, if there are impediments to project development that the participating jurisdiction determines are reasonably beyond the control of the borrower.
            (b) Project-specific seed money loans—(1) General. Within the percentage specified in § 92.300(c), HOME funds may be used to provide loans to community housing development organizations to cover preconstruction project costs that the participating jurisdiction determines to be customary and reasonable, including, but not limited to the costs of obtaining firm construction loan commitments, architectural plans and specifications, zoning approvals, engineering studies, and legal fees.
            
            (2) Eligible sponsors. A loan may be provided only to a community housing development organization that has, with respect to the project concerned, site control (evidenced by a deed, a sales contract, or an option contract to acquire the property), a preliminary financial commitment, and a capable development team.
            (3) Repayment. The community housing development organization must repay the loan to the participating jurisdiction from construction loan proceeds or other project income. The participating jurisdiction may waive repayment of the loan, in whole or in part, if there are impediments to project development that the participating jurisdiction determines are reasonably beyond the control of the community housing development organization.
          
          
            § 92.302
            Housing education and organizational support.

            HUD is authorized to provide education and organizational support assistance, in conjunction with HOME funds made available to community housing development organizations in accordance with section 233 of the Act. HUD will publish a notice in the Federal Register announcing the availability of funding under this section, as appropriate. The notice need not include funding for each of the eligible activities, but may target funding from among the eligible activities.
          
          
            § 92.303
            Tenant participation plan.
            A community housing development organization that receives assistance under this part must adhere to a fair lease and grievance procedure approved by the participating jurisdiction and provide a plan for and follow a program of tenant participation in management decisions.
          
        
        
          Subpart H—Other Federal Requirements
          
            § 92.350
            Other Federal requirements and nondiscrimination.
            (a) The Federal requirements set forth in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A, are applicable to participants in the HOME program. The requirements of this subpart include: nondiscrimination and equal opportunity; disclosure requirements; debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors; drug-free work; and housing counseling.
            (b) The nondiscrimination requirements at section 282 of the Act are applicable. These requirements are waived in connection with the use of HOME funds on lands set aside under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920 (42 Stat. 108).
            [62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997, as amended at 81 FR 90657, Dec. 14, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.351
            Affirmative marketing; minority outreach program.
            (a) Affirmative marketing. (1) Each participating jurisdiction must adopt and follow affirmative marketing procedures and requirements for rental and homebuyer projects containing five or more HOME-assisted housing units. Affirmative marketing requirements and procedures also apply to all HOME- funded programs, including, but not limited to, tenant-based rental assistance and downpayment assistance programs. Affirmative marketing steps consist of actions to provide information and otherwise attract eligible persons in the housing market area to the available housing without regard to race, color, national origin, sex, religion, familial status, or disability. If participating jurisdiction's written agreement with the project owner permits the rental housing project to limit tenant eligibility or to have a tenant preference in accordance with § 92.253(d)(3), the participating jurisdiction must have affirmative marketing procedures and requirements that apply in the context of the limited/preferred tenant eligibility for the project.
            (2) The affirmative marketing requirements and procedures adopted must include:
            (i) Methods for informing the public, owners, and potential tenants about Federal fair housing laws and the participating jurisdiction's affirmative marketing policy (e.g., the use of the Equal Housing Opportunity logotype or slogan in press releases and solicitations for owners, and written communication to fair housing and other groups);

            (ii) Requirements and practices each subrecipient and owner must adhere to in order to carry out the participating jurisdiction's affirmative marketing procedures and requirements (e.g., use of commercial media, use of community contacts, use of the Equal Housing Opportunity logotype or slogan, and display of fair housing poster);
            (iii) Procedures to be used by subrecipients and owners to inform and solicit applications from persons in the housing market area who are not likely to apply for the housing program or the housing without special outreach (e.g., through the use of community organizations, places of worship, employment centers, fair housing groups, or housing counseling agencies);
            (iv) Records that will be kept describing actions taken by the participating jurisdiction and by subrecipients and owners to affirmatively market the program and units and records to assess the results of these actions; and
            (v) A description of how the participating jurisdiction will annually assess the success of affirmative marketing actions and what corrective actions will be taken where affirmative marketing requirements are not met.
            (3) A State that distributes HOME funds to units of general local government must require each unit of general local government to adopt affirmative marketing procedures and requirements that meet the requirement in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
            (b) Minority outreach. A participating jurisdiction must prescribe procedures acceptable to HUD to establish and oversee a minority outreach program within its jurisdiction to ensure the inclusion, to the maximum extent possible, of minorities and women, and entities owned by minorities and women, including, without limitation, real estate firms, construction firms, appraisal firms, management firms, financial institutions, investment banking firms, underwriters, accountants, and providers of legal services, in all contracts entered into by the participating jurisdiction with such persons or entities, public and private, in order to facilitate the activities of the participating jurisdiction to provide affordable housing authorized under this Act or any other Federal housing law applicable to such jurisdiction. Section 200.321 of title 2 Code of Federal Regulations describes actions to be taken by a participating jurisdiction to assure that minority business enterprises and women business enterprises are used when possible in the procurement of property and services.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44678, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 92.352
            Environmental review.
            (a) General. The environmental effects of each activity carried out with HOME funds must be assessed in accordance with the provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321) and the related authorities listed in HUD's implementing regulations at 24 CFR parts 50 and 58. The applicability of the provisions of 24 CFR part 50 or part 58 is based on the HOME project (new construction, rehabilitation, acquisition) or activity (tenant-based rental assistance) as a whole, not on the type of the cost paid with HOME funds.
            (b) Responsibility for review. (1) The jurisdiction (e.g., the participating jurisdiction or State recipient) or insular area must assume responsibility for environmental review, decisionmaking, and action for each activity that it carries out with HOME funds, in accordance with the requirements imposed on a recipient under 24 CFR part 58. No funds may be committed to a HOME activity or project before the completion of the environmental review and approval of the request for release of funds and related certification, except as authorized by 24 CFR part 58.
            (2) A State participating jurisdiction must also assume responsibility for approval of requests for release of HOME funds submitted by State recipients.
            (3) HUD will perform the environmental review, in accordance with 24 CFR part 50, for a competitively awarded application for HOME funds submitted to HUD by an entity that is not a jurisdiction.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44678, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            
            § 92.353
            Displacement, relocation, and acquisition.
            (a) Minimizing displacement. Consistent with the other goals and objectives of this part, the participating jurisdiction must ensure that it has taken all reasonable steps to minimize the displacement of persons (families, individuals, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms) as a result of a project assisted with HOME funds. To the extent feasible, residential tenants must be provided a reasonable opportunity to lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable dwelling unit in the building/complex upon completion of the project.
            (b) Temporary relocation. The following policies cover residential tenants who will not be required to move permanently but who must relocate temporarily for the project. Such tenants must be provided:
            (1) Reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary relocation, including the cost of moving to and from the temporarily occupied housing and any increase in monthly rent/utility costs.
            (2) Appropriate advisory services, including reasonable advance written notice of:
            (i) The date and approximate duration of the temporary relocation;
            (ii) The location of the suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling to be made available for the temporary period;
            (iii) The terms and conditions under which the tenant may lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling in the building/complex upon completion of the project; and
            (iv) The provisions of paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
            (c) Relocation assistance for displaced persons—(1) General. A displaced person (defined in paragraph (c)(2) of this section) must be provided relocation assistance at the levels described in, and in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (URA) (42 U.S.C. 4201-4655) and 49 CFR part 24. A “displaced person” must be advised of his or her rights under the Fair Housing Act and, if the comparable replacement dwelling used to establish the amount of the replacement housing payment to be provided to a minority person is located in an area of minority concentration, the minority person also must be given, if possible, referrals to comparable and suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwellings not located in such areas.
            (2) Displaced Person. (i) For purposes of paragraph (c) of this section, the term displaced person means a person (family individual, business, nonprofit organization, or farm, including any corporation, partnership or association) that moves from real property or moves personal property from real property, permanently, as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for a project assisted with HOME funds. This includes any permanent, involuntary move for an assisted project, including any permanent move from the real property that is made:
            (A) After notice by the owner to move permanently from the property, if the move occurs on or after:
            (1) The date of the submission of an application to the participating jurisdiction or HUD, if the applicant has site control and the application is later approved; or
            (2) The date the jurisdiction approves the applicable site, if the applicant does not have site control at the time of the application; or
            (B) Before the date described in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A) of this section, if the jurisdiction or HUD determines that the displacement resulted directly from acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for the project; or
            (C) By a tenant-occupant of a dwelling unit, if any one of the following three situations occurs:
            (1) The tenant moves after execution of the agreement covering the acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition and the move occurs before the tenant is provided written notice offering the tenant the opportunity to lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling in the same building/complex upon completion of the project under reasonable terms and conditions. Such reasonable terms and conditions must include a term of at least one year at a monthly rent and estimated average monthly utility costs that do not exceed the greater of:
            (i) The tenant's monthly rent before such agreement and estimated average monthly utility costs; or
            (ii) The total tenant payment, as determined under 24 CFR 5.628, if the tenant is low-income, or 30 percent of gross household income, if the tenant is not low-income;
            (2) The tenant is required to relocate temporarily, does not return to the building/complex, and either
            (i) The tenant is not offered payment for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary relocation; or
            (ii) Other conditions of the temporary relocation are not reasonable; or
            (3) The tenant is required to move to another dwelling unit in the same building/complex but is not offered reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the move, or other conditions of the move are not reasonable.

            (ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, a person does not qualify as a displaced person if:
            (A) The person has been evicted for cause based upon a serious or repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease or occupancy agreement, violation of applicable federal, State or local law, or other good cause, and the participating jurisdiction determines that the eviction was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the obligation to provide relocation assistance. The effective date of any termination or refusal to renew must be preceded by at least 30 days advance written notice to the tenant specifying the grounds for the action.
            (B) The person moved into the property after the submission of the application but, before signing a lease and commencing occupancy, was provided written notice of the project, its possible impact on the person (e.g., the person may be displaced, temporarily relocated, incur a rent increase), and the fact that the person would not qualify as a “displaced person” (or for any assistance under this section) as a result of the project;
            (C) The person is ineligible under 49 CFR 24.2(g)(2); or
            (D) HUD determines that the person was not displaced as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for the project.
            (iii) The jurisdiction may, at any time, ask HUD to determine whether a displacement is or would be covered by this rule.
            (3) Initiation of negotiations. For purposes of determining the formula for computing replacement housing assistance to be provided under paragraph (c) of this section to a tenant displaced from a dwelling as a direct result of private-owner rehabilitation, demolition or acquisition of the real property, the term initiation of negotiations means the execution of the agreement covering the acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition.
            (d) Optional relocation assistance. The participating jurisdiction may provide relocation payments and other relocation assistance to families, individuals, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms displaced by a project assisted with HOME funds where the displacement is not subject to paragraph (c) of this section. The jurisdiction may also provide relocation assistance to persons covered under paragraph (c) of this section beyond that required. For any such assistance that is not required by State or local law, the jurisdiction must adopt a written policy available to the public that describes the optional relocation assistance that it has elected to furnish and provides for equal relocation assistance within each class of displaced persons.
            (e) Residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan. The participating jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of 24 CFR part 42, subpart C.
            (f) Real property acquisition requirements. The acquisition of real property for a project is subject to the URA and the requirements of 49 CFR part 24, subpart B.
            (g) Appeals. A person who disagrees with the participating jurisdiction's determination concerning whether the person qualifies as a displaced person, or the amount of relocation assistance for which the person may be eligible, may file a written appeal of that determination with the jurisdiction. A low-income person who is dissatisfied with the jurisdiction's determination on his or her appeal may submit a written request for review of that determination to the HUD Field Office.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 51760, Oct. 3, 1996; 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997; 67 FR 61756, Oct. 1, 2002; 78 FR 44678, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.354
            Labor.
            (a) General. (1) Every contract for the construction (rehabilitation or new construction) of housing that includes 12 or more units assisted with HOME funds must contain a provision requiring the payment of not less than the wages prevailing in the locality, as predetermined by the Secretary of Labor pursuant to the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 3141), to all laborers and mechanics employed in the development of any part of the housing. Such contracts must also be subject to the overtime provisions, as applicable, of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 3701).
            (2) The contract for construction must contain these wage provisions if HOME funds are used for any project costs in § 92.206, including construction or nonconstruction costs, of housing with 12 or more HOME-assisted units. When HOME funds are only used to assist homebuyers to acquire single-family housing, and not for any other project costs, the wage provisions apply to the construction of the housing if there is a written agreement with the owner or developer of the housing that HOME funds will be used to assist homebuyers to buy the housing and the construction contract covers 12 or more housing units to be purchased with HOME assistance. The wage provisions apply to any construction contract that includes a total of 12 or more HOME-assisted units, whether one or more than one project is covered by the construction contract. Once they are determined to be applicable, the wage provisions must be contained in the construction contract so as to cover all laborers and mechanics employed in the development of the entire project, including portions other than the assisted units. Arranging multiple construction contracts within a single project for the purpose of avoiding the wage provisions is not permitted.
            (3) Participating jurisdictions, contractors, subcontractors, and other participants must comply with regulations issued under these acts and with other Federal laws and regulations pertaining to labor standards, as applicable. Participating jurisdictions shall be responsible for ensuring compliance by contractors and subcontractors with labor standards described in this section. In accordance with procedures specified by HUD, participating jurisdictions shall:
            (i) Ensure that bid and contract documents contain required labor standards provisions and the appropriate Department of Labor wage determinations;
            (ii) Conduct on-site inspections and employee interviews;
            (iii) Collect and review certified weekly payroll reports;
            (iv) Correct all labor standards violations promptly;
            (v) Maintain documentation of administrative and enforcement activities; and
            (vi) Require certification as to compliance with the provisions of this section before making any payment under such contracts.
            (b) Volunteers. The prevailing wage provisions of paragraph (a) of this section do not apply to an individual who receives no compensation or is paid expenses, reasonable benefits, or a nominal fee to perform the services for which the individual volunteered and who is not otherwise employed at any time in the construction work. See 24 CFR part 70.
            (c) Sweat equity. The prevailing wage provisions of paragraph (a) of this section do not apply to members of an eligible family who provide labor in exchange for acquisition of a property for homeownership or provide labor in lieu of, or as a supplement to, rent payments.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44678, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.355
            Lead-based paint.

            Housing assisted with HOME funds is subject to the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 4821-4846), the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 4851-4856), and implementing regulations at part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, M and R of this title.
            [64 FR 50224, Sept. 15, 1999]
          
          
            § 92.356
            Conflict of interest.
            (a) Applicability. In the procurement of property and services by participating jurisdictions, State recipients, and subrecipients, the conflict of interest provisions in 2 CFR 200.317 and 2 CFR 200.318, apply. In all cases not governed by 2 CFR 200.317 and 2 CFR 200.318, the provisions of this section apply.
            (b) Conflicts prohibited. No persons described in paragraph (c) of this section who exercise or have exercised any functions or responsibilities with respect to activities assisted with HOME funds or who are in a position to participate in a decision-making process or gain inside information with regard to these activities may obtain a financial interest or financial benefit from a HOME-assisted activity, or have a financial interest in any contract, subcontract, or agreement with respect to the HOME-assisted activity, or the proceeds from such activity, either for themselves or those with whom they have business or immediate family ties, during their tenure or for one year thereafter. Immediate family ties include (whether by blood, marriage or adoption) the spouse, parent (including a stepparent), child (including a stepchild), brother, sister (including a stepbrother or stepsister), grandparent, grandchild, and in-laws of a covered person.
            (c) Persons covered. The conflict of interest provisions of paragraph (b) of this section apply to any person who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected official or appointed official of the participating jurisdiction, State recipient, or subrecipient which are receiving HOME funds.
            (d) Exceptions: Threshold requirements. Upon the written request of the participating jurisdiction, HUD may grant an exception to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section on a case-by-case basis when it determines that the exception will serve to further the purposes of the HOME Investment Partnerships Program and the effective and efficient administration of the participating jurisdiction's program or project. An exception may be considered only after the participating jurisdiction has provided the following:
            (1) A disclosure of the nature of the conflict, accompanied by an assurance that there has been public disclosure of the conflict and a description of how the public disclosure was made; and
            (2) An opinion of the participating jurisdiction's or State recipient's attorney that the interest for which the exception is sought would not violate State or local law.
            (e) Factors to be considered for exceptions. In determining whether to grant a requested exception after the participating jurisdiction has satisfactorily met the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section, HUD will consider the cumulative effect of the following factors, where applicable:
            (1) Whether the exception would provide a significant cost benefit or an essential degree of expertise to the program or project which would otherwise not be available;
            (2) Whether the person affected is a member of a group or class of low-income persons intended to be the beneficiaries of the assisted activity, and the exception will permit such person to receive generally the same interests or benefits as are being made available or provided to the group or class;
            (3) Whether the affected person has withdrawn from his or her functions or responsibilities, or the decisionmaking process with respect to the specific assisted activity in question;
            (4) Whether the interest or benefit was present before the affected person was in a position as described in paragraph (c) of this section;
            (5) Whether undue hardship will result either to the participating jurisdiction or the person affected when weighed against the public interest served by avoiding the prohibited conflict; and
            (6) Any other relevant considerations.
            (f) Owners and developers. (1) No owner, developer, or sponsor of a project assisted with HOME funds (or officer, employee, agent, elected or appointed official, or consultant of the owner, developer, or sponsor or immediate family member or immediate family member of an officer, employee, agent, elected or appointed official, or consultant of the owner, developer, or sponsor) whether private, for-profit or nonprofit (including a community housing development organization (CHDO) when acting as an owner, developer, or sponsor) may occupy a HOME-assisted affordable housing unit in a project during the required period of affordability specified in § 92.252(e) or § 92.254(a)(4). This provision does not apply to an individual who receives HOME funds to acquire or rehabilitate his or her principal residence or to an employee or agent of the owner or developer of a rental housing project who occupies a housing unit as the project manager or maintenance worker.
            (2) Exceptions. Upon written request of a housing owner or developer, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient, if authorized by the State participating jurisdiction) may grant an exception to the provisions of paragraph (f)(1) of this section on a case-by-case basis when it determines that the exception will serve to further the purposes of the HOME program and the effective and efficient administration of the owner's or developer's HOME-assisted project. In determining whether to grant a requested exception, the participating jurisdiction shall consider the following factors:
            (i) Whether the person receiving the benefit is a member of a group or class of low-income persons intended to be the beneficiaries of the assisted housing, and the exception will permit such person to receive generally the same interests or benefits as are being made available or provided to the group or class;
            (ii) Whether the person has withdrawn from his or her functions or responsibilities, or the decisionmaking process with respect to the specific assisted housing in question;
            (iii) Whether the tenant protection requirements of § 92.253 are being observed;
            (iv) Whether the affirmative marketing requirements of § 92.351 are being observed and followed; and
            (v) Any other factor relevant to the participating jurisdiction's determination, including the timing of the requested exception.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997; 78 FR 44679, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 92.357
            Executive Order 12372.
            (a) General. Executive Order 12372, as amended by Executive Order 12416 (3 CFR, 1982 Comp., p. 197 and 3 CFR, 1983 Comp., p. 186) (Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs) and HUD's implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 52, allow each State to establish its own process for review and comment on proposed Federal financial assistance programs.
            (b) Applicability. Executive Order 12372 applies to applications submitted with respect to HOME funds being competitively reallocated under subpart J of this part to units of general local government.
          
          
            § 92.358
            Consultant activities.
            No person providing consultant services in an employer-employee type relationship shall receive more than a reasonable rate of compensation for personal services paid with HOME funds. In no event, however, shall such compensation exceed the limits in effect under the provisions of any applicable statute (e.g., annual HUD appropriations acts which have set the limit at the equivalent of the daily rate paid for Level IV of the Executive Schedule, see the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1997, Pub. L. 104-204 (September 26, 1996)). Such services shall be evidenced by written agreements between the parties which detail the responsibilities, standards, and compensation. Consultant services provided under an independent contractor relationship are not subject to the compensation limitation of Level IV of the Executive Schedule.
            [62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]
          
          
            § 92.359
            VAWA requirements.
            (a) General. (1) The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) requirements set forth in 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, apply to all HOME tenant-based rental assistance and rental housing assisted with HOME funds, as supplemented by this section.
            (2) For the HOME program, the “covered housing provider,” as this term is used in HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, refers to:
            (i) The housing owner for the purposes of 24 CFR 5.2005(d)(1), (d)(3), and (d)(4) and § 5.2009(a); and
            (ii) The participating jurisdiction and the owner for purposes of 24 CFR 5.2005(d)(2), 5.2005(e), and 5.2007, except as otherwise provided in paragraph (g) of this section.
            (b) Effective date. The core statutory protections of VAWA that prohibit denial or termination of assistance or eviction solely because an applicant or tenant is a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking became applicable upon enactment of VAWA 2013 on March 7, 2013. Compliance with the VAWA regulatory requirements under this section and 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, are required for any tenant-based rental assistance or rental housing project for which the date of the HOME funding commitment is on or after December 16, 2016.
            (c) Notification requirements. The participating jurisdiction must provide a notice and certification form that meet the requirements of 24 CFR 5.2005(a) to the owner of HOME-assisted rental housing.
            (1) For HOME-assisted units. The owner of HOME-assisted rental housing must provide the notice and certification form described in 24 CFR 5.2005(a) to the applicant for a HOME-assisted unit at the time the applicant is admitted to a HOME-assisted unit, or denied admission to a HOME-assisted unit based on the owner's tenant selection policies and criteria. The owner of HOME-assisted rental housing must also provide the notice and certification form described in 24 CFR 5.2005 with any notification of eviction from a HOME-assisted unit.
            (2) For HOME tenant-based rental assistance. The participating jurisdiction must provide the notice and certification form described in 24 CFR 5.2005(a) to the applicant for HOME tenant-based rental assistance when the applicant's HOME tenant-based rental assistance is approved or denied. The participating jurisdiction must also provide the notice and certification form described in 24 CFR 5.2005(a) to a tenant receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance when the participating jurisdiction provides the tenant with notification of termination of the HOME tenant-based rental assistance, and when the participating jurisdiction learns that the tenant's housing owner intends to provide the tenant with notification of eviction.
            (d) Bifurcation of lease requirements. For the purposes of this part, the following requirements shall apply in place of the requirements at 24 CFR 5.2009(b):
            (1) If a family living in a HOME-assisted rental unit separates under 24 CFR 5.2009(a), the remaining tenant(s) may remain in the HOME-assisted unit.
            (2) If a family who is receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance separates under 24 CFR 5.2009(a), the remaining tenant(s) will retain the HOME tenant-based rental assistance. The participating jurisdiction must determine whether the tenant that was removed from the unit will receive HOME tenant-based rental assistance.
            (e) VAWA lease term/addendum. The participating jurisdiction must develop a VAWA lease term/addendum to incorporate all requirements that apply to the owner or lease under 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, and this section, including the prohibited bases for eviction and restrictions on construing lease terms under 24 CFR 5.2005(b) and (c). This VAWA lease term/addendum must also provide that the tenant may terminate the lease without penalty if the participating jurisdiction determines that the tenant has met the conditions for an emergency transfer under 24 CFR 5.2005(e). When HOME tenant-based rental assistance is provided, the lease term/addendum must require the owner to notify the participating jurisdiction before the owner bifurcates the lease or provides notification of eviction to the tenant. If HOME tenant-based rental assistance is the only assistance provided (i.e., the unit is not receiving project-based assistance under a covered housing program, as defined in 24 CFR 5.2003), the VAWA lease term/addendum may be written to expire at the end of the rental assistance period.
            (f) Period of applicability. For HOME-assisted rental housing, the requirements of this section shall apply to the owner of the housing for the duration of the affordability period. For HOME tenant-based rental assistance, the requirements of this section shall apply to the owner of the tenant's housing for the period for which the rental assistance is provided.
            (g) Emergency Transfer Plan. (1) The participating jurisdiction must develop and implement an emergency transfer plan and must make the determination of whether a tenant qualifies under the plan. The plan must meet the requirements in 24 CFR 5.2005(e), as supplemented by this section.
            (2) For the purposes of § 5.2005(e)(7), the required policies must specify that for tenants who qualify for an emergency transfer and who wish to make an external emergency transfer when a safe unit is not immediately available, the participating jurisdiction must provide a list of properties in the jurisdiction that include HOME-assisted units. The list must include the following information for each property: The property's address, contact information, the unit sizes (number of bedrooms) for the HOME-assisted units, and, to the extent known, any tenant preferences or eligibility restrictions for the HOME-assisted units. In addition, the participating jurisdiction may:
            (i) Establish a preference under the participating jurisdiction's HOME program for tenants who qualify for emergency transfers under 24 CFR 5.2005(e);
            (ii) Provide HOME tenant-based rental assistance to tenants who qualify for emergency transfers under 24 CFR 5.2005(e); or
            (iii) Coordinate with victim service providers and advocates to develop the emergency transfer plan, make referrals, and facilitate emergency transfers to safe and available units.
            [81 FR 80803, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
        
        
          Subpart I—Technical Assistance
          
            § 92.400
            Coordinated Federal support for housing strategies.
            (a) General. HUD will provide assistance in accordance with Subtitle C of the Act.
            (b) Notice of funding. HUD will publish a notice in the Federal Register announcing the availability of funding under this section as appropriate.
          
        
        
          Subpart J—Reallocations
          
            § 92.450
            General.
            (a) This subpart J sets out the conditions under which HUD reallocates HOME funds that have been allocated, reserved, or placed in a HOME Investment Trust Fund.
            (b) A jurisdiction that is not a participating jurisdiction but is meeting the requirements of §§ 92.102, 92.103, and 92.104, (participation threshold, notice of intent, and submission of consolidated plan) is treated as a participating jurisdiction for purposes of receiving a reallocation under subpart J of this part.
          
          
            § 92.451
            Reallocation of HOME funds from a jurisdiction that is not designated a participating jurisdiction or has its designation revoked.
            (a) Failure to be designated a participating jurisdiction. HUD will reallocate, under this section, any HOME funds allocated to or reserved for a jurisdiction that is not a participating jurisdiction if:
            (1) HUD determines that the jurisdiction has failed to:
            (i) Meet the participation threshold amount in § 92.102;
            (ii) Provide notice of its intent to become a participating jurisdiction in accordance with § 92.103; or
            (iii) Submit its consolidated plan, in accordance with 24 CFR part 91; or
            (2) HUD after providing for amendments and resubmissions in accordance with 24 CFR part 91 disapproves the jurisdiction's consolidated plan.
            (b) Designation revoked. HUD will reallocate, under this section, any funds remaining in a jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund after HUD has revoked the jurisdiction's designation as a participating jurisdiction under § 92.107.
            (c) Manner of reallocation. HUD will reallocate funds that are subject to reallocation under this section in the following manner:
            (1) If the funds to be reallocated under this section are from a State, HUD will:
            (i) Make the funds available by competition in accordance with criteria in § 92.453 among applications submitted by units of general local government within the State and with preference being given to applications from units of general local government that are not participating jurisdictions, and
            (ii) Reallocate the remainder by formula in accordance with § 92.454.
            (2) If the funds to be reallocated are from a unit of general local government:
            (i) Located in a State that is participating jurisdiction, HUD will reallocate the funds to that State. The State, in distributing these funds, must give preference to the provision of affordable housing within the unit of general local government; or
            (ii) Located in a State that is not a participating jurisdiction, HUD will reallocate the funds by competition among units of general local government and community housing development organizations within the State, with priority going to applications for affordable housing within the unit of general local government; and reallocate the remainder by formula in accordance with § 92.454.
          
          
            § 92.452
            Reallocation of community housing development organization set-aside.
            HUD will reallocate, under this section, any HOME funds reduced or recaptured by HUD from a participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund under § 92.300(d). HUD will reallocate these funds by competition in accordance with criteria in § 92.453 to other participating jurisdictions for affordable housing developed, sponsored, or owned by community housing development organizations.
          
          
            § 92.453
            Competitive reallocations.
            (a) HUD will invite applications through Federal Register publication of a Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA), in accordance with section 102 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3545) and the requirements of sec. 217(c) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12747(c)), for HOME funds that become available for competitive reallocation under § 92.451 or § 92.452, or both. The NOFA will describe the application requirements and procedures, including the total funding available for the competition and any maximum amount of individual awards. The NOFA will also describe the selection criteria and any special factors to be evaluated in awarding points under the selection criteria.
            (b) The NOFA will include the selection criteria at sec. 217(c) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12747(c)), with the following maximum number of points awarded for each category of criteria:
            (1) Commitment. Up to 25 points for the criteria at sec. 217(c)(1) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12747(c)(1));
            (2) Actions. Up to 50 points for the criteria at sec. 217(c)(2) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12747(c)(2)); and
            (3) Policies. Up to 25 points for the criteria at sec. 217(c)(3) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12747(c)(3)).
            [62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997]
          
          
            § 92.454
            Reallocations by formula.
            (a) HUD will reallocate under this section:
            (1) Any HOME funds remaining available for reallocation after HUD has made competitive reallocations under § 92.451 and § 92.452;
            (2) Any HOME funds available for reallocation because HUD reduced or recaptured funds from participating jurisdiction under § 92.500(d) for failure to commit the funds within the time specified;

            (3) Any HOME funds withdrawn by HUD from a participating jurisdiction under 24 CFR 91.520(f) for failure to submit in a timely manner a performance report required by 24 CFR 91.520 that is satisfactory to HUD; and
            
            (4) Any HOME funds remitted to HUD under § 92.503(b) when a jurisdiction ceases to be a participating jurisdiction.
            (b) Any reallocation of funds from a State must be made only among all participating States, and any reallocation of funds from units of general local government must be made only among all participating units of general local government, except those participating jurisdictions that HUD has removed from participating in reallocations under § 92.552.
            (c) A local participating jurisdiction's share of a reallocation is calculated by multiplying the amount available for reallocation to units of general local government by a factor that is that ratio of the participating jurisdiction's formula allocation provided under § 92.50 to the total of the formula allocations provided for all local participating jurisdictions sharing in the reallocation. A State participating jurisdiction's share is comparably determined using the amount available for reallocation to States.
            (d) HUD will make reallocations under this section quarterly, unless the amount available for such reallocation is insufficient to warrant making a reallocation. In any event, HUD will make a reallocation under this section at least once a year. The minimum amount of a reallocation is $1000.
          
        
        
          Subpart K—Program Administration
          
            § 92.500
            The HOME Investment Trust Fund.
            (a) General. A HOME Investment Trust Fund consists of the accounts described in this section solely for investment in accordance with the provisions of this part. HUD will establish a HOME Investment Trust Fund United States Treasury account for each participating jurisdiction. Each participating jurisdiction may use either a separate local HOME Investment Trust Fund account or, a subsidiary account within its general fund (or other appropriate fund) as the local HOME Investment Trust Fund account.
            (b) Treasury Account. The United States Treasury account of the HOME Investment Trust Fund includes funds allocated to the participating jurisdiction under § 92.50 (including for a local participating jurisdiction, any transfer of the State's allocation pursuant to § 92.102(b)(2)) and funds reallocated to the participating jurisdiction, either by formula or by competition, under subpart J of this part; and
            (c) Local account. (1) The local account of the HOME Investment Trust Fund includes deposits of HOME funds disbursed from the Treasury account; the deposit of any State funds (other than HOME funds transferred pursuant to § 92.102(b)(2)) or local funds that enable the jurisdiction to meet the participating threshold amount in § 92.102, any program income (from both the allocated funds and matching contributions in accordance with the definition of program income), and any repayments or recaptured funds as required by § 92.503. The local account must be interest-bearing.
            (2) The participating jurisdiction may establish a second local account of the HOME Investment Trust Funds if:
            (i) The participating jurisdiction has its own affordable housing trust fund that the participating jurisdiction will use for matching contributions to the HOME program;
            (ii) The statute or local ordinance requires repayments from its own trust fund to be made to the trust fund;
            (iii) The participating jurisdiction establishes a separate account within its own trust fund for repayments of the matching contributions; and
            (iv) The funds in the account are used solely for investment in eligible activities within the participating jurisdiction's boundaries in accordance with the provisions of this part, except as provided under § 92.201(a)(2).
            (3) The funds in the local account cannot be used for the matching contribution and do not need to be matched.
            (d)(1) Reductions of Fiscal Year 2015 and subsequent fiscal year allocations. HUD will reduce or recapture HOME funds in the HOME Investment Trust Fund, as follows:

            (i) Any funds from a specific fiscal year allocation that are in the United States Treasury account that are not committed (including funds for community housing development organizations under § 92.300) within 24 months after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement for the specific fiscal year allocation;
            (ii) Any funds from a specific fiscal year allocation that were committed to a State recipient or subrecipient that are not committed to a specific local project within 36 months after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement for the specific fiscal year allocation;
            (iii) Any funds from a specific fiscal year allocation that are in the United States Treasury account that are not expended (drawn down) by September 30 of the fifth year after the end of the period of availability of the fiscal year allocation for obligation by HUD. Due to end-of-year financial system closeouts that begin before this date and prevent electronic access to the payment system, requests to draw down the funds must be made at least 7 full business days before this date to ensure that the funds still can be drawn from the United States Treasury account through the computerized disbursement and information system; and
            (iv) Any penalties assessed by HUD under § 92.552.
            (2)(i) Reductions of Fiscal Year 2014 and prior fiscal year allocations. HUD will reduce or recapture HOME funds in the HOME Investment Trust Fund by the amount of:

            (A) Any funds from Fiscal Year 2014 and prior fiscal year allocations in the United States Treasury account that are required to be reserved (i.e., 15 percent of the funds) by a participating jurisdiction, under § 92.300, and which are not committed to a community housing development organization project within 24 months after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement;
            (B) Any funds from Fiscal Year 2014 and prior fiscal year allocations in the United States Treasury account that are not committed within 24 months after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement;
            (C) Any funds from Fiscal Year 2014 and prior fiscal year allocations in the United States Treasury account that are not expended within 5 years after the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement; and
            (D) Any penalties assessed by HUD under § 92.552.
            (ii) For purposes of determining the amount by which the HOME Investment Trust Fund will be reduced or recaptured under paragraphs (d)(2)(i)(A), (B), and (C) of this section, HUD will consider the sum of commitments to CHDOs, commitments, or expenditures, as applicable, from all fiscal year allocations through the Fiscal Year 2014 allocation. This sum must be equal to or greater than the sum of all fiscal year allocations through the fiscal year allocation being examined (minus previous reductions to the HOME Investment Trust Fund), or in the case of commitments to CHDOs, 15 percent of those fiscal year allocations.
            (iii) HUD will reduce or recapture HOME funds in the HOME Investment Trust Fund by the amount of all fiscal year allocations through the Fiscal Year 2014 allocation that are uncommitted by the commitment deadline for the Fiscal Year 2015 allocation.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997; 78 FR 44679, July 24, 2013; 81 FR 86952, Dec. 2, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.501
            HOME Investment Partnership Agreement.
            Allocated and reallocated funds will be made available pursuant to a HOME Investment Partnership Agreement. The agreement ensures that HOME funds invested in affordable housing are repayable if the housing ceases to qualify as affordable housing before the period of affordability expires.
          
          
            
            § 92.502
            Program disbursement and information system.
            (a) General. The HOME Investment Trust Fund account established in the United States Treasury is managed through a computerized disbursement and information system established by HUD. The system disburses HOME funds that are allocated or reallocated, and collects and reports information on the use of HOME funds in the United States Treasury account. (For purposes of reporting in the Integrated Disbursement and Information System, a HOME project is an activity.) The participating jurisdiction must report all program income in HUD's computerized disbursement and information system.
            (b) Project set-up. After the participating jurisdiction executes the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement, submits the applicable banking and security documents, complies with the environmental requirements under 24 CFR part 58 for release of funds and commits funds to a specific local project, the participating jurisdiction may identify (set up) specific investments in the disbursement and information system. Investments that require the set-up of projects in the system are the acquisition, new construction, or rehabilitation of housing, and the provision of tenant-based rental assistance. The participating jurisdiction is required to enter complete project set-up information at the time of project set-up.
            (c) Disbursement of HOME funds. (1) After complete project set-up information is entered into the disbursement and information system, HOME funds for the project may be drawn down from the United States Treasury account by the participating jurisdiction by electronic funds transfer. The funds will be deposited in the local account of the HOME Investment Trust Fund of the participating jurisdiction within 48 to 72 hours of the disbursement request. Any drawdown of HOME funds from the United States Treasury account is conditioned upon the provision of satisfactory information by the participating jurisdiction about the project or tenant-based rental assistance and compliance with other procedures, as specified by HUD.
            (2) HOME funds drawn from the United States Treasury account must be expended for eligible costs within 15 days. Any interest earned within the 15-day period may be retained by the participating jurisdiction as HOME funds. Any funds that are drawn down and not expended for eligible costs within 15 days of the disbursement must be returned to HUD for deposit in the participating jurisdiction's United States Treasury account of the HOME Investment Trust Fund. Interest earned after 15 days belongs to the United States and must be remitted to the United States as provided in 2 CFR 200.305(b)(9), except interest amounts up to $500 per year may be retained for administrative expenses.
            (3) HOME funds in the local account of the HOME Investment Trust Fund must be disbursed before requests are made for HOME funds in the United States Treasury account. Beginning with the Fiscal Year 2015 allocation, the specific funds that are committed to a project will be disbursed for that project. If both funds in the local account and funds in the United States Treasury account are committed to a project, the funds in the local account must be disbursed before requests are made for HOME funds in the United States Treasury account for the project.
            (4) A participating jurisdiction will be paid on an advance basis provided it complies with the requirements of this part.
            (d) Project completion. (1) Complete project completion information must be entered into the disbursement and information system, or otherwise provided, within 120 days of the final project drawdown. If satisfactory project completion information is not provided, HUD may suspend further project set-ups or take other corrective actions.
            (2) Additional HOME funds may be committed to a project up to one year after project completion, but the amount of HOME funds in the project may not exceed the maximum per-unit subsidy amount established under § 92.250.
            (e) Access by other participants. Access to the disbursement and information system by other entities participating in the HOME program (e.g., State recipients) will be governed by procedures established by HUD. Only participating jurisdictions and State recipients (if permitted by the State) may request disbursement.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44679, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015; 81 FR 86952, Dec. 2, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.503
            Program income, repayments, and recaptured funds.
            (a) Program income. (1) Program income must be used in accordance with the requirements of this part. Program income must be deposited in the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local account unless the participating jurisdiction permits the State recipient or subrecipient to retain the program income for additional HOME projects pursuant to the written agreement required by § 92.504.
            (2) If the jurisdiction is not a participating jurisdiction when the program income is received, the funds are not subject to the requirements of this part.
            (3) Program income derived from consortium activities undertaken by or within a member unit of general local government which thereafter terminates its participation in the consortium continues to be program income of the consortium.
            (b) Repayments. (1) Any HOME funds invested in housing that does not meet the affordability requirements for the period specified in § 92.252 or § 92.254, as applicable, must be repaid by the participating jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
            (2) Any HOME funds invested in a project that is terminated before completion, either voluntarily or otherwise, must be repaid by the participating jurisdiction, in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section, except for repayments of project-specific community housing development organization loans that are waived, in accordance with §§ 92.301(a)(3) and (b)(3). In addition, any HOME funds used for costs that are not eligible under this part must be repaid by the participating jurisdiction, in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
            (3) HUD will instruct the participating jurisdiction to either repay the funds to the HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account or the local account. If the jurisdiction is not a participating jurisdiction at the time the repayment is made, the funds must be remitted to HUD and reallocated, in accordance with § 92.454.
            (c) Recaptures. HOME funds recaptured in accordance with § 92.254(a)(5)(ii) must be used in accordance with the requirements of this part. Recaptured funds must be deposited in the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local account unless the participating jurisdiction permits the State recipient, subrecipient, or community housing development organization to retain the recaptured funds for additional HOME projects pursuant to the written agreement required by § 92.504. If the jurisdiction is not a participating jurisdiction when the recaptured funds are received, the funds must be remitted to HUD and reallocated in accordance with § 92.454.
            (d) Commitment of funds in the local account. Beginning with the Fiscal Year 2017 action plan, as provided in 24 CFR 91.220(l)(2) and 91.320(k)(2), program income, repayments, and recaptured funds in the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local account must be used in accordance with the requirements of this part, and the amount of program income, repayments, and recaptured funds in the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local account at the beginning of the program year must be committed before HOME funds in the HOME Investment Trust Fund United States Treasury account, except for the HOME funds in the United States Treasury account that are required to be reserved (i.e., 15 percent of the funds), under § 92.300(a), for investment only in housing to be owned, developed, or sponsored by community housing development organizations. The deadline for committing program income, repayments, and recaptured funds received during a program year is the date of the participating jurisdiction's commitment deadline for the subsequent year's grant allocation.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44680, July 24, 2013; 81 FR 86952, Dec. 2, 2016]
          
          
            
            § 92.504
            Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written agreements; on-site inspection.
            (a) Responsibilities. The participating jurisdiction is responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of its HOME program, ensuring that HOME funds are used in accordance with all program requirements and written agreements, and taking appropriate action when performance problems arise. The use of State recipients, subrecipients, or contractors does not relieve the participating jurisdiction of this responsibility. The performance and compliance of each contractor, State recipient, and subrecipient must be reviewed at least annually. The participating jurisdiction must have and follow written policies, procedures, and systems, including a system for assessing risk of activities and projects and a system for monitoring entities consistent with this section, to ensure that the requirements of this part are met.
            (b) Executing a written agreement. Before disbursing any HOME funds to any entity, the participating jurisdiction must enter into a written agreement with that entity. Before disbursing any HOME funds to any entity, a State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor which is administering all or a part of the HOME program on behalf of the participating jurisdiction, must also enter into a written agreement with that entity. The written agreement must ensure compliance with the requirements of this part.
            (c) Provisions in written agreements. The contents of the agreement may vary depending upon the role the entity is asked to assume or the type of project undertaken. This section details basic requirements by role and the minimum provisions that must be included in a written agreement.
            (1) State recipient. The provisions in the written agreement between the State and a State recipient will depend on the program functions that the State specifies the State recipient will carry out in accordance with § 92.201(b). In accordance with § 92.201, the written agreement must either require the State recipient to comply with the requirements established by the State or require the State recipient to establish its own requirements to comply with this part, including requirements for income determinations and underwriting subsidy layering guidelines, rehabilitation standards, refinancing guidelines, homebuyer program policies, and affordability.
            (i) Use of the HOME funds. The agreement must describe the amount and use of the HOME funds to administer one or more programs to produce affordable housing, provide downpayment assistance, or provide tenant-based rental assistance, including the type and number of housing projects to be funded (e.g. the number of single- family homeowner loans to be made or number of homebuyers to receive downpayment assistance), tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing the tasks (including a schedule for committing funds to projects that meet the deadlines established by this part), a budget for each program, and any requirement for matching contributions. These items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the State to effectively monitor performance under the agreement.
            (ii) Affordability. The agreement must require housing assisted with HOME funds to meet the affordability requirements of § 92.252 or § 92.254, as applicable, and must require repayment of the funds if the housing does not meet the affordability requirements for the specified time period. The agreement must state if repayment of HOME funds or recaptured HOME funds must be remitted to the State or retained by the State recipient for additional eligible activities.
            (iii) Program income. The agreement must state if program income is to be remitted to the State or to be retained by the State recipient for additional eligible activities.
            (iv) Uniform administrative requirements. The agreement must require the State recipient to comply with applicable uniform administrative requirements, as described in § 92.505.
            (v) Project requirement. The agreement must require compliance with project requirements in subpart F of this part, as applicable in accordance with the type of project assisted.
            
            (vi) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the State recipient to carry out each activity in compliance with all Federal laws and regulations described in subpart H of this part, except that the State recipient does not assume the State's responsibilities for release of funds under § 92.352 and the intergovernmental review process in § 92.357 does not apply to the State recipient. If HOME funds are provided for development of rental housing or provision of tenant-based rental assistance, the agreement must set forth all obligations the State imposes on the State recipient in order to meet the VAWA requirements under § 92.359, including notice obligations and any obligations with respect to the emergency transfer plan (including whether the State recipient must develop its own plan or follow the State's plan).
            (vii) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the State recipient's affirmative marketing responsibilities in accordance with § 92.351.
            (viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that the State recipient may not request disbursement of HOME funds under this agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed. Program income must be disbursed before the State recipient requests funds from the State.
            (ix) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted in order to assist the State in meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
            (x) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a means of enforcement of affordable housing requirements by the State or the intended beneficiaries, if the State recipient will be the owner at project completion of the affordable housing. The means of enforcement may include liens on real property, deed restrictions, or covenants running with the land. The affordability requirements in § 92.252 must be enforced by deed restriction. In addition, the agreement must specify remedies for breach of the HOME requirements. The agreement must specify that, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.338, suspension or termination may occur if the State recipient materially fails to comply with any term of the agreement. The State may permit the agreement to be terminated in whole or in part in accordance with 2 CFR 200.339.
            (xi) Written agreement. Before the State recipient provides funds to for-profit owners or developers, nonprofit owners or developers or sponsors, subrecipients, homeowners, homebuyers, tenants (or landlords) receiving tenant-based rental assistance, or contractors who are providing services to the State recipient, the State recipient must have a written agreement with such entities that meets the requirements of this section.
            (xii) Duration of the agreement. The duration of the agreement will depend on which functions the State recipient performs (e.g., whether the State recipient or the State has responsibility for monitoring rental projects for the period of affordability) and which activities are funded under the agreement.
            (xiii) Fees. The agreement must prohibit the State recipient and its subrecipients and community housing development organizations from charging servicing, origination, processing, inspection, or other fees for the costs of administering a HOME program, except as permitted by § 92.214(b)(1).
            (2) Subrecipient. A subrecipient is a public agency or nonprofit organization selected by the participating jurisdiction to administer all or some of the participating jurisdiction's HOME programs to produce affordable housing, provide downpayment assistance, or provide tenant-based rental assistance. The agreement must set forth and require the subrecipient to follow the participating jurisdiction's requirements, including requirements for income determinations, underwriting and subsidy layering guidelines, rehabilitation standards, refinancing guidelines, homebuyer program policies, and affordability requirements. The agreement between the participating jurisdiction and the subrecipient must include:
            
            (i) Use of the HOME funds. The agreement must describe the amount and use of the HOME funds for one or more programs, including the type and number of housing projects to be funded (e.g., the number of single-family homeowners loans to be made or the number of homebuyers to receive downpayment assistance), tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing the tasks (including a schedule for committing funds to projects in accordance with deadlines established by this part), a budget, any requirement for matching contributions and the period of the agreement. These items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the participating jurisdiction to effectively monitor performance under the agreement.
            (ii) Program income. The agreement must state if program income is to be remitted to the participating jurisdiction or to be retained by the subrecipient for additional eligible activities.
            (iii) Uniform administrative requirements. The agreement must require the subrecipient to comply with applicable uniform administrative requirements, as described in § 92.505.
            (iv) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the subrecipient to carry out each activity in compliance with all Federal laws and regulations described in subpart H of this part, except that the subrecipient does not assume the participating jurisdiction's responsibilities for environmental review under § 92.352 and the intergovernmental review process in § 92.357 does not apply. The agreement must set forth the requirements the subrecipient must follow to enable the participating jurisdiction to carry environmental review responsibilities before HOME funds are committed to a project. If HOME funds are being provided to develop rental housing or provide tenant-based rental assistance, the agreement must set forth all obligations the participating jurisdiction imposes on the subrecipient in order to meet the VAWA requirements under § 92.359, including notice obligations and obligations under the emergency transfer plan.
            (v) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the subrecipient's affirmative marketing responsibilities in accordance with § 92.351.
            (vi) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that the subrecipient may not request disbursement of funds under the agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed. Program income must be disbursed before the subrecipient requests funds from the participating jurisdiction.
            (vii) Reversion of assets. The agreement must specify that upon expiration of the agreement, the subrecipient must transfer to the participating jurisdiction any HOME funds on hand at the time of expiration and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of HOME funds.
            (viii) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted in order to assist the participating jurisdiction in meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
            (ix) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must specify remedies for breach of the provisions of the agreement. The agreement must specify that, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.338, suspension or termination may occur if the subrecipient materially fails to comply with any term of the agreement. The participating jurisdiction may permit the agreement to be terminated in whole or in part in accordance with 2 CFR 200.339.
            (x) Written agreement. Before the subrecipient provides HOME funds to for-profit owners or developers, nonprofit owners or developers or sponsors, subrecipients, homeowners, homebuyers, tenants (or landlords) receiving tenant-based rental assistance, or contractors, the subrecipient must have a written agreement that meets the requirements of this section. The agreement must state if repayment of HOME funds or recaptured HOME funds must be remitted to the participating jurisdiction or retained by the subrecipient for additional eligible activities.
            
            (xi) Fees. The agreement must prohibit the subrecipient and any community housing development organizations from charging servicing, origination, or other fees for the costs of administering the HOME program, except as permitted by § 92.214(b)(1).
            (3) For-profit or nonprofit housing owner, sponsor, or developer (other than single-family owner-occupant). The participating jurisdiction may preliminarily award HOME funds for a proposed project, contingent on conditions such as obtaining other financing for the project. This preliminary award is not a commitment to a project. The written agreement committing the HOME funds to the project must meet the requirements of “commit to a specific local project” in the definition of “commitment” in § 92.2 and contain the following:
            (i) Use of the HOME funds. The agreement between the participating jurisdiction and a for-profit or nonprofit housing owner, sponsor, or developer must describe the address of the project or the legal description of the property if a street address has not been assigned to the property, the use of the HOME funds and other funds for the project, including the tasks to be performed for the project, a schedule for completing the tasks and the project, and a complete budget. These items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the participating jurisdiction to effectively monitor performance under the agreement to achieve project completion and compliance with the HOME requirements.
            (ii) Affordability. The agreement must require housing assisted with HOME funds to meet the affordability requirements of § 92.252 or § 92.254, as applicable, and must require repayment of the funds if the housing does not meet the affordability requirements for the specified time period. The affordability requirements in § 92.252 must be imposed by deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, use restrictions, or other mechanisms approved by HUD under which the participating jurisdiction has the right to require specific performance.
            (A) If the owner or developer is undertaking rental projects, the agreement must establish the initial rents, the procedures for rent increases pursuant to § 92.252(f)(2), the number of HOME units, the size of the HOME units, and the designation of the HOME units as fixed or floating, and include the requirement that the owner or developer provide the address (e.g., street address and apartment number) of each HOME unit no later than the time of initial occupancy.
            (B) If the owner or developer is undertaking a homeownership project for sale to homebuyers in accordance with § 92.254(a), the agreement must set forth the resale or recapture requirements that must be imposed on the housing, the sales price or the basis upon which the sales price will be determined, and the disposition of the sales proceeds. Recaptured funds must be returned to the participating jurisdiction.
            (iii) Project requirements. The agreement must require compliance with project requirements in subpart F of this part, as applicable in accordance with the type of project assisted. The agreement may permit the owner to limit eligibility or give a preference to a particular segment of the population in accordance with § 92.253(d).
            (iv) Property standards. The agreement must require the housing to meet the property standards in § 92.251, upon project completion. The agreement must also require owners of rental housing assisted with HOME funds to maintain the housing compliance with § 92.251 for the duration of the affordability period.
            (v) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the owner, developer or sponsor to carry out each project in compliance with the following requirements of subpart H of this part:
            (A) The agreement must specify the owner or developer's affirmative marketing responsibilities as enumerated by the participating jurisdiction in accordance with § 92.351.
            (B) The federal requirements and nondiscrimination established in § 92.350.
            (C) Any displacement, relocation, and acquisition requirements imposed by the participating jurisdiction consistent with § 92.353.
            (D) The labor requirements in § 92.354.
            
            (E) The conflict of interest provisions prescribed in § 92.356(f).
            (F) If HOME funds are being provided to develop rental housing, the agreement must set forth all obligations the participating jurisdiction imposes on the owner in order to meet the VAWA requirements under § 92.359, including the owner's notice obligations and owner obligations under the emergency transfer plan.
            (vi) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted in order to assist the participating jurisdiction in meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements. The owner of rental housing must annually provide the participating jurisdiction with information on rents and occupancy of HOME-assisted units to demonstrate compliance with § 92.252. If the rental housing project has floating HOME units, the owner must provide the participating jurisdiction with information regarding unit substitution and filling vacancies so that the project remains in compliance with HOME rental occupancy requirements. The agreement must specify the reporting requirements (including copies of financial statements) to enable the participating jurisdiction to determine the financial condition (and continued financial viability) of the rental project.
            (vii) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a means of enforcement of the affordable housing requirements by the participating jurisdiction and the intended beneficiaries. This means of enforcement may include liens on real property, deed restrictions, or covenants running with the land. The affordability requirements in § 92.252 must be imposed by deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, use restrictions, or other mechanisms approved by HUD under which the participating jurisdiction has the right to require specific performance. In addition, the agreement must specify remedies for breach of the provisions of the agreement.
            (viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that the developer may not request disbursement of funds under the agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed.
            (ix) Duration of the agreement. The agreement must specify the duration of the agreement. If the housing assisted under this agreement is rental housing, the agreement must be in effect through the affordability period required by the participating jurisdiction under § 92.252. If the housing assisted under this agreement is homeownership housing, the agreement must be in effect at least until completion of the project and ownership by the low-income family.
            (x) Community housing development organization provisions. If the nonprofit owner or developer is a community housing development organization and is using set-aside funds under § 92.300, the agreement must include the appropriate provisions under §§ 92.300, 92.301, and 92.303. If the community development organization is receiving HOME funds as a developer of homeownership housing, the agreement must specify if the organization may retain proceeds from the sale of the housing and whether the proceeds are to be used for HOME-eligible or other housing activities to benefit low-income families. Recaptured funds are subject to the requirements of § 92.503. If the community housing development organization is receiving assistance for operating expenses, see paragraph (c)(6) of this section.
            (xi) Fees. The agreement must prohibit project owners from charging fees that are not customarily charged in rental housing such as laundry room access fees, and other fees. However, rental project owners may charge reasonable application fees to prospective tenants may charge parking fees to tenants only if such fees are customary for rental housing projects in the neighborhood; and may charge fees for services such as bus transportation or meals, as long as such services are voluntary. The agreement must also prohibit the developer that is undertaking a homeownership project from charging servicing, origination, processing, inspection, or other fees for the costs of providing homeownership assistance.
            
            (4) Contractor. The participating jurisdiction selects a contractor through applicable procurement procedures and requirements. The contractor provides goods or services in accordance with a written agreement (the contract). For contractors who are administering all or some of the participating jurisdiction's HOME programs or specific services for one or more programs, the contract must include at a minimum the following provisions:
            (i) Use of the HOME funds. The agreement must describe the use of the HOME funds, including the tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing the tasks, a budget, and the length of the agreement.
            (ii) Program requirements. The agreement must provide that the contractor is subject to the requirements in part 92 that are applicable to the participating jurisdiction, except §§ 92.505 and 92.506 do not apply, and the contractor cannot assume the participating jurisdiction responsibilities for environmental review, decisionmaking, and action under § 92.352. Where the contractor is administering only a portion of the program, the agreement must list the requirements applicable to the activities the contractor is administering. If applicable to the work under the contract, the agreement must set forth all obligations the participating jurisdiction imposes on the contractor in order to meet the VAWA requirements under § 92.359, including any notice obligations and any obligations under the emergency transfer plan.
            (iii) Duration of agreement. The agreement must specify the duration of the contract. Generally, the duration of a contract should not exceed two years.
            (5) Homebuyer, homeowner or tenant receiving tenant-based rental or security deposit assistance. When a participating jurisdiction provides assistance to a homebuyer, homeowner or tenant the written agreement may take many forms depending upon the nature of assistance. As appropriate, it must include as a minimum:
            (i) For homebuyers, the agreement must conform to the requirements in § 92.254(a), the value of the property, principal residence, lease-purchase, if applicable, and the resale or recapture provisions. The agreement must specify the amount of HOME funds, the form of assistance, e.g., grant, amortizing loan, deferred payment loan, the use of the funds (e.g., down-payment, closing costs, rehabilitation) and the time by which the housing must be acquired.
            (ii) For homeowners, the agreement must conform to the requirements in § 92.254(b) and specify the amount and form of HOME assistance, rehabilitation work to be undertaken, date for completion, and property standards to be met.
            (iii) For tenants, the rental assistance contract or the security deposit contract must conform to §§ 92.209 and 92.253.
            (6) Community housing development organization receiving assistance for operating expenses. The agreement must describe the use of HOME funds for operating expenses; e.g., salaries, wages, and other employee compensation and benefits; employee education, training, and travel; rent; utilities; communication costs; taxes; insurance; equipment; and materials and supplies. If the community housing development organization is not also receiving funds for a housing project to be developed, sponsored, or owned by the community housing development organization, the agreement must provide that the community housing development organization is expected to receive funds for a project within 24 months of the date of receiving the funds for operating expenses, and must specify the terms and conditions upon which this expectation is based and the consequences of failure to receive funding for a project.
            (7) Community housing development organization receiving assistance for project-specific technical assistance and site control loans or project-specific seed money loans. The agreement must identify the specific site or sites and describe the amount and use of the HOME funds (in accordance with § 92.301), including a budget for work, a period of performance, and a schedule for completion. The agreement must also set forth the basis upon which the participating jurisdiction may waive repayment of the loans, consistent with § 92.301, if applicable.
            
            (8) Technical assistance provider to develop the capacity of community housing development organizations in the jurisdiction. The agreement must identify the specific nonprofit organization(s) to receive capacity building assistance. The agreement must describe the amount and use (scope of work) of the HOME funds, including a budget, a period of performance, and a schedule for completion.
            (d) On-site inspections and financial oversight. (1) Inspections. The participating jurisdiction must inspect each project at project completion and during the period of affordability to determine that the project meets the property standards of § 92.251.
            (i) Completion inspections. Before completing the project in the disbursement and information system established by HUD, the participating jurisdiction must perform an on-site inspection of HOME-assisted housing to determine that all contracted work has been completed and that the project complies with the property standards of § 92.251.
            (ii) Ongoing periodic inspections of HOME-assisted rental housing. During the period of affordability, the participating jurisdiction must perform on-site inspections of HOME-assisted rental housing to determine compliance with the property standards of § 92.251 and to verify the information submitted by the owners in accordance with the requirements of § 92.252. The inspections must be in accordance with the inspection procedures that the participating jurisdiction establishes to meet the inspection requirements of § 92.251.
            (A) The on-site inspections must occur within 12 months after project completion and at least once every 3 years thereafter during the period of affordability.
            (B) If there are observed deficiencies for any of the inspectable items in the property standards established by the participating jurisdiction, in accordance with the inspection requirements of § 92.251, a follow-up on-site inspection to verify that deficiencies are corrected must occur within 12 months. The participating jurisdiction may establish a list of non-hazardous deficiencies for which correction can be verified by third party documentation (e.g., paid invoice for work order) rather than re-inspection. Health and safety deficiencies must be corrected immediately, in accordance with § 92.251. The participating jurisdiction must adopt a more frequent inspection schedule for properties that have been found to have health and safety deficiencies.
            (C) The property owner must annually certify to the participating jurisdiction that each building and all HOME- assisted units in the project are suitable for occupancy, taking into account State and local health, safety, and other applicable codes, ordinances, and requirements, and the ongoing property standards established by the participating jurisdiction to meet the requirements of § 92.251.
            (D) Inspections must be based on a statistically valid sample of units appropriate for the size of the HOME-assisted project, as set forth by HUD through notice. For projects with one-to-four HOME-assisted units, participating jurisdiction must inspect 100 percent of the HOME-assisted units and the inspectable items (site, building exterior, building systems, and common areas) for each building housing HOME-assisted units.
            (iii) Annual inspections. Tenant- based rental assistance (TBRA). All housing occupied by tenants receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance must meet the standards in 24 CFR 982.401 or the successor requirements as established by HUD. The participating jurisdiction must perform annual on-site inspections of rental housing occupied by tenants receiving HOME-assisted TBRA to determine compliance with these standards.
            (2) Financial oversight. During the period of affordability, the participating jurisdiction must examine at least annually the financial condition of HOME-assisted rental projects with 10 units or more to determine the continued financial viability of the housing and must take actions to correct problems, to the extent feasible.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 50224, Sept. 15, 1999; 67 FR 61757, Oct. 1, 2002; 68 FR 56404, Sept. 30, 2003; 78 FR 44680, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015; 81 FR 80804, Nov. 16, 2016; 81 FR 86952, Dec. 2, 2016]
          
          
            
            § 92.505
            Applicability of uniform administrative requirements.
            The requirements of 2 CFR part 200 apply to participating jurisdictions, State recipients, and subrecipients receiving HOME funds, except for the following provisions: §§ 200.306, 200.307, 200.308 (not applicable to participating jurisdictions), 200.311 (except as provided in § 92.257), 200.312, 200.329, 200.333, and 200.334. The provisions of 2 CFR 200.305 apply as modified by § 92.502(c). If there is a conflict between definitions in 2 CFR part 200 and 24 CFR part 92, the definitions in 24 CFR part 92 govern.
            [80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 92.506
            Audit.
            Audits of the participating jurisdiction, State recipients, and subrecipients must be conducted in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart F.
            [67 FR 61757, Oct. 1, 2002, as amended at 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 92.507
            Closeout.
            HOME funds will be closed out in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart D.
            [80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 92.508
            Recordkeeping.
            (a) General. Each participating jurisdiction must establish and maintain sufficient records to enable HUD to determine whether the participating jurisdiction has met the requirements of this part. At a minimum, the following records are needed:
            (1) Records concerning designation as a participating jurisdiction. (i) For a consortium, the consortium agreement among the participating member units of general local government as required by § 92.101.
            (ii) For a unit of general local government receiving a formula allocation of less than $750,000 (or less than $500,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion for this part), records demonstrating that funds have been made available (either by the State or the unit of general local government, or both) equal to or greater than the difference between its formula allocation and $750,000 (or $500,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion) as required by § 92.102(b).
            (2) Program records. (i) Records of the efforts to maximize participation by the private sector as required by § 92.200.
            (ii) The forms of HOME assistance used in the program, including any forms of investment described in the Consolidated Plan under 24 CFR part 91 that are not identified in § 92.205(b), and which are specifically approved by HUD.
            (iii) The underwriting and subsidy layering guidelines adopted in accordance with § 92.250 that support the participating jurisdiction's Consolidated Plan certification.
            (iv) If existing debt is refinanced for multi-family rehabilitation projects, the refinancing guidelines established in accordance with § 92.206(b), described in the Consolidated Plan.
            (v) If HOME funds are used for tenant-based rental assistance, records supporting the participating jurisdiction's Consolidated Plan certification in accordance with § 92.209(b), including documentation of the local market conditions that led to the choice of this option; written selection policies and criteria; supporting documentation for preferences for specific categories of individuals with disabilities; and records supporting the rent standard and minimum tenant contribution established in accordance with § 92.209(h).
            (vi) If HOME funds are used for tenant-based rental assistance or rental housing, records evidencing that not less than 90 percent of the families receiving such rental assistance meet the income requirements of § 92.216.
            (vii) If HOME funds are used for homeownership housing, the procedures used for establishing 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area in accordance with § 92.254(a)(2), in the Consolidated Plan.
            (viii) If HOME funds are used for acquisition of housing for homeownership, the resale or recapture guidelines established in accordance with § 92.254(a)(5), as set forth in the Consolidated Plan.

            (ix) Records demonstrating compliance with the matching requirements of § 92.218 through § 92.222 including a running log and project records documenting the type and amount of match contributions by project.
            (x) Records documenting compliance with the 24 month commitment deadline of § 92.500(d).
            (xi) Records demonstrating compliance with the fifteen percent CHDO set-aside requirement of § 92.300(a).
            (xii) Records documenting compliance with the ten percent limitation on administrative and planning costs in accordance with § 92.207.
            (xiii) Records documenting objections to the religious character of an organization that provides services under the HOME program, and the reasonable efforts undertaken to identify and refer the program participant to an alternative provider to which the prospective program participant has no objection, as provided in § 92.257(d).
            (3) Project records. (i) A full description of each project assisted with HOME funds, including the location (address of each unit), form of HOME assistance, and the units or tenants assisted with HOME funds.
            (ii) The source and application of funds for each project, including supporting documentation in accordance with 2 CFR 200.302; and records to document the eligibility and permissibility of the project costs, including the documentation of the actual HOME-eligible development costs of each HOME-assisted unit (through allocation of costs, if permissible under § 92.205(d)) where HOME funds are used to assist less than all of the units in a multi-unit project.
            (iii) Records demonstrating that each rental housing or homeownership project meets the minimum per-unit subsidy amount of § 92.205(c), the maximum per-unit subsidy amount of § 92.250(a), and the subsidy layering and underwriting evaluation adopted in accordance with § 92.250(b).
            (iv) Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each project meets the property standards of § 92.251 at project completion. In addition, during the period of affordability, records for rental projects demonstrating compliance with the property standards and financial reviews and actions pursuant to § 92.504(d).
            (v) Records demonstrating that each family is income eligible in accordance with § 92.203.
            (vi) Records demonstrating that each tenant-based rental assistance project meets the written tenant selection policies and criteria of § 92.209(c), including any targeting requirements, the rent reasonableness requirements of § 92.209(f), the maximum subsidy provisions of § 92.209(h), property inspection reports, and calculation of the HOME subsidy.
            (vii) Records demonstrating that each rental housing project meets the affordability and income targeting requirements of § 92.252 for the required period. Records must be kept for each family assisted.
            (viii) Records demonstrating that each multifamily rental housing project involving rehabilitation with refinancing complies with the refinancing guidelines established in accordance with § 92.206(b).
            (ix) Records demonstrating that each lease for a tenant receiving tenant-based rental assistance and for an assisted rental housing unit complies with the tenant and participant protections of § 92.253. Records must be kept for each family.
            (x) Records demonstrating that the purchase price or estimated value after rehabilitation for each homeownership housing project does not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area in accordance with § 92.254(a)(2). The records must demonstrate how the estimated value was determined.
            (xi) Records demonstrating that each homeownership project meets the affordability requirements of § 92.254 for the required period.
            (xii) Records demonstrating that any pre-award costs charged to the HOME allocation meet the requirements of § 92.212.
            (xiii) Records demonstrating that a site and neighborhood standards review was conducted for each project which includes new construction of rental housing assisted under this part to determine that the site meets the requirements of 24 CFR 983.57(e)(2) and (e)(3), in accordance with § 92.202.

            (xiv) Records (written agreements) demonstrating compliance with the written agreements requirements in § 92.504.
            (4) Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs) Records. (i) Written agreements committing HOME funds to CHDO projects in accordance with § 92.300(a).
            (ii) Records setting forth the efforts made to identify and encourage CHDOs, as required by § 92.300(b).
            (iii) The name and qualifications of each CHDO and amount of HOME CHDO set-aside funds committed.
            (iv) Records demonstrating that each CHDO complies with the written agreements required by § 92.504.
            (v) Records concerning the use of CHDO setaside funds, including funds used to develop CHDO capacity pursuant to § 92.300(b).
            (vi) Records concerning the use of funds for CHDO operating expenses and demonstrating compliance with the requirements of §§ 92.208, 92.300(e) and 92.300(f).
            (vii) Records concerning the tenant participation plan required by § 92.303.
            (viii) Records concerning project-specific assistance to CHDOs pursuant to § 92.301, including the impediments to repayment, if repayment is waived.
            (5) Financial records. (i) Records, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.302, identifying the source and application of funds for each fiscal year, including the formula allocation, any reallocation (identified by federal fiscal year appropriation), and any State or local funds provided under § 92.102(b).
            (ii) Records concerning the HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account and local account required to be established and maintained by § 92.500, including deposits, disbursements, balances, supporting documentation and any other information required by the program disbursement and information system established by HUD.
            (iii) Records identifying the source and application of program income, repayments and recaptured funds.
            (iv) Records demonstrating adequate budget control and other records required by 2 CFR 200.302, including evidence of periodic account reconciliations.
            (6) Program administration records. (i) Written policies, procedures, and systems, including a system for assessing risk of activities and projects and a system for monitoring entities consistent with this section, to ensure that the requirements of this part are met.
            (ii) Records demonstrating compliance with the written agreements required by § 92.504.
            (iii) Records demonstrating compliance with the applicable uniform administrative requirements required by § 92.505.
            (iv) Records documenting required inspections, monitoring reviews and audits, and the resolution of any findings or concerns.
            (7) Records concerning other Federal requirements—(i) Equal opportunity and fair housing records. (A) Data on the extent to which each racial and ethnic group and single-headed households (by gender of household head) have applied for, participated in, or benefited from, any program or activity funded in whole or in part with HOME funds.
            (B) Documentation of actions undertaken to meet the requirements of 24 CFR part 135 which implements section 3 of the Housing Development Act of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u).
            (C) Documentation of the actions the participating jurisdiction has taken to affirmatively further fair housing, including documentation related to the participating jurisdiction's Assessment of Fair Housing as described in 24 CFR 5.168.
            (ii) Affirmative marketing and MBE/WBE records.
            (A) Records demonstrating compliance with the affirmative marketing procedures and requirements of § 92.351.

            (B) Documentation and data on the steps taken to implement the jurisdiction's outreach programs to minority-owned (MBE) and female-owned (WBE) businesses including data indicating the racial/ethnic or gender character of each business entity receiving a contract or subcontract of $25,000 or more paid, or to be paid, with HOME funds; the amount of the contract or subcontract, and documentation of participating jurisdiction's affirmative steps to assure that minority business and women's business enterprises have an equal opportunity to obtain or compete for contracts and subcontracts as sources of supplies, equipment, construction, and services.
            (iii) Records demonstrating compliance with the environmental review requirements of § 92.352 and 24 CFR part 58, including flood insurance requirements.
            (iv) Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of § 92.353 regarding displacement, relocation, and real property acquisition, including project occupancy lists identifying the name and address of all persons occupying the real property on the date described in § 92.353(c)(2)(i)(A), moving into the property on or after the date described in § 92.353(c)(2)(i)(A), and occupying the property upon completion of the project.
            (v) Records demonstrating compliance with the labor requirements of § 92.354, including contract provisions and payroll records.
            (vi) Records demonstrating compliance with the lead-based paint requirements of part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, M and R of this title.
            (vii) Records supporting exceptions to the conflict of interest prohibition pursuant to § 92.356.
            (viii) Records demonstrating compliance with debarment and suspension requirements in 2 CFR part 2424.
            (ix) Records concerning intergovernmental review, as required by § 92.357.
            (x) Records of emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and 92.359 pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, including data on the outcomes of those requests.
            (b) States with State Recipients. A State that distributes HOME funds to State recipients must require State recipients to keep the records required by paragraphs (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6) and (a)(7) of this section, and such other records as the State determines to be necessary to enable the State to carry out its responsibilities under this part. The State need not duplicate the records kept by the State recipients. The State must keep records concerning its review of State recipients required under § 92.201(b)(3).
            (c) Period of record retention. All records pertaining to each fiscal year of HOME funds must be retained for the most recent five year period, except as provided below.
            (1) For rental housing projects, records may be retained for five years after the project completion date; except that records of individual tenant income verifications, project rents and project inspections must be retained for the most recent five year period, until five years after the affordability period terminates.
            (2) For homeownership housing projects, records may be retained for five years after the project completion date, except for documents imposing recapture/resale restrictions which must be retained for five years after the affordability period terminates.
            (3) For tenant-based rental assistance projects, records must be retained for five years after the period of rental assistance terminates.
            (4) Written agreements must be retained for five years after the agreement terminates.
            (5) Records covering displacements and acquisition must be retained for five years after the date by which all persons displaced from the property and all persons whose property is acquired for the project have received the final payment to which they are entitled in accordance with § 92.353.
            (6) If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, monitoring, inspection or other action has been started before the expiration of the required record retention period records must be retained until completion of the action and resolution of all issues which arise from it, or until the end of the required period, whichever is later.
            (d) Access to records. (1) The participating jurisdiction must provide citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties with reasonable access to records, consistent with applicable state and local laws regarding privacy and obligations of confidentiality.

            (2) HUD and the Comptroller General of the United States, any of their representatives, have the right of access to any pertinent books, documents, papers or other records of the participating jurisdiction, state recipients, and subrecipients, in order to make audits, examinations, excerpts, and transcripts.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 50224, Sept. 15, 1999; 67 FR 61757, Oct. 1, 2002; 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007; 78 FR 44682, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 42366, July 16, 2015; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015; 81 FR 80805, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 92.509
            Performance reports.
            (a) Management reports. Each participating jurisdiction must submit management reports on its HOME Investment Partnerships Program in such format and at such time as HUD may prescribe.
            (b) Annual performance report. For annual performance report requirements, see 24 CFR part 91.
          
        
        
          Subpart L—Performance Reviews and Sanctions
          
            § 92.550
            Performance reviews.
            (a) General. HUD will review the performance of each participating jurisdiction in carrying out its responsibilities under this part whenever determined necessary by HUD, but at least annually. In conducting performance reviews, HUD will rely primarily on information obtained from the participating jurisdiction's and, as appropriate, the State recipient's records and reports, findings from on-site monitoring, audit reports, and information generated from the disbursement and information system established by HUD. Where applicable, HUD may also consider relevant information pertaining to a participating jurisdiction's or State recipient's performance gained from other sources, including citizen comments, complaint determinations, and litigation. Reviews to determine compliance with specific requirements of this part will be conducted as necessary, with or without prior notice to the participating jurisdiction or State recipient. Comprehensive performance reviews under the standards in paragraph (b) of this section will be conducted after prior notice to the participating jurisdiction.
            (b) Standards for comprehensive performance review. A participating jurisdiction's performance will be comprehensively reviewed periodically, as prescribed by HUD, to determine:
            (1) For local participating jurisdictions and State participating jurisdictions administering their own HOME programs, whether the participating jurisdiction has committed the HOME funds in the United States Treasury account as required by § 92.500 and expended the funds in the United States Treasury account as required by § 92.500, and has met the requirements of this part, particularly eligible activities, income targeting, affordability, and matching requirements; or
            (2) For State participating jurisdictions distributing HOME funds to State recipients, whether the State has met the matching contribution and other requirements of this part; has distributed the funds in accordance with the requirements of this part; and has made such reviews and audits of its State recipients as may be appropriate to determine whether they have satisfied the requirements of paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
          
          
            § 92.551
            Corrective and remedial actions.
            (a) General. HUD will use the procedures in this section in conducting the performance review as provided in § 92.550 and in taking corrective and remedial actions.
            (b) Performance review. (1) If HUD determines preliminarily that the participating jurisdiction has not met a requirement of this part, the participating jurisdiction will be given notice of this determination and an opportunity to demonstrate, within the time prescribed by HUD (not to exceed 30 days) and on the basis of substantial facts and data, that it has done so.
            (2) If the participating jurisdiction fails to demonstrate to HUD's satisfaction that it has met the requirement, HUD will take corrective or remedial action in accordance with this section or § 92.552.
            (c) Corrective and remedial actions. Corrective or remedial actions for a performance deficiency (failure to meet a provision of this part) will be designed to prevent a continuation of the deficiency; mitigate, to the extent possible, its adverse effects or consequences; and prevent its recurrence.
            
            (1) HUD may instruct the participating jurisdiction to submit and comply with proposals for action to correct, mitigate and prevent a performance deficiency, including:
            (i) Preparing and following a schedule of actions for carrying out the affected activities, consisting of schedules, timetables, and milestones necessary to implement the affected activities;
            (ii) Establishing and following a management plan that assigns responsibilities for carrying out the remedial actions;
            (iii) Canceling or revising activities likely to be affected by the performance deficiency, before expending HOME funds for the activities;
            (iv) Reprogramming HOME funds that have not yet been expended from affected activities to other eligible activities;
            (v) Reimbursing its HOME Investment Trust Fund in any amount not used in accordance with the requirements of this part;
            (vi) Suspending disbursement of HOME funds for affected activities; and
            (vii) Establishing procedures to ensure compliance with HOME requirements;
            (viii) Making matching contributions as draws are made from the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund United States Treasury Account and establishing a remedial plan to make up the matching contributions deficit; and
            (ix) If the participating jurisdiction is a metropolitan city, forming a consortium with the urban county if the urban county is willing to carry out the HOME program in the metropolitan city.
            (2) HUD may also change the method of payment from an advance to reimbursement basis and may require supporting documentation to be submitted for HUD review for each payment request before payment is made; determine the participating jurisdiction to be high risk and impose special conditions or restrictions on the next year's allocation in accordance with 2 CFR 200.207; and take other remedies that may be legally available, including remedies under 2 CFR 200.338.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 78 FR 44683, July 24, 2013; 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
          
          
            § 92.552
            Notice and opportunity for hearing; sanctions.
            (a) If HUD finds after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing that a participating jurisdiction has failed to comply with any provision of this part and until HUD is satisfied that there is no longer any such failure to comply:
            (1) HUD shall reduce the funds in the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund by the amount of any expenditures that were not in accordance with the requirements of this part; and
            (2) HUD may do one or more of the following:
            (i) Prevent withdrawals from the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund for activities affected by the failure to comply;
            (ii) Restrict the participating jurisdiction's activities under this part to activities that conform to one or more model programs which HUD has developed in accordance with section 213 of the Act;
            (iii) Remove the participating jurisdiction from participation in allocations or reallocations of funds made available under subpart B or J of this part;
            (iv) Require the participating jurisdiction to make matching contributions in amounts required by § 92.218(a) as HOME funds are drawn from the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund United States Treasury Account. Provided, however, that HUD may on due notice suspend payments at any time after the issuance of a notice of opportunity for hearing pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section, pending such hearing and a final decision, to the extent HUD determines such action necessary to preclude the further expenditure of funds for activities affected by the failure to comply.
            (b) Proceedings. When HUD proposes to take action pursuant to this section, the respondent in the proceedings will be the participating jurisdiction or, at HUD's option, the State recipient. Proceedings will be conducted in accordance with 24 CFR part 26.
            [61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997; 78 FR 44683, July 24, 2013]
          
        
        
          Subpart M—American Dream Downpayment Initiative
          
            Source:
            69 FR 16766, Mar. 30, 2004, unless otherwise noted.
          
          
            § 92.600
            Purpose.
            This subpart describes the requirements for the HOME Program American Dream Downpayment Initiative (ADDI). Through the ADDI, HUD makes formula grants to participating jurisdictions that qualify for allocations to assist low-income families achieve homeownership in accordance with the provisions of this subpart. Unless otherwise noted in this subpart, the HOME Program requirements contained in subparts B through L of this part do not apply to the ADDI.
          
          
            § 92.602
            Eligible activities.
            (a) Eligible activities. ADDI funds may only be used for:
            (1) Downpayment assistance towards the purchase of single family housing by low-income families who are first-time homebuyers; and
            (2) Rehabilitation that is completed in conjunction with the home purchase assisted with ADDI funds. The rehabilitation assisted with ADDI funds, including the reduction of lead paint hazards and the remediation of other home health hazards, must be completed within one year of the purchase of the home. Total rehabilitation shall not exceed 20 percent of the participating jurisdiction's ADDI fiscal year formula allocation. FY2003 ADDI funds may not be used for rehabilitation.
            (3) Manufactured housing. ADDI funds may be used to purchase a manufactured housing unit and purchase a manufactured housing lot. The manufactured housing unit must, at the time of project completion, be connected to permanent utility hook-ups and be located on land that is owned by the manufactured housing owner, owned as a cooperative, or is subject to a leasehold interest with a term equal to at least the term of the mortgage financing on the unit or the period of affordability (whichever is greater).
            (b) Eligible project costs. ADDI funds may be used for the following eligible costs:
            (1) Acquisition costs. The costs of acquiring single family housing.
            (2) Rehabilitation costs. The eligible development hard costs for rehabilitation projects described in § 92.206(a) and the costs for reduction of lead paint hazards and the remediation of other home health hazards. FY2003 ADDI funds may not be used for rehabilitation.
            (3) Related soft costs. Reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the homebuyer or participating jurisdiction and associated with the financing of single family housing acquisition and rehabilitation. These costs include, but are not limited to:
            (i) Costs to process and settle the financing for purchase of a home, such as private lender origination fees, credit report fees, fees for title evidence, fees for recordation and filing of legal documents, attorneys fees, and private appraisal fees.
            (ii) Architectural, engineering, or related professional services required to prepare plans, drawings, specifications, or work write-ups.
            (iii) Costs to provide information services, such as fair housing information to prospective homeowners.

            (iv) Staff and overhead costs directly related to carrying out the project, such as work specifications preparation, loan processing inspections, and other services related to assisting a potential homebuyer (e.g., housing counseling), which may be charged to project costs only if the individual purchases single family housing with ADDI assistance.
            (v) Costs of environmental review and release of funds (in accordance with 24 CFR part 58) that are directly related to the project.
            (4) Ineligible costs. ADDI funds may not be used for the development costs (hard costs or soft costs) of new construction of housing or for rental assistance.
            (c) Forms of investment. A participating jurisdiction may invest ADDI funds as interest-bearing loans or advances, non-interest bearing loans or advances, interest subsidies consistent with the purposes of this subpart, deferred payment loans, grants, or other forms of assistance that HUD determines to be consistent with this subpart. Each participating jurisdiction has the right to establish the terms of assistance, subject to the requirements of this subpart.
            (d) Minimum amount of assistance. The minimum amount of ADDI funds in combination with HOME funds that must be invested in a project is $1,000.
            (e) Maximum amount of assistance. The amount of ADDI funds provided to any family shall not exceed the greater of six percent of the purchase price of the single family housing or $10,000. This limitation does not apply to FY2003 ADDI funds.
            (f) Limitation on subrecipients and contractors. A participating jurisdiction may not provide ADDI funds to an entity or organization that provides downpayment assistance, if the activities of that entity or organization are financed in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by contributions, service fees, or other payments from the sellers of housing, whether or not made in conjunction with the sale of specific housing acquired with ADDI funds.
            [69 FR 16766, Mar. 30, 2004, as amended at 72 FR 16685, Apr. 4, 2007]
          
          
            § 92.604
            ADDI allocation formula.
            (a) General. HUD will provide ADDI funds to participating jurisdictions in amounts determined by the formula described in this section.
            (b) Allocation to states that are participating jurisdictions. HUD will provide ADDI funds to each state in an amount that is equal to the percentage of the national total of low-income households residing in rental housing in the state, as determined on the basis of the most recent available U.S. census data (as adjusted by HUD).
            (c) Local participating jurisdictions. Subject to paragraph (d) of this section, HUD will further allocate to each local participating jurisdiction located within a state an amount equal to the percentage of the state-wide total of low-income households residing in rental housing in such participating jurisdiction, as determined on the basis of the most recent available U.S. census data (as adjusted by HUD).
            (d) Limitation on allocations to local participating jurisdictions. (1) Allocations under paragraph (c) of this section shall be made only if the local participating jurisdiction:
            (i) Has a total population of 150,000 individuals or more, as determined on the basis of the most recent available U.S. census data (as adjusted by HUD); or
            (ii) Would receive an allocation of $50,000 or more.
            (2) Any allocation that would have otherwise been made to a local participating jurisdiction that does not meet the requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of this section shall revert back to the state in which the participating jurisdiction is located.
            (e) Consortia with members in more than one state. A consortium with members in more than one state will receive an allocation if the consortium meets the requirements described in paragraph (d) of this section.
            (f) Allocation of FY2003 ADDI funds. For the allocation of FY2003 ADDI funds, HUD will consider a participating jurisdiction's need for, and prior commitment to, assistance to homebuyers. Puerto Rico is a “state” for FY2003 ADDI funds.
            (1) Need. The need of the participating jurisdiction for assistance to homebuyers is measured by its ADDI formula allocation, as calculated under paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section.
            (2) Prior commitment. Only those participating jurisdictions that have demonstrated prior commitment to assistance to homebuyers will receive FY2003 ADDI funds. A participating jurisdiction has demonstrated prior commitment to homebuyers if it has previously committed funds to such purpose under the HOME program, the Community Development Block Grants (CDBG) program, mortgage revenue bonds, or existing funding from state and local governments.
          
          
            § 92.606
            Reallocations.

            If any funds allocated to a participating jurisdiction under § 92.604 become available for reallocation, the funds shall be reallocated in the next fiscal year in accordance with § 92.604.
          
          
            § 92.608
            Consolidated plan.
            To receive an ADDI formula allocation, a participating jurisdiction must address the use of the ADDI funds in its consolidated plan submitted in accordance with 24 CFR part 91.
          
          
            § 92.610
            Program requirements.
            The following program requirements contained in subpart E of this part apply to the ADDI:
            (a) Private-public partnership. The private-public partnership provisions contained in § 92.200 apply to the ADDI.
            (b) Distribution of assistance. The distribution of assistance requirements contained in § 92.201 apply to the ADDI.
            (c) Income determinations. The income determination requirements contained in § 92.203 apply to the ADDI.
            (d) Pre-award costs. The requirements regarding pre-award costs contained in § 92.212 apply to the ADDI.
            (e) Matching contribution requirement. The matching contribution requirements contained in §§ 92.218 through 92.222 apply to FY2003 ADDI funds only.
          
          
            § 92.612
            Project requirements.
            The following project requirements contained in subpart F of this part apply to the ADDI:
            (a) Maximum per-unit subsidy amount and subsidy layering. The maximum per-unit subsidy limits and subsidy layering requirements contained in § 92.250 apply to the total HOME and ADDI funds in a project.
            (b) Property standards. Housing assisted with ADDI funds must meet the property standards contained in § 92.251.
            (c) Qualification as affordable housing. Housing assisted with ADDI funds must meet the affordability requirements contained in § 92.254(a) and (c). If a project receives both HOME and ADDI funds, the total of HOME and ADDI funds in the project is used for calculating the period of affordability described in § 92.254(a)(4) and applied to resales (§ 92.254(a)(5)(i)) and recaptures (§ 92.254(a)(5)(ii)).
            (d) Faith-based organizations. Faith-based organizations are eligible to participate in the ADDI as subrecipients or contractors as provided in § 92.257.
          
          
            § 92.614
            Other Federal requirements.
            (a) The following Federal requirements contained in subpart H of this part apply to the ADDI:
            (1) Other Federal requirements and nondiscrimination. The Federal and nondiscrimination requirements contained in § 92.350 apply to the ADDI.
            (2) Environmental review. The environmental review requirements contained in § 92.352 apply to the ADDI.
            (3) Affirmative marketing. The affirmative marketing requirements contained in § 92.351(a).
            (4) Labor. The labor requirements contained in § 92.354 apply to ADDI.
            (5) Lead-based paint. The lead-based paint prevention and abatement requirements contained in § 92.355 apply to the ADDI.
            (6) Conflict of interest. The conflict of interest requirements contained in § 92.356 apply to the ADDI.
            (7) Consultant activities. The requirements regarding consultant activities contained in § 92.358 apply to the ADDI.
            (b) The following Federal requirements contained in subpart H of this part do not apply to the ADDI:
            (1) Displacement, relocation, and acquisition. The displacement, relocation, and acquisition requirements implementing the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act (42 U.S.C. 4201-4655) and the implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24, contained in § 92.353 do not apply to ADDI, except the requirements do apply to FY2003 ADDI funds.
            (2) Executive Order 12372. The requirements of Executive Order 12372 (entitled “Intergovernmental Review) described in § 92.357.
            [69 FR 16766, Mar. 30, 2004, as amended at 78 FR 44683, July 24, 2013]
          
          
            § 92.616
            Program administration.
            The following program administration requirements contained in subpart K of this part apply to the ADDI:
            (a) HOME Investment Trust Fund. The requirements regarding the HOME Investment Trust Fund contained in § 92.500 apply to the ADDI, with the exception of paragraphs (c)(2) and (d)(1)(A).
            
            (b) HOME Investment Partnership Agreement. The requirements regarding HOME Investment Partnership Agreements contained in § 92.501 apply to the ADDI.
            (c) Program disbursement and information system. The requirements regarding program disbursement and information systems contained in § 92.502 apply to the ADDI.
            (d) Program income, repayments and recaptured funds. The requirements regarding program income, repayments, and recaptured funds contained in § 92.503 apply to the ADDI, except the program income and recaptured funds must be deposited in the participating jurisdiction's HOME investments trust fund local account and used in accordance with the HOME program requirements.
            (e) Participating jurisdiction responsibilities and written agreements. The requirements regarding participating jurisdiction responsibilities and written agreements contained in § 92.504 apply to the ADDI, with the modification that the written agreement is not required to cover any HOME requirement that is not applicable to the ADDI.
            (f) Applicability of uniform administrative requirements. The uniform administrative requirements contained in § 982.505 apply to the ADDI.
            (g) Audit. The audit requirements contained in § 92.506 apply to the ADDI.
            (h) Closeout. The closeout requirements contained in § 92.507 apply to the ADDI.
            (i) Recordkeeping. The project records must include records demonstrating that the family qualifies as a first-time homebuyer. The recordkeeping requirements contained in § 92.508 apply to the ADDI, with the exception of the following paragraphs:
            (1) Paragraph (a)(1);
            (2) Paragraphs (a)(2)(iv), (a)(2)(v), (a)(2)(vi), (a)(2)(xi), and (a)(2)(xii);
            (3) Paragraphs (a)(3)(vi), (a)(3)(vii), (a)(3)(viii), (a)(3)(ix), and (a)(3)(xiii);
            (4) Paragraph (a)(4);
            (5) Paragraphs (a)(7)(i)(B), (a)(7)(i)(C), (a)(7)(ii)(A), and (a)(7)(ix) (in addition, the requirements of paragraph (a)(7)(iv) apply to FY2003 ADDI funds only); and
            (6) Paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(3) (in addition, the requirements of paragraph (c)(5) apply to FY2003 ADDI funds only).
            (j) Performance reports. The requirements regarding performance reports contained in § 92.509 apply to the ADDI.
          
          
            § 92.618
            Performance reviews and sanctions.
            HUD will review the performance of participating jurisdictions in carrying out its responsibilities under the ADDI in accordance with the policies and procedures contained in subpart L of this part.
          
        
      
      
        Pt. 93
        PART 93—HOUSING TRUST FUND
        
          
            Subpart A—General
            Sec.
            93.1
            Overview.
            93.2
            Definitions.
            93.3
            Waivers.
          
          
            Subpart B—Allocation Formula; Reallocations
            93.50
            Formula allocation.
            93.51
            Formula factors.
            93.52
            Minimum allocations.
            93.53
            
              Federal Register notice of formula allocations.
            93.54
            Reallocations by formula.
          
          
            Subpart C—Participation and Submission Requirements; Distribution of Assistance
            93.100
            Participation and submission requirements.
            93.101
            Distribution of assistance.
          
          
            Subpart D—Program Requirements
            93.150
            Site and neighborhood standards.
            93.151
            Income determinations.
          
          
            Subpart E—Eligible and Prohibited Activities
            93.200
            Eligible activities: General.
            93.201
            Eligible project costs.
            93.202
            Eligible administrative and planning costs.
            93.203
            HTF funds and public housing.
            93.204
            Prohibited activities and fees.
          
          
            Subpart F—Income Targeting
            93.250
            Income targeting.
          
          
            Subpart G—Project Requirements
            93.300
            Maximum per-unit subsidy amount, underwriting, and subsidy layering.
            93.301
            Property standards.
            
            93.302
            Qualification as affordable housing: rental housing.
            93.303
            Tenant protections and selection.
            93.304
            Qualification as affordable housing: homeownership.
            93.305
            Qualification as affordable housing: modest housing requirements for homeownership; resale or recapture requirements.
          
          
            Subpart H—Other Federal Requirements
            93.350
            Other Federal requirements and nondiscrimination; affirmative marketing.
            93.351
            Lead-based paint.
            93.352
            Displacement, relocation, and acquisition.
            93.353
            Conflict of interest.
            93.354
            Funding Accountability and Transparency Act.
            93.355
            Eminent domain.
            93.356
            VAWA requirements.
          
          
            Subpart I—Program Administration
            93.400
            Housing Trust Fund (HTF) accounts.
            93.401
            HTF grant agreement.
            93.402
            Program disbursement and information system.
            93.403
            Program income and repayments.
            93.404
            Grantee responsibilities; written agreements; onsite inspections; financial oversight.
            93.405
            Applicability of uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audits.
            93.406
            Audits.
            93.407
            Recordkeeping.
            93.408
            Performance reports.
          
          
            Subpart J—Performance Reviews and Sanctions
            93.450
            Accountability of recipients.
            93.451
            Performance reviews.
            93.452
            Corrective and remedial actions.
            93.453
            Notice and opportunity for hearing; sanctions.
          
        
        
          Authority:
          42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 12 U.S.C. 4568.
        
        
          Source:
          80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015, unless otherwise noted.
        
        
           Subpart A—General
          
            § 93.1
            Overview.

            (a) This part implements the Housing Trust Fund (HTF) program established under section 1338 of the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992, as amended (12 U.S.C. 4501 et seq.) (the Act). In general, under the HTF program, HUD allocates funds by formula to eligible States to increase and preserve the supply of decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable housing, with primary attention to rental housing for extremely low-income and very low-income households, including homeless families.
            (b) Section 1337 of the Act requires a percentage of the unpaid principal balance of total new business for the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) and the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) (collectively, the government-sponsored enterprises or GSEs) to be setaside and allocated as a dedicated source of annual funding for the HTF, unless allocations are suspended by the Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the agency that regulates the GSEs. These funds will be deposited into an HTF account established in the Treasury of the United States by the Secretary of the Treasury to carry out the HTF program. The Act also provides that the HTF may be funded with amounts appropriated, transferred, or credited to the HTF under other provisions of law.
          
          
            § 93.2
            Definitions.
            
              1937 Act means the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.).
            
              Act means the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992, as amended (12 U.S.C. 4501 et seq).
            
              Annual income. See § 93.151.
            
              Commitment means:
            (1) The grantee has executed a legally binding written agreement (that includes the date of the signature of each person signing the agreement) with an eligible recipient for a project that meets the definition of “commit to a specific local project” of paragraph (2) of this definition.
            (2) “Commit to a specific local project” means:

            (i) If the project consists of rehabilitation or new construction (with or without acquisition), the grantee and recipient have executed a written legally binding agreement under which HTF assistance will be provided to the recipient for an identifiable project for which construction can reasonably be expected to start within 12 months of the agreement date. The written agreement for rehabilitation or new construction of rental housing may also provide operating cost assistance and/or operating cost assistance reserves.
            (ii) If the project consists of acquisition of standard housing and the grantee is providing HTF funds to a recipient to acquire rental housing, or to a first-time homebuyer family to acquire single family housing for homeownership, the grantee and recipient or the family have executed a written agreement under which HTF assistance will be provided for the purchase of the rental housing or single family housing and the property title will be transferred to the recipient or family within 6 months of the agreement date. The written agreement for acquisition of rental housing may also provide operating cost assistance and/or operating cost assistance reserves.
            (iii) If the project is for renewal of operating cost assistance or operating cost assistance reserves, the grantee and the recipient must have executed a legally binding written agreement under which HTF funds will be provided to the recipient for operating cost assistance or operating cost assistance reserves for the identified HTF project.
            
              Consolidated plan means the plan submitted and approved in accordance with 24 CFR part 91.
            
              Displaced homemaker means an individual who:
            (1) Is an adult;
            (2) Has not worked full-time full-year in the labor force for a number of years, but has, during such years, worked primarily without remuneration to care for the home and family; and
            (3) Is unemployed or underemployed and is experiencing difficulty in obtaining or upgrading employment.
            
              Extremely low-income families means low-income families whose annual incomes do not exceed 30 percent of the median family income of a geographic area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families.
            
              Family has the same meaning given that term in 24 CFR 5.403.
            
              First-time homebuyer means an individual and his or her spouse who have not owned a home during the 3-year period prior to purchase of a home with assistance under this part. The term first-time homebuyer also includes an individual who is a displaced homemaker or single parent, as those terms are defined in this section.
            
              Grantee means the State or the State-designated entity that receives the HTF funds from HUD.
            
              HTF allocation plan means the annual submission to HUD required by the Act that describes how the grantee will distribute its HTF funds, including how it will use the funds to address its priority housing needs, what activities may be undertaken with those funds, and how recipients and projects will be selected to receive those funds. See 24 CFR 91.220(l)(4) and 91.320(k)(5).
            
              HTF funds means funds made available under this part through formula allocations and reallocations, plus program income.
            
              Homeownership means ownership in fee simple title in a 1- to 4-unit dwelling or in a condominium unit, or equivalent form of ownership approved by HUD.
            (1) The land may be owned in fee simple or the homeowner may have a 99-year ground lease.
            (i) For housing located in the insular areas, the ground lease must be 40 years or more.
            (ii) For housing located on Indian trust or restricted Indian lands or a Community Land Trust, the ground lease must be 50 years or more.
            (iii) For manufactured housing, the ground lease must be for a period at least equal to the applicable period of affordability in § 93.304(e).
            (2) Right to possession under a contract for deed, installment contract, or land contract (pursuant to which the deed is not given until the final payment is made) is not an equivalent form of ownership.

            (3) The ownership interest may be subject only to the restrictions on resale required under § 93.304; mortgages, deeds of trust, or other liens or instruments securing debt on the property as approved by the grantee; or any other restrictions or encumbrances that do not impair the good and marketable nature of title to the ownership interest.
            
            (4) The grantee must determine whether or not ownership or membership in a cooperative or mutual housing project constitutes homeownership under State law; however, if the cooperative or mutual housing project receives low income housing tax credits, the ownership or membership does not constitute homeownership.
            
              Homeownership counseling has the same meaning given the term in 24 CFR 5.100, and is a type of housing counseling.
            
              Household means one or more persons occupying a housing unit.
            
              Housing includes manufactured housing and manufactured housing lots, permanent housing for disabled homeless persons, single-room occupancy housing, and group homes. Housing does not include emergency shelters (including shelters for disaster victims) or facilities such as nursing homes, convalescent homes, hospitals, residential treatment facilities, correctional facilities, halfway houses, housing for students, or dormitories (including farmworker dormitories).
            
              Housing counseling has the meaning given the term in 24 CFR 5.100.
            
              HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            
              Income-eligible means a family, homeowner, or household (as appropriate given the context of the specific regulatory provision) that is very low-income, extremely low-income, or both, depending on the income-targeting requirements set forth in § 93.250.
            
              Insular areas means Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands, and American Samoa.
            
              Neighborhood means a geographic location designated in comprehensive plans, ordinances, or other local documents as a neighborhood, village, or similar geographical designation that is within the boundary but does not encompass the entire area of a unit of general local government; except that if the unit of general local government has a population under 25,000, the neighborhood may, but need not, encompass the entire area of a unit of general local government.
            
              Poverty line is defined in section 673 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (42 U.S.C. 9902).
            
              Program income means gross income received by the grantee that is directly generated from the use of HTF funds. When program income is generated by housing that is only partially assisted with HTF funds, the income shall be prorated to reflect the percentage of HTF funds used. Program income includes, but is not limited to, the following:
            (1) Proceeds from the disposition by sale or long-term lease of real property acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed with HTF funds;
            (2) Gross income from the use or rental of real property owned by the grantee that was acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed with HTF funds, minus costs that were incidental to generation of the income; therefore, program income does not include gross income from the use, rental, or sale of real property received by the recipient, unless the funds are paid by the recipient to the grantee);
            (3) Payments of principal and interest on loans made using HTF funds;
            (4) Proceeds from the sale of loans made with HTF funds;
            (5) Proceeds from the sale of obligations secured by loans made with HTF funds;
            (6) Interest earned on program income pending its disposition; and
            (7) Any other interest or return on the investment of HTF funds, as permitted under § 93.200(b).
            
              Project means a site or sites together with any building (including a manufactured housing unit) or buildings located on the site(s) that are under common ownership, management, and financing and are to be assisted with HTF funds as a single undertaking under this part. The project includes all the activities associated with the site and building.
            
              Project completion means that all necessary title transfer requirements and construction work have been performed, the project complies with the requirements of this part (including the property standards under § 93.301 of this part), the final drawdown has been disbursed for the project, and the project completion information has been entered in the disbursement and information system established by HUD, except that with respect to rental housing project completion, for the purposes of § 93.402(d) of this part, project completion occurs upon completion of construction before occupancy.
            
              Recipient means an organization, agency, or other entity (including a public housing agency, or a for-profit entity or a nonprofit entity) that receives HTF assistance from a grantee as an owner or developer to carry out an HTF-assisted project. A recipient must:
            (1) Make acceptable assurances to the grantee that it will comply with the requirements of the HTF program during the entire period that begins upon selection of the recipient to receive HTF funds, and ending upon the conclusion of all HTF-funded activities;
            (2) Demonstrate the ability and financial capacity to undertake, comply, and manage the eligible activity;
            (3) Demonstrate its familiarity with the requirements of other Federal, State, or local housing programs that may be used in conjunction with HTF funds to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements and regulations of such programs; and
            (4) Have demonstrated experience and capacity to conduct an eligible HTF activity as evidenced by its ability to:
            (i) Own, construct, or rehabilitate, and manage and operate an affordable multifamily rental housing development; or
            (ii) Design, construct, or rehabilitate, and market affordable housing for homeownership.
            (iii) Provide forms of assistance, such as down payments, closing costs, or interest rate buydowns for purchasers.
            
              Reconstruction means the rebuilding, on the same lot, of housing standing on a site at the time of project commitment, except that housing that was destroyed may be rebuilt on the same lot if HTF funds are committed within 12 months of the date of destruction. The number of housing units on the lot may not be decreased or increased as part of a reconstruction project, but the number of rooms per unit may be increased or decreased. Reconstruction also includes replacing an existing substandard unit of manufactured housing with a new or standard unit of manufactured housing. Reconstruction is new construction for purposes of this part.
            
              Shortage of standard rental units both affordable and available to extremely low-income renter households means
            (1) For any State or other geographical area the gap between:
            (i) The number of units with complete plumbing and kitchen facilities with a rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 30 percent of the adjusted area median income (AMI) as determined by HUD that either are occupied by extremely low-income renter households or are vacant for rent; and
            (ii) The number of extremely low-income renter households.
            (2) If the number of units described in paragraph (1)(i) of this definition exceeds the number of extremely low-income households described in paragraph (1)(ii) of this definition, there is no shortage.
            
              Single family housing means a one-to four-family residence, condominium unit, cooperative unit, combination of manufactured housing and lot, or manufactured housing lot.
            
              Single parent means an individual who:
            (1) Is unmarried or legally separated from a spouse; and
            (2) Has one or more minor children of whom the individual has custody or joint custody, or is pregnant.
            
              State means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, the Virgin Islands, and American Samoa.
            
              State-designated entity means a State housing finance agency, tribally designated housing entity, or any other qualified instrumentality of the State that is designated by the State to be the grantee.
            
              Subgrantee means a unit of general local government or State agency selected by the grantee to administer all or a portion of its HTF program. A local government subgrantee must have an approved consolidated plan submitted in accordance with 24 CFR part 91. The selection of a subgrantee by a grantee is not subject to the procurement procedures and requirements.
            
            
              Tribally designated housing entity has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1997 (25 U.S.C. 4103).
            
              Unit of general local government means a city, town, township, county, parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a State; and any agency or instrumentality thereof that is established pursuant to legislation and designated by the chief executive to act on behalf of the jurisdiction with regard to provisions of this part. When a county is an urban county, the urban county is the unit of general local government for purposes of the HTF program.
            
              Urban county has the meaning given the term in 24 CFR 570.3.
            
              Very low-income renter households means a household whose income is in excess of 30 percent but not greater than 50 percent of the area median income, with adjustments for smaller and larger families, as determined by HUD.
            
              Very low-income families means low-income families whose annual incomes are in excess of 30 percent but not greater than 50 percent of the median family income of a geographic area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families. “Very low-income family” also includes any family that resides in a nonmetropolitan area that does not exceed the poverty line applicable to the family size involved.
            [80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 90657, Dec. 14, 2016]
          
          
            § 93.3
            Waivers.
            HUD may, upon a determination of good cause and subject to statutory limitations, waive any provision of this part and delegate this authority in accordance with section 106 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3535(q)).
          
        
        
          Subpart B—Allocation Formula; Reallocations
          
            § 93.50
            Formula allocation.
            (a) Allocations to States. HUD will provide to the States allocations of funds in amounts determined by the formula described in this part.
            (b) Amount available for allocation. The amount of funds available for allocation by the formula is the balance remaining after providing for other purposes authorized by Congress, in accordance with the Act and appropriations.
            (c) Allocations for the insular areas. The allocation amount for each insular area is determined by multiplying the funds available times the ratio of renter households in each insular area to the total number of renter households in the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the insular areas.
            (d) Allocations for the 50 States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia—(1) Amounts available for allocations. The amount of funds that is available for allocation by the formula to the 50 States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia is determined using the most current data available from the U.S. Census Bureau that is available for the same year for all these geographic areas. The amount is equal to the balance of funds remaining after determining formula allocations for the insular areas under § 93.50(c). For purposes of paragraphs (d)(1) and (2) of this section, the term “State” means any of the 50 United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia.
            (2) Allocations. (i) Allocations to the States are determined using the four needs factors described in § 93.51(a) through (d), multiplying each factor by the amount available under § 93.51(d)(1) by its priority weight, and summing the four factors for each State.
            (ii) The factor described in § 93.51(a) is weighted 0.5. The factors described in § 93.51(b) and (d) are weighted at 0.125 and the factor described in § 93.51(c) of this section is weighted at 0.25.
            (iii) The sum of the four needs factors for each State is then multiplied by the construction cost factor described in § 93.51(e) of this section and by the total amount of funds available for State allocations.
          
          
            
            § 93.51
            Formula factors.
            (a) Need factor one. The ratio of the shortage of standard rental units both affordable and available to extremely low-income renter households in the State to the aggregate shortage of standard rental units both affordable and available to extremely low-income renter households in all the States.
            (b) Need factor two. The ratio of the shortage of standard rental units both affordable and available to very low-income renter households in the State to the aggregate shortage of standard rental units both affordable and available to very low-income renter households in all the States.
            (c) Need factor three. The ratio of:
            (1) Extremely low-income renter households in the State living with either incomplete kitchen or plumbing facilities, more than one person per room, or paying more than 50 percent of income for housing costs, to
            (2) The aggregate number of extremely low-income renter households living with either incomplete kitchen or plumbing facilities, more than one person per room, or paying more than 50 percent of income for housing costs in all the States.
            (d) Need factor four. The ratio of very low-income renter households in the State paying more than 50 percent of income on rent relative to the aggregate number of very low-income renter households paying more than 50 percent of income on rent in all the States.
            (e) Construction cost factor. The resulting sum calculated from the factors described in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section shall be multiplied by the relative cost of construction in the state. For purposes of calculating this factor, the term “cost of construction”:
            (1) Means the cost of construction or building rehabilitation in the State relative to the national cost of construction or building rehabilitation; and
            (2) Is calculated so that values higher than 1.0 indicate that the State's construction costs are higher than the national average, a value of 1.0 indicates that the State's construction costs are exactly the same as the national average, and values lower than 1.0 indicate that the State's cost of construction are lower than the national average.
          
          
            § 93.52
            Minimum allocations.
            (a) In accordance with the HTF statute, HUD is required to provide each of the States and the District of Columbia with a minimum grant of $3 million. If the formula amount determined for a fiscal year is less than $3 million to any of the 50 States or the District of Columbia, then the allocation to that State or the District of Columbia is increased to $3 million, and allocations to States and the District of Columbia above $3 million and to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the insular areas are adjusted by an equal amount on a pro rata basis.

            (b) If in any fiscal year, funding in the HTF is insufficient to provide each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia with a minimum grant of $3 million, HUD will, through notice published in the Federal Register for public comment, describe an alternative method for allocating grant funds to the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
          
          
            § 93.53
            Federal Register notice of formula allocations.

            Not later than 60 calendar days after the date that HUD determines the formula amounts under this subpart, HUD will publish a notice in the Federal Register announcing the availability of the allocations to States.
          
          
            § 93.54
            Reallocations by formula.
            (a) HUD will reallocate under this section:
            (1) Any HTF funds available for reallocation because HUD reduced or recaptured funds from an HTF grantee under § 93.400(d) for failure to commit or expend the funds within the time specified, or under § 93.453 for failure to comply substantially with any provision of this part;
            (2) Any HTF funds reduced for failure by the grantee to obtain funds required to be reimbursed or returned under § 93.450; and

            (3) Any HTF funds remitted to HUD under § 93.403(b)(4) when a grantee ceases to be an HTF grantee for any reason.
            
            (b) Any reallocation of funds must be made only among all participating States, except those States from which the funds were recaptured or reduced.
            (c) Any amounts that become available for reallocation shall be added to amounts for formula allocation in the succeeding fiscal year.
          
        
        
          Subpart C—Participation and Submission Requirements; Distribution of Assistance
          
            § 93.100
            Participation and submission requirements.
            (a) Notification of intent to participate. Not later than 30 calendar days after HUD's publication of the formula allocation amounts as provided in § 93.53, the State must notify HUD in writing of its intention to become an HTF grantee for the first year of HTF funding.
            (b) Submission requirement. To receive its HTF grant, the grantee must submit a consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR part 91.
          
          
            § 93.101
            Distribution of assistance.
            (a) A State may choose to be the HTF grantee to receive and administer its grant or it may choose a qualified State-designated entity to be the HTF grantee.
            (b) Each grantee is responsible for distributing HTF funds throughout the State according to the State's assessment of the priority housing needs within the State, as identified in the State's approved consolidated plan.
            (c) An HTF grantee may choose to directly fund projects by eligible recipients in accordance with the State's HTF allocation plan or to fund projects by eligible recipients through one or more subgrantees. An HTF subgrantee that is a unit of general local government must have a consolidated plan under 24 CFR part 91, and must include an HTF allocation plan in its consolidated plan (see 24 CFR 91.220(l)(4)), and must select projects by eligible recipients in accordance with its HTF allocation plan. Because a State has only one consolidated plan, and HTF allocation plan for an HTF subgrantee that is a State agency must be included in the State's HTF allocation plan. The grantee or subgrantee must determine that the applicant is an eligible recipient that meets the definition of “recipient” in § 93.2 before awarding HTF assistance.
            (d) If the HTF grantee subgrants HTF funds to subgrantees, the grantee must ensure that its subgrantees comply with the requirements of this part and carry out the responsibilities of the grantee. The grantee must annually review the performance of subgrantees in accordance with 24 CFR 93.404(a).
          
        
        
          Subpart D—Program Requirements
          
            § 93.150
            Site and neighborhood standards.
            (a) General. A grantee must administer its HTF program in a manner that provides housing that is suitable from the standpoint of facilitating and furthering full compliance with the applicable provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4), the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq., E.O. 11063, 3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 652) and HUD regulations issued pursuant thereto; and promotes greater choice of housing opportunities.
            (b) New rental housing. In carrying out the site and neighborhood requirements with respect to new construction of rental housing, a grantee is responsible for making the determination that proposed sites for new construction meet the requirements in 24 CFR 983.57(e)(2).
          
          
            § 93.151
            Income determinations.
            (a) General. The HTF program has income-targeting requirements. Therefore, the grantee must determine that each family occupying an HTF-assisted unit is income-eligible by determining the family's annual income.
            (b) Definition of “annual income.” (1) When determining whether a family is income-eligible, the grantee must use one of the following two definitions of “annual income”:
            (i) “Annual income” as defined at 24 CFR 5.609; or
            (ii) “Adjusted gross income” as defined for purposes of reporting under the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1040 series for individual federal annual income tax purposes.
            

            (2) The grantee may use only one definition for each HTF-assisted program (e.g., down payment assistance program) that it administers and for each rental housing project.
            (c) Determining annual income—(1) Tenants in HTF-assisted housing. For families who are tenants in HTF-assisted housing, the grantee must initially determine annual income using the method in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. For subsequent income determinations during the period of affordability, the grantee may use any one of the methods described in paragraph (d) of this section, in accordance with § 93.302(e).
            (2) HTF-assisted homebuyers. For families who are HTF-assisted homebuyers, the grantee must determine annual income using the method described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
            (d) Methods of determining annual income. (1) Examine at least 2 months of source documents evidencing annual income (e.g., wage statement, interest statement, unemployment compensation statement) for the family.
            (2) Obtain from the family a written statement of the amount of the family's annual income and family size, along with a certification that the information is complete and accurate. The certification must state that the family will provide source documents upon request.
            (3) Obtain a written statement from the administrator of a government program under which the family receives benefits and which examines each year the annual income of the family. The statement must indicate the tenant's family size and state the amount of the family's annual income; or alternatively, the statement must indicate the current dollar limit for very low- or low-income families for the family size of the tenant and state that the tenant's annual income does not exceed this limit.
          
        
        
          Subpart E—Eligible and Prohibited Activities
          
            § 93.200
            Eligible activities: General.
            (a)(1) HTF funds may be used for the production, preservation, and rehabilitation of affordable rental housing and affordable housing for first-time homebuyers through the acquisition (including assistance to homebuyers), new construction, reconstruction, or rehabilitation of nonluxury housing with suitable amenities, including real property acquisition, site improvements, conversion, demolition, and other expenses, including financing costs, relocation expenses of any displaced persons, families, businesses, or organizations; for operating costs of HTF-assisted rental housing; and for reasonable administrative and planning costs. Not more than one third of each annual grant may be used for operating cost assistance and operating cost assistance reserves. Operating cost assistance and operating cost assistance reserves may be provided only to rental housing acquired, rehabilitated, reconstructed, or newly constructed with HTF funds. Not more than 10 percent of the annual grant shall be used for housing for homeownership. HTF-assisted housing must be permanent housing. The specific eligible costs for these activities are found in §§ 93.201 and 93.202. The activities and costs are eligible only if the housing meets the property standards in § 93.301, as applicable, upon project completion.
            (2) Acquisition of vacant land or demolition must be undertaken only with respect to a particular housing project intended to provide affordable housing within the time frames established in the definition of “commitment” in § 93.2.
            (3) HTF funds may be used to purchase and/or rehabilitate a manufactured housing unit, and purchase the land upon which a manufactured housing unit is located. The manufactured housing unit must, at the time of project completion, be connected to permanent utility hook-ups and be located on land that is owned by the manufactured housing unit owner or land for which the manufactured housing owner has a lease for a period at least equal to the applicable period of affordability.
            (b) Forms of assistance to projects. A grantee may provide HTF funds as equity investments, interest-bearing loans or advances, non-interest-bearing loans or advances, interest subsidies consistent with the purposes of this part, deferred payment loans, grants, or other forms of assistance that HUD determines to be consistent with the purposes of this part. Each grantee has the right to establish the terms of assistance, subject to the requirements of this part.
            (c) Multi-unit projects. (1) HTF funds may be used to assist in the development of one or more housing units in a multi-unit project. Only the actual HTF eligible development costs of the assisted units may be charged to the HTF program. If the assisted and non-assisted units are not comparable, the actual costs may be determined based on a method of cost allocation. If the assisted and non-assisted units are comparable in terms of size, features, and number of bedrooms, the actual cost of the HTF-assisted units can be determined by prorating the total HTF-eligible development costs of the project so that the proportion of the total development costs charged to the HTF program does not exceed the proportion of the HTF-assisted units in the project.
            (2) After project completion, the number of units designated as HTF-assisted may be reduced only in accordance with § 93.203, except that in a project consisting of all HTF-assisted units, one unit may be converted to an onsite manager's unit if the grantee determines the conversion is reasonable and that, based on one fewer HTF-assisted unit, the costs charged to the HTF program do not exceed the actual costs of the HTF-assisted units and do not exceed the subsidy limit established pursuant to § 93.300(a).
            (d) Terminated projects. An HTF-assisted project that is terminated before completion, either voluntarily or otherwise, constitutes an ineligible activity and the grantee must repay any HTF funds invested in the project to its HTF account from which the funds were drawn (i.e., local or Treasury account), in accordance with § 93.403(b). A project that does not meet the requirements for affordable housing must be terminated and the grantee must repay the HTF funds to the grantee's HTF account.
          
          
            § 93.201
            Eligible project costs.
            HTF funds may be used to pay the following eligible costs:
            (a) Development hard costs. The actual cost of constructing or rehabilitating housing. These costs include the following:
            (1) For new construction projects, costs to meet the new construction standards of the grantee in § 93.301;
            (2) For rehabilitation, costs to meet the property standards for rehabilitation projects in § 93.301(b);
            (3) For both new construction and rehabilitation projects, costs:
            (i) To demolish existing structures;
            (ii) To make utility connections including off-site connections from the property line to the adjacent street; and
            (iii) To make improvements to the project site that are in keeping with improvements of surrounding, standard projects. Site improvements may include onsite roads and sewer and water lines necessary to the development of the project. The project site is the property, owned by the project owner, upon which the project is located.
            (4) For both new construction and rehabilitation of multifamily rental housing projects, costs to construct or rehabilitate laundry and community facilities that are located within the same building as the housing and which are for the use of the project residents and their guests.
            (5) Costs to make utility connections or to make improvements to the project site, in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs (a)(3)(ii) and (iii) of this section are also eligible in connection with the acquisition of standard housing.
            (b) Refinancing costs. (1) The cost to refinance existing debt secured by rental housing units that are being rehabilitated with HTF funds, but only if the refinancing is necessary to reduce the overall housing costs and to make the housing more affordable and proportional to the number of HTF-assisted units in the rental project. The proportional rehabilitation cost must be greater than the proportional amount of debt that is refinanced.

            (2) The grantee must establish refinancing guidelines and state them in its consolidated plan described in 24 CFR part 91. The guidelines shall describe the conditions under which the grantee will refinance existing debt. At minimum, the guidelines must demonstrate that rehabilitation is the primary eligible activity and ensure that this requirement is met by establishing a minimum level of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between rehabilitation and refinancing.
            (c) Acquisition costs. Costs of acquiring improved or unimproved real property, including acquisition by homebuyers.
            (d) Related soft costs. Other reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the owner or grantee and associated with the financing, or development (or both) of new construction, rehabilitation or acquisition of housing assisted with HTF funds. These costs include, but are not limited to:
            (1) Architectural, engineering, or related professional services required to prepare plans, drawings, specifications, or work write-ups. The costs may be paid if they were incurred not more than 24 months before the date that HTF funds are committed to the project and the grantee expressly permits HTF funds to be used to pay the costs in the written agreement committing the funds.
            (2) Costs to process and settle the financing for a project, such as private lender origination fees, credit reports, fees for title evidence, fees for recordation and filing of legal documents, building permits, attorneys' fees, private appraisal fees and fees for an independent cost estimate, and builders' or developers' fees.
            (3) Costs of a project audit, including certification of costs performed by a certified public accountant, that the grantee may require with respect to the development of the project.
            (4) Costs to provide information services such as affirmative marketing and fair housing information to prospective homeowners and tenants as required by § 93.350.
            (5) For new construction or rehabilitation, the cost of funding an initial operating deficit reserve, which is a reserve to meet any shortfall in project income during the period of project rent-up (not to exceed 18 months) and which may only be used to pay project operating expenses, scheduled payments to a replacement reserve, and debt service. Any HTF funds placed in an operating deficit reserve that remain unexpended after the period of project rent-up may be retained for project reserves if permitted by the grantee.
            (6) Staff and overhead costs of the grantee directly related to carrying out the project, such as work specifications preparation, loan processing, and inspections. For multi-unit projects, such costs must be allocated among HTF-assisted units in a reasonable manner and documented. Although these costs may be charged as project costs, these costs cannot be charged to or paid by the assisted families.
            (7) For both new construction and rehabilitation, costs for the payment of impact fees that are charged for all projects within a jurisdiction.
            (e) Operating cost assistance and operating cost assistance reserves. For HTF-assisted units for which project-based assistance is not available, when necessary and subject to the limitations in § 93.200(a), HTF funds may be used to pay for operating cost assistance and operating cost assistance reserves, as follows:

            (1) Operating costs are costs for insurance, utilities, real property taxes, and maintenance and scheduled payments to a reserve for replacement of major systems (provided that the payments must be based on the useful life of each major system and expected replacement cost) of an HTF-assisted unit. The eligible amount of HTF funds per unit for operating cost assistance is determined based on the deficit remaining after the monthly rent payment for the HTF-assisted unit is applied to the HTF-assisted unit's share of monthly operating costs. The maximum amount of the operating cost assistance to be provided to an HTF-assisted rental project must be based on the underwriting of the project and must be specified in a written agreement between the grantee and the recipient. The written agreement may commit, from a fiscal year HTF grant, funds for operating cost assistance for a multiyear period provided that the grantee is able meet its expenditure deadline in § 93.400(d). The grantee may renew operating cost assistance with future fiscal year HTF grants during the affordability period and the amount must be based on the need for the operating cost assistance at the time the assistance is renewed.
            (2) An operating cost assistance reserve may be funded by the grantee for HTF-assisted units in a project where the grantee determines in its underwriting of the project the reserve is necessary to ensure the project's financial feasibility. If the operating cost assistance reserve is funded with appropriated HTF funds, the allowable amount of the reserve shall not exceed the amount determined by the grantee to be necessary to provide operating cost assistance for HTF-assisted units, for a period not to exceed 5 years, based on an analysis of potential deficits remaining after the expected rent payments for the HTF-assisted unit are applied to the HTF-assisted unit's expected share of operating costs. The grantee may renew operating cost assistance reserves with future fiscal year HTF grants during the affordability period and the amount must be based on the need for the operating cost assistance reserve at the time the assistance for the reserve is renewed. If the operating cost assistance reserve is funded with non-appropriated HTF funds, the reserve may be funded for the period of affordability.
            (f) Relocation costs. The cost of relocation payments and other relocation assistance to persons displaced by the project are eligible costs.
            (1) Relocation payments include replacement housing payments, payments for moving expenses, and payments for reasonable out-of-pocket costs incurred in the temporary relocation of persons.
            (2) Other relocation assistance means staff and overhead costs directly related to providing advisory and other relocation services to persons displaced by the project, including timely written notices to occupants, referrals to comparable and suitable replacement property, property inspections, counseling, and other assistance necessary to minimize hardship.
            (g) Costs relating to payment of loans. If the HTF funds are not used to directly pay a cost specified in this section, but are used to pay off a construction loan, bridge financing loan, or guaranteed loan, the payment of principal and interest for such loan is an eligible cost only if:
            (1) The loan was used for eligible costs specified in this section, and
            (2) The HTF assistance is part of the original financing for the project and the project meets the requirements of this part.
            (h) Construction undertaken before the HTF funds are committed to the project. HTF funds cannot be used for development hard costs, as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, or for acquisition, undertaken before the HTF funds are committed to the project. However, the written agreement committing the HTF funds to the project may authorize HTF funds to be used for architectural and engineering costs and other related professional services, as provided in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
          
          
            § 93.202
            Eligible administrative and planning costs.
            (a) General. A HTF grantee may expend, for payment of reasonable administrative and planning costs of the HTF, an amount of HTF funds that is not more than 10 percent of the sum of each fiscal year HTF grant and of program income deposited into its local account or received and reported by its subgrantees during the program year. A HTF grantee may expend the funds directly or may authorize its subgrantees, if any, to expend all or a portion of such funds, provided total expenditures for planning and administrative costs do not exceed the maximum allowable amount. Reasonable administrative and planning costs are those costs described in paragraphs (b) through (h) of this section:
            (b) General management, oversight and coordination. Reasonable costs of overall program management, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation. Such costs include, but are not limited to, necessary expenditures for the following:

            (1) Salaries, wages, and related costs of the grantee's staff. In charging costs to this category the grantee may either include the entire salary, wages, and related costs allocable to the program of each person whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program involves program administration assignments, or the prorated share of the salary, wages, and related costs of each person whose job includes any program administration assignments. The grantee may use only one of these methods. Program administration includes the following types of assignments:
            (i) Developing systems and schedules for ensuring compliance with program requirements;
            (ii) Developing interagency agreements and agreements with entities receiving HTF funds;
            (iii) Monitoring HTF-assisted housing for progress and compliance with program requirements;
            (iv) Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for submission to HUD;
            (v) Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings;
            (vi) Evaluating program results against stated objectives; and
            (vii) Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program include such assignments as those described in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (vi) of this section;
            (2) Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program;
            (3) Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including such services as general legal services, accounting services, and audit services;
            (4) Other costs for goods and services required for administration of the program, including such goods and services as rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and rental and maintenance (but not purchase) of office space; and
            (c) Staff and overhead. Staff and overhead costs of the grantee directly related to carrying out the project, such as work specifications preparation, loan processing, inspections, lead-based paint evaluations (visual assessments, inspections, and risk assessments), other services related to assisting potential owners, tenants and homebuyers (e.g., housing counseling); and staff and overhead costs directly related to providing advisory and other relocation services to persons displaced by the project, including timely written notices to occupants, referrals to comparable and suitable replacement property, property inspections, counseling, and other assistance necessary to minimize hardship. These costs (except homeownership counseling) may be charged as administrative costs or as project costs under § 93.201(d)(6) and (f)(2), at the discretion of the grantee; however, these costs (except homeownership counseling) cannot be charged to or paid by the low-income families.
            (d) Public information. The provision of information and other resources to residents and citizen organizations participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of projects being assisted with HTF funds.
            (e) Fair housing. Activities to affirmatively further fair housing in accordance with the grantee's certification under 24 CFR part 91.
            (f) Indirect costs. Indirect costs may be charged to the HTF program in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart E.
            (g) Preparation of the consolidated plan. Preparation of the consolidated plan required under 24 CFR part 91. Preparation includes the costs of public hearings, consultations, and publication.
            (h) Other Federal requirements. Costs of complying with the Federal requirements in subpart H of this part.
          
          
            § 93.203
            HTF funds and public housing.
            (a) HTF funds may be used for new construction or rehabilitation of public housing units only in accordance with the following:
            (1) HTF funds may be used for new construction of public housing as part of the Choice Neighborhoods (Choice) program under a HUD appropriation act or for new public housing units that have been allocated and will receive low-income housing tax credits under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 42).

            (2) HTF funds may be used for the rehabilitation of existing public housing units in which the public housing assistance will be converted and used at the properties under the Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD) program under HUD's 2012 Appropriations Act (Pub. L. 112-55, 125 Stat. 552, approved November 18, 2011) or subsequent statutes. HTF funds may also be used for the rehabilitation of existing public housing under the Choice program, and of existing public housing units that have been allocated and will receive low-income housing tax credits under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 42).
            (b) The public housing units constructed using funds under this part must replace units that were removed from a public housing agency's public housing inventory as part of a Choice program grant, or as part of a mixed-financed development under section 35 of the 1937 Act. The number of replacement units cannot be more than the number of units removed from the public housing agency's inventory. The public housing units constructed or rehabilitated using funds under this part must receive Public Housing Operating Fund assistance (and may receive Public Housing Capital Fund assistance) under section 9 of the 1937 Act. These units cannot receive operating costs assistance or operating cost assistance reserves under this part.
            (c) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, HTF-assisted housing may not receive Operating Fund or Capital Fund assistance under section 9 of the 1937 Act during the HTF period of affordability.
            (d) Consistent with § 93.200(c), HTF funds may be used for affordable housing in a project that also contains public housing units, provided that the HTF funds are not used for the public housing units and HTF funds are used only for eligible costs, in accordance with this part.
          
          
            § 93.204
            Prohibited activities and fees.
            (a) HTF funds may not be used to:
            (1) Provide assistance (other than assistance to a homebuyer to acquire housing previously assisted with HTF funds or renewal of operating cost assistance or renewal of operating cost assistance reserve) to a project previously assisted with HTF funds during the period of affordability established by the grantee in the written agreement under § 93.404 (c)(2)(iv). However, additional HTF funds may be committed to a project up to one year after project completion, but the amount of HTF funds in the project may not exceed the maximum per-unit development subsidy amount established pursuant to § 93.300.
            (2) Pay for the acquisition of property owned by the grantee, except for property acquired by the grantee with HTF funds or property acquired in anticipation of carrying out an HTF project.
            (3) Pay delinquent taxes, fees, or charges on properties to be assisted with HTF funds.
            (4) Pay for political activities, advocacy, lobbying (whether directly or through other parties), counseling services (except for housing counseling), travel expenses (other than those eligible under § 93.202(b)), or preparing or providing advice on tax returns. The prohibited use of funds for political activities includes influencing the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of one or more candidates to any Federal, State, or local office as codified in section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 501).
            (5) Pay for administrative, outreach, or other costs to manage and operate the grantee of HTF funds, except those administrative costs necessary to carry out the HTF program in § 93.202, including housing counseling.
            (6) Pay for any cost that is not eligible under § 93.201 and § 93.202.
            (b)(1) The grantee may not charge (and must prohibit subgrantees and recipients from charging) servicing, origination, or other fees for the costs of administering the HTF program. However, the grantee may charge owners of rental projects reasonable annual fees for monitoring compliance during the period of affordability. The fees must be based upon the average actual cost of performing the monitoring of HTF-assisted rental projects. The basis for determining the amount of the fee must be documented and the fee must be included in the costs of the project as part of the project underwriting.

            (2) The grantee may also charge nominal application fees (although these fees are not an eligible HTF cost) to eligible recipients, to discourage frivolous applications. The amount of application fees must be appropriate to the type of application and may not create an undue impediment to an extremely low-income family to be able to participate in the grantee's program.
            (3) All fees are applicable credits under 2 CFR part 200, subpart E.

            (4) In addition, the grantee must prohibit project owners from charging fees that are not customarily charged in rental housing (e.g., laundry room access fees), except that rental project owners may charge:
            (i) Reasonable application fees to prospective tenants;
            (ii) Parking fees to tenants only if such fees are customary for rental housing projects in the neighborhood; and
            (iii) Fees for services such as bus transportation or meals, as long as the services are voluntary and fees are charged for services provided.
          
        
        
          Subpart F—Income Targeting
          
            § 93.250
            Income targeting.
            (a) In any fiscal year in which the total amount available for allocation of HTF funds is less than $1 billion, the grantee must use 100 percent of its HTF grant for the benefit of extremely low-income families or families with incomes at or below the poverty line (whichever is greater). In any fiscal year in which the total amount available for allocation of HTF funds is greater than $1 billion, the grantee must use at least 75 percent of its grant for the benefit of extremely low-income families or families with incomes at or below the poverty line.
            (b) Any grant funds not used in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section must be used for the benefit of very-low income families.
          
        
        
          Subpart G—Project Requirements
          
            § 93.300
            Maximum per-unit development subsidy amount, underwriting, and subsidy layering.
            (a) Maximum per-unit development subsidy amount. The grantee must establish maximum limitations on the total amount of HTF funds that the grantee may invest per-unit for development of non-luxury housing, with adjustments for the number of bedrooms and the geographic location of the project. These limits must be reasonable and based on actual costs of developing non-luxury housing in the area. The grantee must include these limits in its consolidated plan and update these limits annually.
            (b) Underwriting and subsidy layering. Before committing funds to a project, the grantee must evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines that it has adopted for determining a reasonable level of profit or return on recipient's investment in a project and must not invest any more HTF funds, alone or in combination with other governmental assistance, than is necessary to provide quality affordable housing that is financially viable for a reasonable period (at minimum, the period of affordability in § 93.302 or § 93.304) and that will not provide a profit or return on the recipient's investment that exceeds the grantee's established standards for the size, type, and complexity of the project. The guidelines adopted by the grantees must require the grantee to undertake:
            (1) An examination of the sources and uses of funds for the project (including any operating cost assistance, operating cost assistance reserve, or project-based rental assistance that will be provided to the project) and a determination that the costs are reasonable; and
            (2) An assessment, at minimum, of the current market demand in the neighborhood in which the project will be located, the experience of the recipient, the financial capacity of the recipient, and firm written financial commitments for the project.
            (3) For HTF-funded downpayment assistance, a market analysis is not required.
          
          
            § 93.301
            Property standards.
            (a) New construction projects. (1) State and local codes, ordinances, and zoning requirements. Housing that is newly constructed with HTF funds must meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and zoning requirements. HTF-assisted new construction projects must meet State or local residential and building codes, as applicable or, in the absence of a State or local building code, the International Residential Code or International Building Code (as applicable to the type of housing) of the International Code Council. The housing must meet the applicable requirements upon project completion.
            (2) HUD requirements. All new construction projects must also meet the requirements described in this paragraph:
            (i) Accessibility. The housing must meet the accessibility requirements of 24 CFR part 8, which implements section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), and Titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131-12189) implemented at 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, as applicable. “Covered multifamily dwellings,” as defined at 24 CFR 100.201, must also meet the design and construction requirements at 24 CFR 100.205, which implements the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619).
            (ii) Energy efficiency. The housing must meet the energy efficiency standards established pursuant to section 109 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12709).
            (iii) Disaster mitigation. Where relevant, the housing must be constructed to mitigate the impact of potential disasters (e.g., earthquakes, hurricanes, flooding, and wildfires), in accordance with State and local codes, ordinances, or other State and local requirements, or such other requirements as HUD may establish.
            (iv) Written cost estimates, construction contracts, and construction documents. The grantee must ensure the construction contract(s) and construction documents describe the work to be undertaken in adequate detail so that inspections can be conducted. The grantee must review and approve written cost estimates for construction and determine that costs are reasonable.
            (v) Construction progress inspections. The grantee must conduct progress and final inspections of construction to ensure that work is done in accordance with the applicable codes, the construction contract, and construction documents.
            (vi) Broadband infrastructure. For new commitments made after January 19, 2017 for a new construction housing project of a building with more than 4 rental units, the construction must include installation of broadband infrastructure, as this term is defined in 24 CFR 5.100, except where the grantee determines and, in accordance with § 93.407(a)(2)(iv), documents the determination that:
            (A) The location of the new construction makes installation of broadband infrastructure infeasible; or
            (B) The cost of installing broadband infrastructure would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity or in an undue financial burden.
            (b) Rehabilitation projects. All rehabilitation that is performed using HTF funds must meet the requirements of this paragraph (b).
            (1) Rehabilitation standards. The grantee must establish rehabilitation standards for all HTF-assisted housing rehabilitation activities that set forth the requirements that the housing must meet upon project completion. The grantee's description of its standards must be in sufficient detail to determine the required rehabilitation work including methods and materials. The standards may refer to applicable codes or they may establish requirements that exceed the minimum requirements of the codes. The rehabilitation standards must address each of the following:
            (i) Health and safety. The grantee's standards must identify life-threatening deficiencies that must be addressed immediately if the housing is occupied.
            (ii) Major systems. Major systems are: structural support; roofing; cladding and weatherproofing (e.g., windows, doors, siding, gutters); plumbing; electrical; and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. For rental housing, the grantee's standards must require the grantee to estimate (based on age and condition) the remaining useful life of these systems, upon project completion of each major system. For multifamily housing projects of 26 units or more, the grantee's standards must require the grantee to determine the useful life of major systems through a capital needs assessment of the project. For rental housing, if the remaining useful life of one or more major system is less than the applicable period of affordability, the grantee's standards must require the grantee to ensure that a replacement reserve is established and monthly payments are made to the reserve that are adequate to repair or replace the systems as needed. For homeownership housing, the grantee's standards must require, upon project completion, each of the major systems to have a remaining useful life for a minimum of 5 years or for such longer period specified by grantee, or the major systems must be rehabilitated or replaced as part of the rehabilitation work.
            (iii) Lead-based paint. The grantee's standards must require the housing to meet the lead-based paint requirements at 24 CFR part 35.
            (iv) Accessibility. The grantee's standards must require the housing to meet the accessibility requirements in 24 CFR part 8, which implements section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), and Titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131-12189) implemented at 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, as applicable. “Covered multifamily dwellings,” as defined at 24 CFR 100.201, must also meet the design and construction requirements at 24 CFR 100.205, which implements the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619). Rehabilitation may include improvements that are not required by regulation or statute that permit use by a person with disabilities.
            (v) [Reserved].
            (vi) Disaster mitigation. Where relevant, the grantee's standards must require the housing to be improved to mitigate the impact of potential disasters (e.g., earthquake, hurricanes, flooding, and wildfires) in accordance with State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements, or such other requirements as HUD may establish.
            (vii) State and local codes, ordinances, and zoning requirements. The grantee's standards must require the housing to meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements or, in the absence of a State or local building code, the International Existing Building Code of the International Code Council.
            (viii) Uniform Physical Condition Standards. The standards of the grantee must be such that, upon completion, the HTF-assisted project and units will be decent, safe, sanitary, and in good repair as described in 24 CFR 5.703. HUD will establish the minimum deficiencies that must be corrected under the grantee's rehabilitation standards based on inspectable items and inspected areas from HUD-prescribed physical inspection procedures (Uniform Physical Conditions Standards) pursuant to 24 CFR 5.705.
            (ix) Capital Needs Assessments. For multifamily rental housing projects of 26 or more total units, the grantee must determine all work that will be performed in the rehabilitation of the housing and the long-term physical needs of the project through a capital needs assessment of the project.
            (x) Broadband infrastructure. For new commitments made after January 19, 2017 for a substantial rehabilitation project of a building with more than 4 rental units, any substantial rehabilitation, as defined in 24 CFR 5.100, must provide for installation of broadband infrastructure, as this term is also defined in 24 CFR 5.100, except where the grantee determines and, in accordance with § 93.407(a)(2)(iv), documents the determination that:
            (A) The location of the substantial rehabilitation makes installation of broadband infrastructure infeasible;
            (B) The cost of installing broadband infrastructure would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or activity or in an undue financial burden; or
            (C) The structure of the housing to be substantially rehabilitated makes installation of broadband infrastructure infeasible.
            (2) Construction documents and cost estimates. The grantee must ensure that the work to be undertaken will meet the grantee's rehabilitation standards. The construction documents (i.e., written scope of work to be performed) must be in sufficient detail to establish the basis for a uniform inspection of the housing to determine compliance with the grantee's standards. The grantee must review and approve a written cost estimate for rehabilitation after determining that costs are reasonable.
            
            (3) Frequency of inspections. The grantee must conduct an initial property inspection to identify the deficiencies that must be addressed. The grantee must conduct progress and final inspections to determine that work was done in accordance with work write-ups.
            (c) Acquisition of standard housing. (1) Existing housing that is acquired with HTF assistance for rental housing, and that was newly constructed or rehabilitated less than 12 months before the date of commitment of HTF funds, must meet the property standards of paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this section, as applicable, for new construction and rehabilitation projects. The grantee must document this compliance based upon a review of approved building plans and Certificates of Occupancy, and an inspection that is conducted no earlier than 90 calendar days before the date of commitment of HTF assistance.
            (2) All other existing housing that is acquired with HTF assistance for rental housing must meet the rehabilitation property standards requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. The grantee must document this compliance based upon an inspection that is conducted no earlier than 90 calendar days before the date of commitment of HTF assistance. If the property does not meet these standards, HTF funds cannot be used to acquire the property unless it is rehabilitated to meet the standards of paragraph (b) of this section.

            (3) Existing housing that is acquired for homeownership (e.g., downpayment assistance) must be decent, safe, sanitary, and in good repair. The grantee must establish standards to determine that the housing is decent, safe, sanitary, and in good repair. At minimum, the standards must provide that the housing meets all applicable State and local standards and code requirements and the housing does not contain the specific deficiencies proscribed by HUD based on the applicable inspectable items and inspected areas in HUD-prescribed physical inspection procedures (Uniform Physical Condition Standards) issued pursuant to 24 CFR 5.705. The grantee must inspect the housing and document this compliance based upon an inspection that is conducted no earlier than 90 calendar days before the date of commitment of HTF assistance. If the housing does not meet these standards, the housing must be rehabilitated to meet the standards of this paragraph (c)(3) or it cannot be assisted with HTF funds.
            (d) Manufactured housing. Construction of all manufactured housing (including manufactured housing that replaces an existing substandard unit under the definition of “reconstruction”) must meet the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards codified at 24 CFR part 3280. These standards preempt State and local codes which are not identical to the Federal standards for the new construction of manufactured housing. The grantees providing HTF funds to assist manufactured housing units must comply with applicable State and local laws or codes. In the absence of such laws or codes, the installation must comply with the manufacturer's written instructions for installation of manufactured housing units. All new manufactured housing and all manufactured housing that replaces an existing substandard unit under the definition of “reconstruction” must be on a permanent foundation that meets the requirements for foundation systems as set forth in 24 CFR 203.43f(c)(i). All new manufactured housing (and all manufactured housing that replaces an existing substandard unit under the definition of “reconstruction”) must, at the time of project completion, be connected to permanent utility hook-ups and be located on land that is owned by the manufactured housing unit owner or land for which the manufactured housing owner has a lease for a period at least equal to the applicable period of affordability. In HTF-funded rehabilitation of existing manufactured housing the foundation and anchoring must meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements or in the absence of local or State codes, the Model Manufactured Home Installation Standards at 24 CFR part 3285. Manufactured housing that is rehabilitated using HTF funds must meet the property standards requirements in paragraph (b) of this section, as applicable. The grantee must document this compliance in accordance with inspection procedures that the grantee has established pursuant to § 92.301, as applicable.
            (e) Ongoing property condition standards: Rental housing—(1) Ongoing property standards. The grantee must establish property standards for rental housing (including manufactured housing) that apply throughout the affordability period. The standards must ensure that owners maintain the housing as decent, safe, and sanitary housing in good repair. The grantee's description of its property standards must be in sufficient detail to establish the basis for a uniform inspection of HTF rental projects. The grantee's ongoing property standards must address each of the following:
            (i) At a minimum, the grantee's ongoing property standards must include all inspectable items and inspectable areas specified by HUD based on the HUD physical inspection procedures (Uniform Physical Condition Standards (UPCS)) prescribed by HUD pursuant to 24 CFR 5.705.
            (ii) Health and safety. The grantee's standards must require the housing to be free of all health and safety defects. The standards must identify life-threatening deficiencies that the owner must immediately correct and the time frames for addressing these deficiencies.
            (iii) Lead-based paint. The grantee's standards must require the housing to meet the lead-based paint requirements in 24 CFR part 35.
            (2) Inspections. The grantee must undertake ongoing property inspections, in accordance with § 93.404.
            (3) Corrective and remedial actions. The grantee must have procedures for ensuring that timely corrective and remedial actions are taken by the project owner to address identified deficiencies.
            (4) Inspection procedures. The grantee must establish written inspection procedures. The procedures must include detailed inspection checklists, description of how and by whom inspections will be carried out, and procedures for training and certifying qualified inspectors. The procedures must also describe how frequently the property will be inspected, consistent with section § 93.404(d).
            (f) Environmental provisions—(1) New construction projects environmental requirements—(i) Historic preservation—(A) Standards. The project activities (including demolition) must not be performed on properties that are either listed in or determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, unless the project activities meet the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, either as certified through the Federal and/or State historic rehabilitation tax credit programs or as verified by someone that meets the relevant Secretary of the Interior's Professional Qualification Standards;
            
            (B) Archaeological resources. If archaeological resources or human remains are discovered on the project site during construction, the grantee must consult with affected tribes and/or descendant communities and comply with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (25 U.S.C. 3001-3013), State law and/or local ordinance (e.g., State unmarked burial law).
            (ii) Farmland. Project activities must not result in the conversion of unique, prime, or statewide or locally significant agricultural properties to urban uses.
            (iii) Airport zones. Projects are not permitted within the runway protection zones of civilian airports, or the clear zones or accident potential zones of military airfields.
            (iv) Coastal Barrier Resource System. No projects may be assisted in Coastal Barrier Resource System (CBRS) units. CBRS units are mapped and available from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
            (v) Coastal zone management. Development must be consistent with the appropriate State coastal zone management plan. Plans are available from the local coastal zone management agency.
            (vi) Floodplains. Except as modified below, definitions for terms used below can be found at 24 CFR part 55.

            (A) Construction and other activities in the 100-year floodplain are to be avoided when practicable. If there are no practicable alternatives to new construction or substantial improvement in the 100-year floodplain, the structure must be elevated at least the base flood elevation (BFE) or floodproofed to one foot above the BFE. Elevated and floodproofed buildings must adhere to National Flood Insurance Program standards. The primary sources of floodplain data are Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs). When FEMA provides interim flood hazard data, such as Advisory Base Flood Elevations (ABFE) or preliminary maps or studies, the latest of these sources shall be used.
            (B) No HTF assistance may be approved with respect to:
            (1) Any action, other than a functionally dependent use, located in a floodway;
            (2) Any new construction critical action located in a coastal high hazard area, 100- or 500-year floodplain; or
            (3) Any non-critical new construction action in a coastal high hazard area, unless the action is reconstruction following destruction caused by a disaster and is designed for location in a coastal high hazard area consistent with the FEMA National Flood Insurance Program requirements for V-Zones.
            (vii) Wetlands. (A) No draining, dredging, channelizing, filling, diking, impounding, or related grading activities are to be performed in wetlands. No activities, structures, or facilities funded under this program are to adversely impact a wetland.

            (B) A wetland means those areas that are inundated by surface or ground water with a frequency sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances, does or would support a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life that requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas such as sloughs, potholes, wet meadows, river overflows, mud flats, and natural ponds. This definition includes those wetland areas separated from their natural supply of water as a result of activities, such as the construction of structural flood protection methods or solid-fill road beds, or mineral extraction and navigation improvements. This definition is independent of the definition of jurisdictional wetland used by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.).
            (viii) Explosives and hazards. Projects must be in compliance with the standards for acceptable separation distance, as set forth at 24 CFR part 51, subpart C.
            (ix) Contamination. All properties assisted with HTF funds must be free of hazardous materials, contamination, toxic chemicals and gases, and radioactive substances, where a hazard could affect the health and safety of occupants or conflict with the intended use of the property.
            (A) All proposed multifamily (more than four housing units) HTF projects require a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA-ASTM). If the Phase I ESA identifies recognized environmental concerns (RECs), a Phase II (ESA-ASTM) will be required. ASTM reports shall be prepared in accordance with the most current ASTM standard. Single family housing does not require a Phase I ESA.
            (B) HTF projects must avoid sites located within 0.25 miles of a Superfund or CERCLIS (Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Information System) site or other contaminated site reported to Federal, State, or local authorities without a statement in writing from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the appropriate State agency that there is no hazard that could affect the health and safety of the occupants or conflict with the intended use of the property.
            (x) Noise. (A) Internal noise levels: All activities will be developed to ensure an interior noise level of no more than 45 decibels (dB).
            (B) External noise levels:
            (1) Project sites exposed to less than or equal to 65 dB of environmental noise are acceptable.
            (2) Sites between 65 dB and less than 75 dB are acceptable with mitigation (e.g., noise walls, careful site planning) that result in an interior standard of 45 dB.
            (3) Locations with environmental noise levels of 75 dB or greater may not have noise sensitive outdoor uses (e.g., picnic areas, tot lots, balconies, or patios) and require sound attenuation in the building shell to achieve the 45 dB interior standard.
            (xi) Endangered species. The grantee must avoid all actions which could jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered or threatened species, as designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or National Marine Fisheries Service, or would result in the destruction or adversely modify the designated critical habitat of such species.
            (xii) Wild and scenic rivers. The grantee must avoid activities that are inconsistent with conservation easements, land-use protections, and restrictions adjacent to wild and scenic rivers, as designated/listed by the Departments of Agriculture or Interior. Maps for the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System are available at the governing departments.
            (xiii) Safe drinking water. Projects with a potable water system must use only lead-free pipes, solder, and flux.
            (xiv) Sole-source aquifers. Project activities should avoid sites and activities that have the potential to contaminate sole source aquifer areas (SSAs). EPA defines a sole or principal source aquifer as an aquifer that supplies at least 50 percent of the drinking water consumed in the area overlying the aquifer. If the project overlies an SSA, EPA must review the project. EPA review is designed to reduce the risk of ground water contamination that could pose a health hazard to those who use it.
            (2) Rehabilitation projects environmental requirements—(i) Historic preservation. (A) The project activities (including demolition) must not be performed on properties that are either listed in or determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, unless the project activities meet the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, either as certified through the Federal and/or State historic rehabilitation tax credit programs or as verified by someone that meets the relevant Secretary of the Interior's Professional Qualification Standards;
            
            (B) Archaeological resources. If archaeological resources or human remains are discovered on the project site during construction or rehabilitation, the grantee must consult with affected tribes and/or descendant communities and comply with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (25 U.S.C. 3001-3013), State law, and/or local ordinance (e.g., State unmarked burial law).
            (ii) Farmland. Project activities must not result in the conversion of unique, prime, or locally significant agricultural properties to urban uses.
            (iii) Airport zones. Projects are not permitted within the runway protection zones of civilian airports, or the clear zones or accident potential zones of military airfields.
            (iv) Coastal Barrier Resource System. No projects may be assisted in Coastal Barrier Resource System (CBRS) units. CBRS units are mapped and available from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
            (v) Coastal zone management. Development must be consistent with the appropriate State coastal zone management plan. Plans are available from the local coastal zone management agency.
            (vi) Floodplains. Except as modified below, definitions for terms used below can be found at 24 CFR part 55.
            (A) Construction and other activities in the 100-year floodplain are to be avoided when practicable. If there are no practicable alternatives to new construction or substantial improvement in the 100-year floodplain, the structure must be elevated at least to the base flood elevation (BFE) or floodproofed to one foot above the BFE. Elevated and floodproofed buildings must adhere to National Flood Insurance Program standards. The primary sources of floodplain data are Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS). When FEMA provides interim flood hazard data, such as Advisory Base Flood Elevations (ABFE) or preliminary maps or studies, the latest of these sources shall be used.

            (B) No HTF assistance may be approved with respect to:
            
            (1) Any action, other than functionally dependent uses, located in a floodway;
            (2) Any critical action located in a coastal high hazard area, 100- or 500-year floodplain; or
            (3) Any non-critical action located in a coastal high hazard area, unless the action is designed for location in a coastal high hazard area consistent with the FEMA National Flood Insurance Program requirements for V-Zones. “Any non-critical action in a coastal high hazard area, unless the action is reconstruction following destruction caused by a disaster and is designed for location in a coastal high hazard area consistent with the FEMA National Flood Insurance Program requirements for V-Zones.”
            (vii) Wetlands. No rehabilitation of existing properties that expands the footprint into a wetland is allowed. A wetland means those areas that are inundated by surface or ground water with a frequency sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances, does or would support a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life that requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas such as sloughs, potholes, wet meadows, river overflows, mud flats, and natural ponds. This definition includes those wetland areas separated from their natural supply of water as a result of activities such as the construction of structural flood protection methods or solid-fill road beds and activities such as mineral extraction and navigation improvements. This definition is independent of the definition of jurisdictional wetland used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.).
            (viii) Explosives and hazards. If the rehabilitation of the building increases the number of dwelling units, then the project must be in compliance with the standards for acceptable separation distance as set forth at 24 CFR part 51, subpart C.
            (ix) Contamination. All properties assisted with HTF funds must be free of hazardous materials, contamination, toxic chemicals and gases, and radioactive substances, where a hazard could affect the health and safety of occupants or conflict with the intended use of the property:
            (A) All proposed multifamily (more than four housing units) HTF project activities require a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA—ASTM). If the Phase I ESA identifies recognized environmental concerns (RECs), a Phase II (ESA-ASTM) will be required. ASTM reports shall be prepared in accordance with the most current ASTM standard. Single family housing does not require a Phase I ESA.
            (B) HTF projects must avoid sites located within 0.25 miles of a Superfund or CERCLIS (Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Information System) site or other contaminated site reported to Federal, State, or local authorities without a statement in writing from EPA or the appropriate State agency that there is no hazard that could affect the health and safety of the occupants or conflict with the intended utilization of the property.
            (x) Noise—(A) Internal noise levels. All activities will be developed to ensure an interior noise level of no more than45 decibels (dB).
            (B) [Reserved].
            (xi) Endangered species. (A) The grantee must avoid all actions that could jeopardize the continued existence of any species designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or National Marine Fisheries Service as endangered or threatened.
            (B) The grantee must avoid all actions that adversely modify the critical habitat of such species.
            (xii) Wild and scenic rivers. The grantee must avoid activities that are inconsistent with conservation easements, land-use protections, and restrictions adjacent to wild and scenic rivers, as designated/listed by the Departments of Agriculture and Interior. Maps for the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System are available at the governing departments.
            (xiii) Safe drinking water. Projects with a potable water system must use only lead-free pipes, solder, and flux.
            
            (xiv) Sole-source aquifers. Project activities should avoid sites and activities that have the potential to contaminate sole source aquifer areas (SSAs). The EPA defines a sole or principal source aquifer as an aquifer that supplies at least 50 percent of the drinking water consumed in the area overlying the aquifer. If the project overlies an SSA, the EPA must review the project. The EPA review is designed to reduce the risk of ground water contamination, which could pose a health hazard to those who use it.
            (3) Acquisition projects environmental requirements. (i)(A) Existing housing that is acquired with HTF funds, and has been newly constructed or rehabilitated less than 12 months before the commitment of HTF funds must meet the property standards at paragraph (f)(1) of this section.
            (B) All other existing housing that is acquired with HTF assistance must meet the property standards requirements of paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
            (ii) If under paragraph (f)(3)(i)(A) or paragraph (B) of this section, the property does not meet these standards, with the exception of the noise standards in paragraph (f)(2) of this section, HTF funds cannot be used to acquire the property.
            (4) Manufactured housing environmental requirements. Manufactured housing is subject to the environmental standards in paragraph (f)(1) of this section for new construction or paragraph (f)(2) of this section for rehabilitation, as applicable. If an existing property does not meet these standards, HTF funds cannot be used to acquire the property unless it is rehabilitated to meet the standards in paragraph (f)(2), as applicable, with the exception of noise standards in paragraph (f)(2)(x).
            [80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 92636, Dec. 20, 2016]
          
          
            § 93.302
            Qualification as affordable housing: rental housing.
            (a) Eligible tenants. The HTF-assisted units in a rental housing project must be occupied by households who are eligible families in accordance with the income targeting requirements in § 93.250.
            (b) Rent limitations—(1)(i) Extremely low-income tenants. The HTF rent plus utilities of an extremely low-income tenant shall not exceed the greater of 30 percent of the federal poverty line or 30 percent of the income of a family whose annual income equals 30 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for the number of bedrooms in the unit. HUD will publish the HTF rent limits on an annual basis.
            (ii) Very-low income tenants. The HTF rent plus utilities of a very low-income tenant shall not exceed 30 percent of the income of a family whose annual income equals 50 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for the number of bedrooms in the unit. HUD will publish the HTF rent limits on an annual basis.
            (2) If the unit receives Federal or State project-based rental subsidy, and the tenant pays as a contribution toward rent not more than 30 percent of the tenant's adjusted income, the maximum rent is the rent allowable under the Federal or State project-based rental subsidy program.
            (c) Initial rent schedule and utility allowance. (1) The grantee must establish maximum monthly allowances for utilities and services (excluding telephone, television, and Internet service).
            (2) The grantee must annually review and approve rents proposed by the owner for HTF units. For all units for which the tenant is paying utilities, the grantee must ensure that the rents do not exceed the maximum rent minus the monthly allowances for utilities.
            (d) Periods of affordability. (1) HTF-assisted units must meet the affordability requirements for not less than 30 years, beginning after project completion. The grantee may impose longer periods.

            (2) The affordability requirements apply without regard to the term of any loan or mortgage, repayment of the HTF investment, or the transfer of ownership. They must be imposed by a deed restriction, covenant running with the land, an agreement restricting the use of the property, or other mechanisms approved by HUD under which the grantee and beneficiaries have the right to require specific performance, except that the affordability restrictions may terminate upon foreclosure or transfer in lieu of foreclosure. The affordability requirements must be recorded in accordance with State recordation laws.
            (3) The grantee may use purchase options, rights of first refusal, or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing before foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure to preserve affordability.
            (4) The affordability restrictions shall be revived according to the original terms if, during the original affordability period, the owner of record before the foreclosure, or deed in lieu of foreclosure, or any entity that includes the former owner or those with whom the former owner has or had family or business ties, obtains an ownership interest in the project or property.
            (5) The termination of the restrictions on the project does not terminate the grantee's repayment obligation under § 93.403.
            (e) Tenant income. (1) The income of each tenant must be determined initially in accordance with § 93.151. In addition, in each year during the period of affordability, the project owner must re-examine each tenant's annual income in accordance with one of the options in § 93.151(c) selected by the grantee.
            (2) An owner who re-examines a tenant's annual income through a statement and certification in accordance with § 93.151(a)(1)(iii) must examine the source documentation of the income of each tenant every 6th year of the affordability period, except that, for units that receive project-based assistance, the owner must re-examine the tenant's annual income in accordance with the project-based assistance rules. Otherwise, an owner who accepts the tenant's statement and certification in accordance with § 93.151(a)(1)(iii) is not required to examine the income of tenants, unless there is evidence that the tenant's written statement failed to completely and accurately state information about the family's size or income.
            (f) Over-income tenants. HTF-assisted units continue to qualify as affordable housing despite a temporary noncompliance caused by increases in the incomes of existing tenants if actions satisfactory to HUD are being taken to ensure that all vacancies are filled in accordance with this section until the noncompliance is corrected.
            (g) Fixed and floating HTF units. In a project containing HTF-assisted and other units, the grantee may designate fixed or floating HTF units. This designation must be made at the time of project commitment in the written agreement between the grantee and the recipient, and the HTF units must be identified not later than the time of project completion. Fixed units must remain the same throughout the period of affordability. Floating units must be changed to maintain conformity with the requirements of this section during the period of affordability so that the total number of housing units meeting the requirements of this section remains the same, and each substituted unit must be comparable in terms of size, features, and number of bedrooms to the originally designated HTF-assisted unit.
            (h) Tenant selection. The tenants must be selected in accordance with § 93.303.
            (i) Onsite inspections and financial oversight. See § 93.404(d) for the grantee's ongoing responsibilities for onsite inspections and financial oversight.
          
          
            § 93.303
            Tenant protections and selection.
            (a) Lease. There must be a written lease between the tenant and the owner of rental housing assisted with HTF funds that is for a period of not less than one year, unless by mutual agreement between the tenant and the owner a shorter period is specified. The lease must incorporate the VAWA lease term/addendum required under § 93.356(d).
            (b) Prohibited lease terms. The lease may not contain any of the following provisions:
            (1) Agreement to be sued. Agreement by the tenant to be sued, to admit guilt, or to a judgment in favor of the owner in a lawsuit brought in connection with the lease;
            (2) Treatment of property. Agreement by the tenant that the owner may take, hold, or sell personal property of household members without notice to the tenant and a court decision on the rights of the parties. This prohibition, however, does not apply to an agreement by the tenant concerning disposition of personal property remaining in the housing unit after the tenant has moved out of the unit. The owner may dispose of this personal property in accordance with State law;
            (3) Excusing owner from responsibility. Agreement by the tenant not to hold the owner or the owner's agents legally responsible for any action or failure to act, whether intentional or negligent;
            (4) Waiver of notice. Agreement of the tenant that the owner may institute a lawsuit without notice to the tenant;
            (5) Waiver of legal proceedings. Agreement by the tenant that the owner may evict the tenant or household members without instituting a civil court proceeding in which the tenant has the opportunity to present a defense, or before a court decision on the rights of the parties;
            (6) Waiver of a jury trial. Agreement by the tenant to waive any right to a trial by jury;
            (7) Waiver of right to appeal court decision. Agreement by the tenant to waive the tenant's right to appeal, or to otherwise challenge in court, a court decision in connection with the lease;
            (8) Tenant chargeable with cost of legal actions regardless of outcome. Agreement by the tenant to pay attorney's fees or other legal costs even if the tenant wins in a court proceeding by the owner against the tenant. The tenant, however, may be obligated to pay costs if the tenant loses; and
            (9) Mandatory supportive services. Agreement by the tenant to accept supportive services that are offered.
            (c) Termination of tenancy. An owner may not terminate the tenancy or refuse to renew the lease of a tenant of rental housing assisted with HTF funds, except for serious or repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease; for violation of applicable Federal, State, or local law; or for other good cause. Good cause does not include an increase in the tenant's income. To terminate or refuse to renew tenancy, the owner must serve written notice upon the tenant specifying the grounds for the action and providing a specific period for vacating that is consistent with State or local law.
            (d) Tenant selection. An owner of rental housing assisted with HTF funds must comply with the affirmative marketing requirements established by the grantee pursuant to § 93.350. The owner must adopt and follow written tenant selection policies and criteria that:
            (1) Limit the housing to income-eligible families;

            (2) Are reasonably related to the applicants' ability to perform the obligations of the lease (i.e., to pay the rent, not to damage the housing; not to interfere with the rights and quiet enjoyment of other tenants);
            (3) Limit eligibility or give a preference to a particular segment of the population if permitted in its written agreement with the grantee (and only if the limitation or preference is described in the grantee's consolidated plan).

            (i) Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination requirements in § 93.350. A limitation or preference does not violate nondiscrimination requirements if the housing also receives funding from a Federal program that limits eligibility to a particular segment of the population (e.g., the Housing Opportunity for Persons With AIDS program under 24 CFR part 574), and the limit or preference is tailored to serve that segment of the population.
            (ii) If a project does not receive funding from a Federal program that limits eligibility to a particular segment of the population, the project may have a limitation or preference for persons with disabilities who need services offered at a project only if:
            (A) The limitation or preference is limited to the population of families (including individuals) with disabilities that significantly interfere with their ability to obtain and maintain housing;
            (B) Such families will not be able to obtain or maintain themselves in housing without appropriate supportive services; and

            (C) Such services cannot be provided in a nonsegregated setting. The families must not be required to accept the services offered at the project. In advertising the project, the owner may advertise the project as offering services for a particular type of disability; however, the project must be open to all otherwise eligible persons with disabilities who may benefit from the services provided in the project.
            (4) Do not exclude an applicant with a voucher under the Section 8 Tenant-Based Assistance: Housing Choice Voucher program (24 CFR part 982) or an applicant participating in a HOME tenant-based rental assistance program (24 CFR part 92) because of the status of the prospective tenant as a holder of such voucher or comparable HOME tenant-based assistance document.
            (5) Provide for the selection of tenants from a written waiting list in the chronological order of their application, insofar as is practicable;
            (6) Give prompt written notification to any rejected applicant of the grounds for any rejection; and
            (7) Comply with the VAWA requirements prescribed in § 93.356.
            [80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 80805, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 93.304
            Qualification as affordable housing: Homeownership.
            (a) Homeownership activities. Housing that is for purchase by a first-time homebuyer must meet the affordability requirements of this section.
            (b) Single family housing. The housing must be single-family housing, as defined at § 93.2.
            (c) Modest housing. The housing must be modest housing, in accordance with § 93.305.
            (d) First-time homebuyer and income requirements. The housing must be acquired by a first-time homebuyer whose family qualifies as an income-eligible family in accordance with § 93.251 and the housing must be the principal residence of the family throughout the period described in paragraph (e) of this section. In determining the income eligibility of the family, the grantee must include the income of all persons living in the housing. Before purchasing the housing, the family must have completed a program of independent financial education and homeownership counseling from an eligible organization that has been certified in accordance with section 106(e) of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701x (e)).
            (e) Period of affordability. The HTF-assisted housing must meet the affordability requirements for not less than 30 years.
            (f) Resale or recapture requirements. The grantee must establish the resale or recapture requirements that comply with the standards of § 93.305 and set forth the requirements in its consolidated plan. HUD must determine that they are appropriate and must specifically approve them in writing.
            (g) Special considerations for single family properties with more than one unit. (1) If the HTF funds are used only to assist an income-eligible homebuyer in acquiring one unit in a single family property containing more than one unit and the assisted unit will be the principal residence of the homebuyer, the affordability requirements of this section apply only to the assisted unit.
            (2) If HTF funds are also used to assist the income-eligible homebuyer in acquiring one or more of the rental units in the single family property, the affordability requirements of § 93.302 apply to assisted rental units, except that the grantee must impose resale restrictions on all assisted units (owner-occupied and rental units) in the single-family housing. The affordability requirements on all assisted units continue for the period of affordability. If HTF funds are used to assist only the rental units in such a property, then the requirements of § 93.302 would apply and the owner-occupied unit would not be subject to the income targeting or affordability provisions of this section.
            (h) Lease-purchase. (1) HTF funds may be used to assist homebuyers through lease-purchase programs for existing housing and for housing to be constructed. The housing must be purchased by an eligible homebuyer within 36 months of signing the lease-purchase agreement. The homebuyer must qualify as an income-eligible family at the time the lease-purchase agreement is signed.
            (2) If HTF funds are used to acquire housing that will be resold to a homebuyer through a lease-purchase program, the HTF affordability requirements for rental housing in § 93.302 shall apply if the housing is not transferred to an eligible homebuyer within 42 months after project completion.
            (i) Contract to purchase. If HTF funds are used to assist a homebuyer who has entered into a contract to purchase housing to be constructed, the homebuyer must qualify as an income-eligible family at the time the contract is signed.
            (j) If there is no ratified sales contract with an eligible homebuyer for the housing within 9 months of the date of completion of construction or rehabilitation, the housing must be rented to an eligible tenant in accordance with § 93.301.
            (k) Preserving affordability. (1) To preserve the affordability of housing that was previously assisted with HTF funds and subject to the requirements of this section, a grantee may use additional HTF funds to acquire the housing through a purchase option, right of first refusal, or other preemptive right before foreclosure, or to acquire the housing at the foreclosure sale, undertake any necessary rehabilitation, and provide assistance to another first-time homebuyer. The housing must be sold to a new eligible homebuyer in accordance with the requirements of this section. Additional HTF funds may not be used if the mortgage in default was funded with HTF funds.
            (2) The total amount of original and additional HTF assistance may not exceed the maximum per-unit development subsidy amount established pursuant to § 93.300. As an alternative to charging the cost to the HTF program under § 93.201, the grantee may charge the cost to the HTF program under § 93.302 as a reasonable administrative cost of its HTF program, so that the additional HTF funds for the housing are not subject to the maximum per-unit subsidy amount.
            (l) Agreements with lending institutions. (1) The grantee may provide homeownership assistance through written agreements with for-profit or nonprofit lending institutions that are providing the first mortgage loan to a family. The grantee must independently verify that the family is income-eligible and meets the definition of “first-time homebuyer,” and must inspect the housing for compliance with the applicable property standards.

            (2) No fees may be charged to the family for the HTF homeownership assistance (e.g., origination fees or points, processing fees, inspection fees). The grantee must determine that the fees and other amounts charged to the family by the lender for the first mortgage financing are reasonable. Reasonable administrative costs of the HTF homeownership assistance can be charged to the HTF program as a project cost. If the grantee requires lenders to pay a fee to participate in the HTF program, the fee is program income to the HTF program.
            (m) Written policies. The grantee must have and follow written policies for:
            (1) Underwriting standards for homeownership assistance that examine the family's housing debt, overall debt, income, and ability to maintain the housing;
            (2) Anti-predatory lending; and
            (3) Refinancing loans to which HTF loans are subordinated to ensure that the terms of the new loan are reasonable.
          
          
            § 93.305
            Qualification as affordable housing: modest housing requirements for homeownership; resale or recapture requirements.
            (a) Housing that is for acquisition by a family pursuant to § 93.304 must be modest housing.

            (1) The housing must be modest housing as follows: The housing has a purchase price for the type of single family housing that does not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area for newly constructed or standard housing. The grantee must use the HTF affordable homeownership limits provided by HUD for newly constructed housing and for existing housing. HUD will provide limits for affordable newly constructed housing based on 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area using Federal Housing Administration (FHA) single family mortgage program data for newly constructed housing, with a minimum limit based on 95 percent of the U.S. median purchase price for new construction for nonmetropolitan areas. HUD will provide limits for affordable existing housing based on 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area using FHA single family mortgage program data for existing housing data and other appropriate data that are available nation-wide for sales of existing housing, with a minimum limit based on 95 percent of the state-wide nonmetropolitan area median purchase price using these data. For States with no non-metropolitan areas, the minimum purchase price is defined as the lesser of the State non-metro or the United States non-metro median.
            (2) In lieu of the limits provided by HUD, the grantee may determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price for single family housing in the jurisdiction annually, as follows: The grantee must set forth the price for different types of single family housing for the jurisdiction. The grantee may determine separate limits for existing housing and newly constructed housing. For housing located outside of metropolitan areas, a grantee may aggregate sales data from more than one county, if the counties are contiguous and similarly situated. The following information must be included in the annual action plan of the consolidated plan submitted to HUD for review and updated in each action plan:
            (i) The 95 percent of median area purchase price must be established in accordance with a market analysis that ensured that a sufficient number of recent housing sales are included in the survey.
            (ii) Sales must cover the requisite number of months based on volume: For 500 or more sales per month, a one- month reporting period; for 250 through 499 sales per month, a 2-month reporting period; for less than 250 sales per month, at least a 3-month reporting period. The data must be listed in ascending order of sales price.
            (iii) The address of the listed properties must include the location within the grantee. Lot, square, and subdivision data may be substituted for the street address.
            (iv) The housing sales data must reflect all, or nearly all, of the one- family house sales in the entire area.
            (v) To determine the median, take the middle sale on the list if an odd number of sales, and if an even number, take the higher of the middle numbers and consider it the median. After identifying the median sales price, the amount should be multiplied by 0.95 to determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price.
            (b) Resale or recapture requirements. The grantee must establish the resale or recapture requirements that comply with the standards of this section and set forth the requirements in its consolidated plan. The HTF-assisted housing must meet the affordability requirements for not less than 30 years if resale restrictions are used. If recapture restrictions are used, the affordability periods are based on the amount of HTF funds per unit as follows:
            
              
                Homeownershipassistance HTF amount per-unit
                
                Minimum period of affordability in years
              
              
                Under $30,000
                10
              
              
                $30,000-$50,000
                20
              
              
                Over $50,000
                30
              
            
            (1) Resale. Resale requirements must ensure, if the housing does not continue to be the principal residence of the family for the duration of the period of affordability, that the housing is made available for subsequent purchase only to a buyer whose family qualifies as a very low-income family and will use the property as the family's principal residence. The resale requirement must also ensure that the price at resale provides the original HTF-assisted owner a fair return on investment (including the homeowner's investment and any capital improvement) and ensure that the housing will remain affordable to a reasonable range of income-eligible homebuyers. The grantee must specifically define “fair return on investment” and “affordability to a reasonable range of very low-income homebuyers,” and specifically address how it will make the housing affordable to an income eligible homebuyer in the event that the resale price necessary to provide fair return is not affordable to the subsequent buyer. Deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, or other mechanisms approved by HUD must be used as the mechanism to impose the resale requirements. The affordability restrictions may terminate upon occurrence of any of the following termination events: foreclosure, transfer in lieu of foreclosure, or assignment of an FHA insured mortgage to HUD. The grantee may use purchase options, rights of first refusal or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing before foreclosure to preserve affordability. The affordability restrictions shall be revived according to the original terms if, during the original affordability period, the owner of record before the termination event, obtains an ownership interest in the housing.
            (2) Recapture. (i) Recapture provisions must ensure that the grantee recoups all or a portion of the HTF assistance to the homebuyers, if the housing does not continue to be the principal residence of the family for the duration of the period of affordability. The grantee may structure its recapture provisions based on its program design and market conditions. Recapture provisions may permit the subsequent homebuyer to assume the HTF assistance (subject to the HTF requirements for the remainder of the period of affordability) if the subsequent homebuyer is income-eligible, and no additional HTF assistance is provided.
            (ii) The following options for recapture requirements are acceptable to HUD. The grantee may adopt, modify, or develop its own recapture requirements for HUD approval. In establishing its recapture requirements, the grantee is subject to the limitation that, when the recapture requirement is triggered by a sale (voluntary or involuntary) of the housing unit, the amount recaptured cannot exceed the net proceeds, if any. The net proceeds are the sales price minus superior loan repayment (other than HTF funds) and any closing costs.
            (A) Recapture entire amount. The grantee may recapture the entire amount of the HTF assistance from the homeowner.
            (B) Reduction during affordability period. The grantee may reduce the HTF assistance amount to be recaptured on a prorata basis for the time the homeowner has owned and occupied the housing measured against the required affordability period.
            (C) Shared net proceeds. If the net proceeds are not sufficient to recapture the full HTF assistance (or a reduced amount as provided for in this section) plus enable the homeowner to recover the amount of the homeowner's downpayment and any capital improvement investment made by the owner since purchase, the grantee may share the net proceeds. The net proceeds are the sales price minus loan repayment (other than HTF funds) and closing costs. The net proceeds may be divided proportionally as set forth in the following mathematical formulas:
            
              ER30JA15.010
            
            (D) Owner investment returned first. The grantee may permit the homebuyer to recover the homebuyer's entire investment (downpayment and capital improvements made by the owner since purchase) before recapturing the HTF assistance.
            (E) Amount subject to recapture. The HTF assistance that is subject to recapture is based on the amount of HTF assistance that enabled the homebuyer to buy the dwelling unit. This includes any HTF assistance that reduced the purchase price from fair market value to an affordable price, but excludes the amount between the cost of producing the unit and the market value of the property (i.e., the development subsidy). The recaptured funds must be used to carry out HTF-eligible activities in accordance with the requirements of this part. If the HTF assistance is only used for the development subsidy and therefore not subject to recapture, the resale option must be used.
          
        
        
          
          Subpart H—Other Federal Requirements
          
            § 93.350
            Other federal requirements and nondiscrimination; affirmative marketing.
            (a) General. The Federal requirements set forth in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A, are applicable to participants in the HTF program. The requirements of this subpart include: nondiscrimination and equal opportunity; disclosure requirements; debarred, suspended, or ineligible contractors; drug-free work; and housing counseling.
            (b) Affirmative marketing. (1) Each grantee must adopt and follow affirmative marketing procedures and requirements for rental projects containing five or more HTF-assisted housing units and for homeownership assistance programs. Affirmative marketing steps consist of actions to provide information and otherwise attract eligible persons in the housing market area to the available housing without regard to race, color, national origin, sex, religion, familial status, or disability. If a grantee's written agreement with the project owner permits the rental housing project to limit tenant eligibility or to have a tenant preference in accordance with § 93.303(d)(3), the grantee must have affirmative marketing procedures and requirements that apply in the context of the limited/preferred tenant eligibility for the project.
            (2) The affirmative marketing requirements and procedures adopted must include:

            (i) Methods for informing the public, owners, and potential tenants about Federal fair housing laws and the grantee's affirmative marketing policy (e.g., the use of the Equal Housing Opportunity logotype or slogan in press releases and solicitations for owners, and written communication to fair housing and other groups);

            (ii) Requirements and practices the grantee and owner must adhere to in order to carry out the grantee's affirmative marketing procedures and requirements (e.g., use of commercial media, use of community contacts, use of the Equal Housing Opportunity logotype or slogan, and display of fair housing poster);

            (iii) Procedures to be used by the grantee and owners to inform and solicit applications from persons in the housing market area who are not likely to apply for the rental housing or homeownership assistance program without special outreach (e.g., through the use of community organizations, places of worship, employment centers, fair housing groups, or housing counseling agencies);
            (iv) Records that will be kept describing actions taken by the grantee and owners to affirmatively market rental housing units and homeownership assistance program and records to assess the results of these actions; and
            (v) A description of how the grantee will annually assess the success of affirmative marketing actions and what corrective actions will be taken where affirmative marketing requirements are not met.
            (3) A grantee that subgrants HTF funds to subgrantees must require each subgrantee to either follow the grantee's procedures and requirements or adopt its own affirmative marketing procedures and requirements that meet this section.
            [80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 90657, Dec. 14, 2016]
          
          
            § 93.351
            Lead-based paint.
            Housing assisted with HTF funds is subject to the regulations at 24 CFR part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, and R.
          
          
            § 93.352
            Displacement, relocation, and acquisition.
            (a) Minimizing displacement. Consistent with the other goals and objectives of this part, the grantee must ensure that it has taken all reasonable steps to minimize the displacement of persons (families, individuals, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms) as a result of a project assisted with HTF funds. To the extent feasible, displaced residential tenants must be provided a reasonable opportunity to lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable dwelling unit in the building/complex upon completion of the project.
            (b) Temporary relocation. The following policies cover residential tenants who will not be required to move permanently but who must relocate temporarily for the project. Such tenants must be provided:
            (1) Reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary relocation, including the cost of moving to and from the temporarily occupied housing and any increase in monthly rent/utility costs.
            (2) Appropriate advisory services, including reasonable advance written notice of:
            (i) The date and approximate duration of the temporary relocation;
            (ii) The location of the suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling to be made available for the temporary period;
            (iii) The terms and conditions under which the tenant may lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling in the building/complex upon completion of the project; and
            (iv) The provisions of paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
            (c) Relocation assistance for displaced persons—(1) General. A displaced person (defined in paragraph (c)(2) of this section) must be provided relocation assistance at the levels described in, and in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (URA) (42 U.S.C. 4201-4655) and 49 CFR part 24. A “displaced person” must be advised of his or her rights under the Fair Housing Act and, if the comparable replacement dwelling used to establish the amount of the replacement housing payment to be provided to a minority person is located in an area of minority concentration, the minority person also must be given, if possible, referrals to comparable and suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwellings not located in such areas.
            (2) Displaced person. (i) For purposes of this paragraph (c), the term “displaced person” means a person (family individual, business, nonprofit organization, or farm, including any corporation, partnership or association) that moves from real property or moves personal property from real property, permanently, as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for a project assisted with HTF funds. This includes any permanent, involuntary move for an assisted project, including any permanent move from the real property that is made:
            (A) After notice by the owner to move permanently from the property, if the move occurs on or after:
            (1) The date of the submission of an application to the grantee or HUD, if the applicant has site control and the application is later approved; or
            (2) The date the grantee approves the applicable site, if the applicant does not have site control at the time of the application; or
            (B) Before the date described in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A) of this section, if the grantee or HUD determines that the displacement resulted directly from acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for the project; or
            (C) By a tenant-occupant of a dwelling unit, if any one of the following three situations occurs:
            (1) The tenant moves after execution of the agreement covering the acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition and the move occurs before the tenant is provided written notice offering the tenant the opportunity to lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling in the same building/complex upon completion of the project under reasonable terms and conditions. Such reasonable terms and conditions must include a term of at least one year at a monthly rent and estimated average monthly utility costs that do not exceed the greater of:
            (i) The tenant's monthly rent before such agreement and estimated average monthly utility costs; or
            (ii) The total tenant payment, as determined under 24 CFR 5.628, if the tenant is low-income, or 30 percent of gross household income, if the tenant is not low-income;
            (2) The tenant is required to relocate temporarily, does not return to the building/complex, and either:
            (i) The tenant is not offered payment for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary relocation; or
            (ii) Other conditions of the temporary relocation are not reasonable; or
            (3) The tenant is required to move to another dwelling unit in the same building/complex but is not offered reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the move, or other conditions of the move are not reasonable.
            (ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, a person does not qualify as a “displaced person” if:
            (A) The person has been evicted for cause based upon a serious or repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease or occupancy agreement, violation of applicable Federal, State or local law, or other good cause, and the grantee determines that the eviction was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the obligation to provide relocation assistance. The effective date of any termination or refusal to renew must be preceded by at least 30 calendar days advance written notice to the tenant specifying the grounds for the action.

            (B) The person moved into the property after the submission of the application, but before signing a lease and commencing occupancy, was provided written notice of the project, its possible impact on the person (e.g., the person may be displaced, temporarily relocated, incur a rent increase), and the fact that the person would not qualify as a “displaced person” (or for any assistance under this section) as a result of the project;
            (C) The person is ineligible under 49 CFR 24.2(g)(2); or
            (D) HUD determines that the person was not displaced as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for the project.
            (iii) The grantee may, at any time, ask HUD to determine whether a displacement is or would be covered by this rule.
            (3) Initiation of negotiations. For purposes of determining the formula for computing replacement housing assistance to be provided under this paragraph (c) to a tenant displaced from a dwelling as a direct result of private-owner rehabilitation, demolition, or acquisition of the real property, the term “initiation of negotiations” means the execution of the agreement covering the acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition.
            (d) Optional relocation assistance. The grantee may provide relocation payments and other relocation assistance to families, individuals, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms displaced by a project assisted with HTF funds where the displacement is not subject to paragraph (c) of this section. The grantee may also provide relocation assistance to persons covered under paragraph (c) of this section beyond that required. For any such assistance that is not required by State or local law, the grantee must adopt a written policy available to the public that describes the optional relocation assistance that it has elected to furnish and provides for equal relocation assistance within each class of displaced persons.
            (e) Real property acquisition requirements. The acquisition of real property for a project is subject to the URA and the requirements of 49 CFR part 24, subpart B.
            (f) Appeals. A person who disagrees with the grantee's determination concerning whether the person qualifies as a displaced person, or the amount of relocation assistance for which the person may be eligible, may file a written appeal of that determination with the grantee.
          
          
            § 93.353
            Conflict of interest.
            (a) Applicability of 2 CFR 200.318. In the procurement of property and services by grantees and subgrantees, the conflict of interest provisions in 2 CFR 200.318 apply. In all cases not governed by 2 CFR 200.318, the provisions of this section apply.
            (b) Conflicts prohibited. No persons described in paragraph (c) of this section who exercise or have exercised any functions or responsibilities with respect to activities assisted with HTF funds or who are in a position to participate in a decision-making process or gain inside information with regard to these activities may obtain a financial interest or financial benefit from a HTF-assisted activity, or have a financial interest in any contract, subcontract, or agreement with respect to the HTF-assisted activity, or the proceeds from such activity, either for themselves or those with whom they have business or immediate family ties, during their tenure or for one year thereafter. Immediate family ties include (whether by blood, marriage, or adoption) the spouse, parent (including a stepparent), child (including a stepchild), brother, sister (including a stepbrother or stepsister), grandparent, grandchild, and in-laws of a covered person.
            (c) Persons covered. The conflict of interest provisions of paragraph (b) of this section apply to any person who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected official or appointed official of the grantee or subgrantee.
            (d) Exceptions: Threshold requirements. Upon the written request of the grantee, HUD may grant an exception to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section on a case-by-case basis when it determines that the exception will serve to further the purposes of the HTF and the effective and efficient administration of the grantee's program or project. An exception may be considered only after the grantee has provided the following:
            (1) A disclosure of the nature of the conflict, accompanied by an assurance that there has been public disclosure of the conflict and a description of how the public disclosure was made; and
            (2) An opinion of the grantee's attorney that the interest for which the exception is sought would not violate State or local law.
            (e) Factors to be considered for exceptions. In determining whether to grant a requested exception after the grantee has satisfactorily met the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section, HUD will consider the cumulative effect of the following factors, where applicable:
            (1) Whether the exception would provide a significant cost benefit or an essential degree of expertise to the program or project which would otherwise not be available;
            (2) Whether the person affected is a member of a group or class of income eligible persons intended to be the beneficiaries of the assisted activity, and the exception will permit such person to receive generally the same interests or benefits as are being made available or provided to the group or class;
            (3) Whether the affected person has withdrawn from his or her functions or responsibilities, or the decisionmaking process with respect to the specific assisted activity in question;
            (4) Whether the interest or benefit was present before the affected person was in a position as described in paragraph (c) of this section;
            (5) Whether undue hardship will result either to the grantee or the person affected when weighed against the public interest served by avoiding the prohibited conflict; and
            (6) Any other relevant considerations.
            (f) Recipient—(1) General. No recipient assisted with HTF funds (or officer, employee, agent, elected or appointed official, or consultant of recipient or immediate family member or immediate family member of an officer, employee, agent, elected or appointed official, or consultant of a recipient) whether private, for-profit or nonprofit, may occupy a HTF-assisted affordable housing unit in a project during the required period of affordability specified in § 93.302(e) or § 93.304. This provision does not apply to an employee or agent of the recipient who occupies a housing unit as the project manager or maintenance worker.
            (2) Exceptions. Upon written request of a recipient, the grantee (or subgrantee, if authorized by the grantee) may grant an exception to the provisions of paragraph (f)(1) of this section on a case-by-case basis when it determines that the exception will serve to further the purposes of the HTF program and the effective and efficient administration of the recipient's HTF-assisted project. In determining whether to grant a requested exception, the grantee shall consider the following factors:
            (i) Whether the person receiving the benefit is a member of a group or class of low-income persons intended to be the beneficiaries of the assisted housing, and the exception will permit such person to receive generally the same interests or benefits as are being made available or provided to the group or class;
            (ii) Whether the person has withdrawn from his or her functions or responsibilities, or the decisionmaking process with respect to the specific assisted housing in question;

            (iii) Whether the tenant protection requirements of § 93.303 are being observed;
            
            (iv) Whether the affirmative marketing requirements of § 93.350 are being observed and followed; and
            (v) Any other factor relevant to the grantee's determination, including the timing of the requested exception.
          
          
            § 93.354
            Funding Accountability and Transparency Act.
            The HTF grant to the grantee and all assistance provided to subgrantees and recipients shall be considered a Federal award for purposes of the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 (31 U.S.C. 6101 note).
          
          
            § 93.355
            Eminent domain.
            No HTF funds may be used in conjunction with property taken by eminent domain, unless eminent domain is employed only for a public use, except that, public use shall not be construed to include economic development that primarily benefits any private entity.
          
          
            § 93.356
            VAWA requirements.
            (a) General. (1) The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) requirements set forth in 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, apply to all rental housing assisted with HTF funds, as provided in this section.
            (2) For the HTF program, the “covered housing provider,” as this term is used in HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, refers to:
            (i) The owner of HTF-assisted rental housing for the purposes of 24 CFR 5.2005(d)(1), (2), (3), and (4) and 5.2009(a); and
            (ii) The owner and the grantee for purposes of 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and 5.2007, except as otherwise provided in paragraph (f) of this section.
            (b) Notification requirements. The grantee must provide a notice and certification form that meet the requirements of 24 CFR 5.2005(a) to the owner of HTF-assisted rental housing. The owner of HTF-assisted rental housing must provide the notice and certification form described in 24 CFR 5.2005(a) to the applicant for a HTF-assisted unit at the time the applicant is admitted to an HTF-assisted unit, or denied admission to a HTF-assisted unit based on the owner's tenant selection policies and criteria. The owner of HTF-assisted rental housing must also provide the notice and certification form described in 24 CFR 5.2005 with any notification of eviction from a HTF-assisted unit.
            (c) Bifurcation of lease requirements. For purposes of this part, the requirements of 24 CFR 5.2009(b) do not apply. If a family who lives in a HTF-assisted rental unit separates under 24 CFR 5.2009(a), the remaining tenant(s) may remain in the HTF-assisted unit.
            (d) VAWA lease term/addendum. The grantee must develop a VAWA lease term/addendum to incorporate all requirements that apply to the owner or lease of HTF-assisted rental housing under 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, and this section, including the prohibited bases for eviction and restrictions on construing lease terms under 24 CFR 5.2005(b) and (c). This VAWA lease term/addendum must also provide that the tenant may terminate the lease without penalty if the grantee determines that the tenant has met the conditions for an emergency transfer under 24 CFR 5.2005(e).
            (e) Period of applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to the owner of the HTF-assisted rental housing for the duration of the affordability period.
            (f) Emergency transfer plan. The grantee must develop and implement an emergency transfer plan and must make the determination of whether a tenant qualifies for an emergency transfer under the plan. The plan must meet the requirements in 24 CFR 5.2005(e), where, for the purposes of § 5.2005(e)(7), the required policies must specify that for tenants who qualify for an emergency transfer and who wish to make an external emergency transfer when a safe unit is not immediately available, the grantee must provide a list of properties in the jurisdiction that include HTF-assisted units. The list must include the following information for each property: The property's address, contact information, the unit sizes (number of bedrooms) for the HTF-assisted units, and, to the extent known, any tenant preferences or eligibility restrictions for the HTF-assisted units. In addition, the grantee may:

            (1) Establish a preference under the grantee's HTF program for tenants who qualify for emergency transfers under 24 CFR 5.2005(e); and
            (2) Coordinate with victim service providers and advocates to develop the emergency transfer plan, make referrals, and facilitate emergency transfers to safe and available units.
            [81 FR 80805, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
        
        
          Subpart I—Program Administration
          
            § 93.400
            Housing Trust Fund (HTF) accounts.
            (a) General. HUD will establish an HTF United States Treasury account (HTF Treasury account) for each grantee. Each grantee may use either a separate HTF local account or a subsidiary account within its general fund (or other appropriate fund) as the HTF local account.
            (b) HTF Treasury account. The HTF Treasury account includes the annual grant and funds reallocated to the State by formula.
            (c) HTF local account. (1) The HTF local account includes deposits of HTF funds disbursed from the HTF Treasury account, any program income, and any repayments as required by § 93.403.
            (2) The HTF local account must be interest-bearing.
            (d) Reductions. HUD will reduce or recapture funds in the HTF account by the amount of:
            (1) Any fiscal year grant funds in the HTF Treasury account that are not committed within 24 months after the date of HUD's execution of the HTF grant agreement;
            (2) Any fiscal year grant funds in the HTF local account that are not expended within 5 years after the date of HUD's execution of the HTF grant agreement;
            (3) Any amounts pursuant to § 93.453; and
            (4) Amounts that the grantee fails to obtain and that were required to be reimbursed or returned under § 93.450.
          
          
            § 93.401
            HTF grant agreement.
            Allocated and reallocated funds will be made available pursuant to an HTF grant agreement.
          
          
            § 93.402
            Program disbursement and information system.
            (a) General. The HTF Treasury account is managed through a computerized disbursement and information system established by HUD. The system disburses HTF funds that are allocated or reallocated, and collects and reports information on the use of funds in the HTF Treasury account. The grantee must report on the receipt and use of all program income in HUD's computerized disbursement and information system. The grantee must develop and maintain a system to ensure that each recipient and subgrantee uses HTF funds in accordance with the requirements of this part and that any requirements or conditions under which the HTF funds were provided.
            (b) Project set-up. (1) After the grantee executes the HTF grant agreement, submits the applicable banking and security documents, and commits funds to a specific local project, the grantee shall identify (set up) specific activities (i.e., projects) in the disbursement and information system. Investments that require the set-up of projects in the system are the acquisition, new construction, or rehabilitation of housing, operating cost assistance, and operating cost assistance reserves. The grantee is required to enter complete project set-up information at the time of project set-up.
            (2) If the project set-up information is not completed within 20 calendar days of the date of the initial project set-up, the project may be canceled by the system. In addition, a project that has been committed in the system for 12 months without an initial disbursement of funds may be canceled by the system.
            (c) Disbursement of HTF Funds. (1) After complete project set-up information is entered into the disbursement and information system, HTF funds for the project may be drawn down from the HTF Treasury account by the grantee by electronic funds transfer. Any drawdown of funds in the HTF Treasury account is conditioned upon the provision of satisfactory information by the grantee about the project and compliance with other procedures, as specified by HUD.
            

            (2) Funds drawn from the HTF Treasury account are subject to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (31 U.S.C. 6501 et seq.) and regulations at 31 CFR part 205.
            (3) Funds in the HTF local account must be disbursed before requests are made for funds in the HTF Treasury account.
            (d) Project completion. (1) Complete project completion information must be entered into the disbursement and information system, or otherwise provided, within 120 calendar days of the date of the final project drawdown. If satisfactory project completion information is not provided, HUD may suspend further project set-ups or take other corrective actions.
            (2) Additional HTF funds for development-related costs may be committed to a project up to one year after project completion, but the amount of HTF funds in the project may not exceed the maximum per-unit development subsidy amount established pursuant to § 93.300.
            (e) Access by other participants. Access to the disbursement and information system by other entities participating in the HTF program will be governed by procedures established by HUD.
          
          
            § 93.403
            Program income and repayments.
            (a) Program income. Program income must be treated as HTF funds and must be used in accordance with the requirements of this part. Program income must be deposited in the grantee's HTF local account unless the grantee permits a subgrantee to retain the program income for additional HTF projects pursuant to the written agreement required by § 93.404(b). The grantee must report the program income received as well as the use of the program income in the disbursement and information system that HUD designates for the HTF.
            (b) Repayments. (1) Any HTF funds invested in housing that does not meet the affordability requirements for the period specified in § 93.302 or § 93.304, as applicable, must be repaid by the grantee in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
            (2) Any HTF funds invested in a project that is terminated before completion, either voluntarily or otherwise, must be repaid by the grantee, in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
            (3) HUD will instruct the grantee to either repay the funds to the HTF Treasury account or the local account. Generally, if the HTF funds were disbursed from the grantee's HTF Treasury account, they must be repaid to the HTF Treasury account. If the HTF funds were disbursed from the grantee's HTF local account, they must be repaid to the local account.
            (4) If the grantee is no longer a grantee in the HTF program when the repayment is made, the funds must be remitted to HUD and reallocated in accordance with § 93.54 of this part.
          
          
            § 93.404
            Grantee responsibilities; written agreements; onsite inspections; financial oversight.
            (a) Responsibilities. The grantee is responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of its HTF program, ensuring that HTF funds are used in accordance with all program requirements and written agreements, and taking appropriate action when performance problems arise. The use of subgrantees or contractors does not relieve the grantee of this responsibility. The performance and compliance of each contractor and subgrantee must be reviewed at least annually. The grantee must have and follow written policies, procedures, and systems, including a system for assessing risk of activities and projects and a system for monitoring entities consistent with this section, to ensure that the requirements of this part are met.
            (b) Executing a written agreement. Before disbursing any HTF funds to any entity, the grantee must enter into a written agreement with that entity. The written agreement must ensure compliance with the requirements of this part.
            (c) Provisions in written agreements. The contents of the agreement may vary depending upon the role the entity is asked to assume or the type of project undertaken. This section details basic requirements by role and the minimum provisions that must be included in a written agreement.
            
            (1) Subgrantee. The agreement must require the subgrantee to comply with the requirements applicable to the grantee under this part. The agreement between the grantee and the subgrantee must include:
            (i) Use of the HTF funds. An HTF subgrantee that is a unit of general local government must have a consolidated plan under 24 CFR part 91, and the written agreement must require that an HTF allocation plan to be part of the subgrantee's consolidated plan (see 24 CFR 91.220(l)(5)). The HTF allocation plan of an HTF subgrantee that is a State agency is included in the grantee's HTF allocation plan. The grantee may impose restrictions on the use of funds by the subgrantee, e.g., limit to rental projects. The written agreement must require that the selection of projects by eligible recipients will be in accordance with the HTF allocation plan. The agreement must describe the tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing the tasks (including a schedule for committing funds to projects), a budget, and the period of the agreement. These items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the grantee to effectively monitor performance under the agreement.
            (ii) Deadlines. The agreement must state the time requirements for the commitment and expenditure of HTF funds and specify that remaining funds will be reduced or recaptured by the grantee so that the grantee can meet its commitment and expenditure deadlines in § 93.400.
            (iii) Audit. The agreement must state that an audit of the subgrantee must be conducted at least annually, in accordance with § 93.406.
            (iv) Program income. The agreement must state if program income is to be remitted to the grantee or to be retained by the subgrantee for additional HTF eligible activities.
            (v) Uniform administrative requirements. The agreement must require the subgrantee to comply with the requirements of 2 CFR part 200, as described in § 93.405. The agreement must include the information in 2 CFR 200.331.
            (vi) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the subgrantee to carry out each project in compliance with all Federal laws and regulations described in §§ 93.350 through 93.356. The agreement must set forth all obligations the grantee imposes on the subgrantee in order to meet the VAWA requirements under § 93.356, including notice obligations and obligations under the emergency transfer plan.
            (vii) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the subgrantee's affirmative marketing responsibilities, in accordance with § 93.350.
            (viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that the subgrantee may not request disbursement of funds under the agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed. Program income must be disbursed before the subgrantee requests grant funds from the grantee.
            (ix) Reversion of assets. The agreement must specify that upon closeout of the subgrant agreement, the subgrantee must transfer to the grantee any HTF funds on hand and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of HTF funds.
            (x) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted in order to assist the grantee in meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
            (xi) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must specify remedies for breach of the provisions of the agreement. The agreement must specify that, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.338, suspension or termination may occur if the subgrantee materially fails to comply with any term of the agreement. The grantee may permit the agreement to be terminated in whole or in part, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.339.
            (xii) Written agreement. The agreement must require that before the subgrantee provides HTF funds to eligible recipients, first-time homebuyers, or contractors, the subgrantee must have a written agreement that meets the requirements of this section.
            (xiii) Duration of the agreement. The agreement must specify the period of performance of the agreement.
            (xiv) Fees. The agreement must prohibit the subgrantee from charging servicing, origination, or other fees for the costs of administering the HTF program, except that:
            (A) The subgrantee may charge owners of rental projects reasonable annual fees for compliance monitoring during the period of affordability. The fees must be based upon the average actual cost of performing the monitoring of HTF-assisted rental projects. The basis for determining the amount of the fee amount must be documented and the fee must be included in the costs of the project as part of the project underwriting;
            (B) The subgrantee may charge nominal application fees (although these fees are not an eligible HTF cost) to discourage frivolous applications. The amount of application fees must be appropriate to the type of application and may not create an undue impediment to an income-eligible family's, or other potential recipient's participation in the HTF program; and
            (C) The subgrantee may charge homebuyers a fee for housing counseling.
            (2) Eligible recipient. The agreement between the grantee and the eligible recipient selected for funding must include:
            (i) Use of the HTF funds. The agreement must describe the use of the HTF funds for the project, including the tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing the tasks and project (including the expenditure deadline), and a project budget. These items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the grantee to effectively monitor performance under the agreement. If the grantee is providing operating cost assistance, the written agreement must include the provisions required by § 93.201.
            (ii) Deadlines. The agreement must state the time requirements for the commitment and expenditure of HTF funds and specify that remaining funds will be reduced or recaptured.
            (iii) Audit. The agreement must specify that the recipient will submit to the grantee a cost certification performed by a certified public accountant for each project assisted with HTF funds. The agreement must specify that the recipient will submit to the grantee an annual audit performed on each project assisted with HTF funds, beginning the first year following the cost certification and with the final annual audit occurring the last year of the affordability period.
            (iv) Affordability. The agreement must specify the affordability period, require housing assisted with HTF funds to meet the affordability requirements of § 93.302 or § 93.304, as applicable, and must require repayment of the funds if the housing does not meet the affordability requirements for the specified time period. If the recipient is undertaking a rental project, the agreement must establish the initial rents and the procedures for rent increases, the number of HTF units, the size of the HTF units, the designation of the HTF units as fixed or floating, and the requirement to provide the address (e.g., street address and apartment number) of each HTF unit no later than the time of project completion. If the recipient is undertaking homeownership projects for sale to first-time homebuyers, in accordance with § 93.304, the agreement must establish the resale or recapture requirements that must be imposed on the housing, the sales price or the basis upon which the sales price will be determined, and the disposition of the sales proceeds.
            (v) Project requirements. The agreement must require the housing to meet the property standards in § 93.301 of this part, as applicable, and in accordance with the type of project assisted upon project completion. The agreement must also require owners of rental housing assisted with HTF funds to maintain the housing in compliance with § 93.301 of this part for the duration of the affordability period, and to comply with the requirements of § 93.303. The agreement may permit the recipient to limit eligibility or give a preference to a particular segment of the population, only if the grantee has described any such limited eligibility or preference in its consolidated plan; provided, however, that any limitation or preference cannot violate nondiscrimination requirements in § 93.350.
            (vi) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the eligible recipient to carry out each project in compliance with all Federal laws and regulations described in §§ 93.350 through 93.356. The agreement must set forth all obligations the grantee imposes on the recipient in order to meet the VAWA requirements under § 93.356, including notice obligations and obligations under the emergency transfer plan.
            (vii) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the recipient's affirmative marketing responsibilities, as enumerated by the grantee in accordance with § 93.350.
            (viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that the recipient may not request disbursement of funds under the agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed.
            (ix) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted to assist the grantee in meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements. The owner of rental housing must annually provide the grantee with information on rents and occupancy of HTF-assisted units to demonstrate compliance with § 93.302. If the rental housing project has floating HTF units, the owner must provide the grantee with information regarding unit substitution and filling vacancies so that the project remains in compliance with HTF rental occupancy requirements. The agreement must specify the reporting requirements (including copies of financial statements) to enable the grantee to determine the financial condition (and continued financial viability) of the rental project.
            (x) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a means of enforcement of the affordable housing requirements by the grantee and the intended beneficiaries. This means of enforcement and the affordability requirements in § 93.302 must be imposed by deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, use restrictions, or other mechanisms approved by HUD under which the grantee and beneficiaries may require specific performance. In addition, the agreement must specify remedies for breach of the provisions of the agreement.
            (xi) Duration of the agreement. The agreement must specify the duration of the agreement. If the housing assisted under this agreement is rental housing, the agreement must be in effect through the affordability period required by the grantee under § 93.302. If the housing assisted under this agreement is homeownership housing, the agreement must be in effect at least until completion of the project and ownership by the first-time homebuyer.
            (xii) Fees. The agreement must prohibit project owners from charging origination fees, parking fees, laundry room access fees, and other fees; however, rental project owners may charge reasonable application fees to prospective tenants.
            (3) First-time homebuyer. When a grantee provides assistance to a homebuyer, the written agreement must include as a minimum:
            (i) Use of the HTF funds. The agreement must conform to the requirements in § 93.304, including the limitations on the value of the property, principal residence requirement, lease-purchase terms, if applicable, and the resale or recapture provisions. The agreement must specify the amount of HTF funds, the form of assistance (e.g., grant, amortizing loan, deferred payment loan), the use of the funds (e.g., downpayment, closing costs), and the time by which the housing must be acquired.
            (ii) Resale or recapture restrictions. The agreement must specify the resale or recapture restrictions established under § 93.304 for the specified time period.
            (iii) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a means of enforcement of the affordable housing requirements by the grantee. The means of enforcement and the affordability requirements in § 93.304 for resale restrictions must be imposed by deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, use restrictions, or other mechanisms approved by HUD under which the grantee may require specific performance. In addition, the agreement must specify remedies for breach of the provisions of the agreement.
            (d) Onsite inspections—(1) Project completion. The grantee must perform an onsite inspection of each HTF-assisted project at project completion to determine that the housing meets the property standards of § 93.301. The inspections must be in accordance with the inspection procedures that the grantee establishes to meet the inspection requirements of § 93.301.
            (2) Period of affordability. (i) During the period of affordability, the grantee must perform onsite inspections of HTF-assisted rental housing buildings to determine compliance with the ongoing property standards of § 93.301 and to verify the information submitted by the owners in accordance with the requirements of § 93.302. The inspections must be in accordance with the inspection procedures that the grantee establishes to meet the inspection requirements of § 93.301.
            (ii) The onsite inspections must occur 12 months after project completion and at least once every 3 years thereafter during the period of affordability.
            (iii) If there are observed deficiencies for any of the inspectable items established by the grantee, in accordance with the inspection requirements of § 93.301, a follow-up onsite inspection must occur within 12 months, or within a reasonable time frame established by the grantee depending on the severity of the deficiency, to verify that all observed deficiencies have been corrected. The grantee may establish a list of non-hazardous deficiencies for which correction can be verified by third party documentation rather than reinspection. The grantee must adopt a more frequent inspection schedule for properties that have been found to have health and safety violations. Life-threatening health and safety deficiencies must be corrected immediately, in accordance with § 93.301.
            (iv) The property owner must annually certify to the grantee that each building in the project is suitable for occupancy, taking into account State and local health, safety, and other applicable codes, ordinances, and requirements, and the ongoing property standards established by the grantee to meet the requirements of § 93.301.
            (v) Inspections must be based on a statistically valid sample of units appropriate for the size of the HTF-assisted project, as set forth by HUD through notice. The grantee must select the sample. For projects with one to four HTF-assisted units, the inspectable items (site, building exterior, building systems, and common areas) for each building with HTF-assisted units and 100 percent of the HTF-assisted dwelling units must be inspected.
            (e) Financial oversight. During the period of affordability, the grantee must examine regularly (at least annually) the financial condition of HTF-assisted rental projects with 10 or more HTF-assisted units to determine the continued financial viability of the housing and must take actions to correct problems.
            [80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 80805, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 93.405
            Applicability of uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audits.
            The requirements of 2 CFR part 200 apply to the grantees and subgrantees receiving HTF funds, except for the following provisions: §§ 200.307, 200.311, 300.328(b), 200.329, and 200.333. If there is a conflict between the definitions in 2 CFR part 200 and 24 CFR part 93, the definitions in part 93 govern.
          
          
            § 93.406
            Audits.
            (a) Audits of the grantee and subgrantees must be conducted in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart F. The use of HTF grant funds by the grantee must be audited not less than annually to ensure compliance with this part. Any financial statement submitted by the grantee to HUD must be reviewed by an independent certified public accountant, in accordance with Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services, which is issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.

            (b) The written agreement providing HTF assistance to the recipient must specify that the recipient will submit to the grantee a cost certification performed by a certified public accountant for each project assisted with HTF funds. The agreement must specify that the recipient will submit to the grantee an annual audit performed on each project assisted with HTF funds, beginning the first year following the cost certification and with the final annual audit occurring the last year of the affordability period.
          
          
            § 93.407
            Recordkeeping.
            (a) General. Each grantee must establish and maintain sufficient records to enable HUD to determine whether the grantee has met the requirements of this part. At a minimum, the following records are needed:
            (1) Program records. (i) The forms of HTF assistance used in the program.
            (ii) The subsidy layering guidelines adopted in accordance with § 93.300.
            (iii) If HTF funds are used for housing for first-time homebuyers, the procedures used for establishing 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area in accordance with § 93.305, as set forth in the consolidated plan.
            (iv) If HTF funds are used for acquisition of housing for homeownership, the resale guidelines established in accordance with § 93.304, as set forth in the consolidated plan.
            (v) Records documenting compliance with the 24-month commitment deadline of § 93.400(d)(l).
            (vi) Records documenting compliance with the 10 percent limitation on administrative and planning costs in accordance with § 93.202.
            (2) Project records. (i) A full description of each project assisted with HTF funds, including the location (address of each unit), form of HTF assistance, and the units assisted with HTF funds.
            (ii) The source and application of funds for each project, including supporting documentation, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.333 through 200.337, and records to document the eligibility and allowability of the project costs, including the documentation of the actual HTF-eligible development costs of each HTF-assisted unit (through allocation of costs, if permissible under § 93.200(c)) where HTF funds are used to assist less than all of the units in a multi-unit project.
            (iii) Records demonstrating that each rental housing or homeownership project meets the maximum per-unit subsidy amount established pursuant to § 93.300(a), and the subsidy layering and underwriting evaluation in accordance with § 93.300.
            (iv) Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each project meets the property standards of § 93.301 of this part at project completion. In addition, during the period of affordability, records for rental projects demonstrating compliance with the property standards, and financial reviews and actions pursuant to § 93.404(a).
            (v) Records demonstrating that each family is income-eligible.
            (vi) Records demonstrating that each rental housing project meets the affordability and income targeting requirements of § 93.302 for the required period. Records must be kept for each family assisted.
            (vii) Records demonstrating that each lease for an assisted rental housing unit complies with the tenant and participant protections of § 93.303. Records must be kept for each family assisted.
            (viii) Records demonstrating that the purchase price for each housing unit for a first-time homebuyer does not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area, in accordance with § 93.305.
            (ix) Records demonstrating that each housing unit for a first-time homebuyer meets the affordability requirements of § 93.304 for the required period.
            (x) Records demonstrating that a site and neighborhood standards review was conducted for each project that included new construction of rental housing assisted under this part, to determine that the site meets the requirements of § 93.150.
            (xi) Records (written agreements) demonstrating compliance with the written agreements requirements in § 93.404.
            (3) Financial records. (i) Records identifying the source and application of funds for each fiscal year, including the annual grant and any reallocation (identified by federal fiscal year).

            (ii) Records concerning the HTF Treasury account and local account required to be established and maintained by § 93.400, including deposits, disbursements, balances, supporting documentation, and any other information required by the program disbursement and information system established by HUD.
            
            (iii) Records identifying the source and application of program income and repayments.
            (iv) Records demonstrating adequate budget control, in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, including evidence of periodic account reconciliations.
            (4) Program administration records. (i) Written policies, procedures, and systems, including a system for assessing risk of activities and projects, and a system for monitoring entities consistent with this section, to ensure that the requirements of this part are met.
            (ii) Records demonstrating compliance with the applicable uniform administrative requirements required by § 93.405.
            (iii) Records documenting required inspections, monitoring reviews and audits, and the resolution of any findings or concerns.
            (5) Records concerning other Federal requirements. (i) Equal opportunity and fair housing records, as required under 24 CFR part 121.
            (A) Data on the extent to which each racial and ethnic group and single-headed households (by gender of household head) have applied for, participated in, or benefited from, any program or activity funded in whole or in part with HTF funds.
            (B) Documentation of actions undertaken to meet the requirements of 24 CFR part 135, which implements section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u).
            (ii) Records demonstrating compliance with the affirmative marketing procedures and requirements of § 93.350.
            (iii) Records demonstrating compliance with the lead-based paint requirements of 24 part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, M, and R.
            (iv) Records demonstrating compliance with requirements of § 93.352 regarding displacement, relocation, and real property acquisition.
            (v) Records supporting exceptions to the conflict-of-interest prohibition pursuant to § 93.353.
            (vi) Debarment and suspension certifications required by 24 CFR5.105(c) and 2 CFR part 2424.
            (vii) Records demonstrating compliance with § 93.354.
            (viii) Records demonstrating compliance with 2 CFR 200.321 regarding the grantee's activities related to minority business enterprise (MBE) and women's business enterprise (WBE).
            (ix) Documentation on emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and § 93.356 pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, including data on the outcomes of such requests.
            (b) Period of record retention. All records pertaining to each fiscal year of HTF funds must be retained in a secure location for the most recent 5-year period, except as provided below.
            (1) For rental housing projects, records may be retained for 5 years after the project completion date, except that records of individual tenant income verifications, project rents, and project inspections must be retained for the most recent 5-year period, until 5 years after the affordability period terminates.
            (2) For homeownership housing projects, records may be retained for 5 years after the project completion date, except for documents imposing resale or recapture restrictions that must be retained for 5 years after the affordability period terminates.
            (3) Written agreements must be retained for 5 years after the agreement terminates.
            (4) Records covering displacements and acquisitions must be retained for 5 years after the date by which all persons displaced from the property and all persons whose property is acquired for the project have received the final payment to which they are entitled, in accordance with § 93.352.
            (5) If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, monitoring, inspection, or other action has been started before the expiration of the required record retention period, records must be retained until completion of the action and resolution of all issues that arise from it, or until the end of the required period, whichever is later.
            (c) Access to records. (1) The grantee must provide citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties with reasonable access to records, consistent with applicable State and local laws regarding privacy and obligations of confidentiality.
            (2) HUD and the Comptroller General of the United States, and any of their representatives, have the right of access to any pertinent books, documents, papers, or other records of the grantee, subgrantees, and recipients, to make audits, examinations, excerpts, and transcripts.
            [80 FR 5220, Jan. 30, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 80805, Nov. 16, 2016]
          
          
            § 93.408
            Performance reports.
            Each grantee must develop and maintain a system to track the use of its HTF funds, and submit annual performance and management reports on its HTF program in accordance with 24 CFR 91.520. HUD will make the performance and management reports publicly available.
          
        
        
          Subpart J—Performance Reviews and Sanctions
          
            § 93.450
            Accountability of recipients.
            The grantee shall review each recipient to determine compliance with the requirements of this part and the terms of the written agreement in accordance with the grantee's policies, procedures, and systems established pursuant to § 93.404(a).
            (a) Misuse of funds—(1) Reimbursement requirement. If a recipient of HTF assistance is determined to have used HTF funds in a manner that is materially in violation of the requirements of this part or any requirements or conditions under which the funds were provided, the grantee must require that, within 12 months after the determination of such misuse, the recipient reimburse the grantee for such misused amounts and return to the grantee any such amounts that remain unused or uncommitted for use. The reimbursement is in addition to any other remedies that may be available under law.
            (2) Determination. The grantee or HUD may make the determination, provided that:
            (i) The grantee provides notification and opportunity for discretionary review to HUD; and
            (ii) HUD does not subsequently reverse the determination.
            (b) Reduction for failure to obtain return of misused funds. (1) If, in any year, a grantee fails to obtain reimbursement or return of the full amount required to be reimbursed or returned to the grantee during the year, the amount of the grant for the grantee for the succeeding year will be reduced by the amount by which the amounts required to be reimbursed or returned exceed the amount actually reimbursed or returned.
            (2) In any case in which a failure to obtain reimbursement or return occurs during a year immediately preceding a year in which HTF grants will not be made, the grantee shall pay to HUD, for reallocation among the other grantees, an amount equal to the amount of the reduction for the entity that would otherwise apply.
          
          
            § 93.451
            Performance reviews.
            (a) General. HUD will review the performance of each grantee in carrying out its responsibilities under this part whenever determined necessary by HUD, but at least annually. In conducting performance reviews, HUD will rely primarily on information obtained from the grantee's records and reports, findings from onsite monitoring, audit reports, and information generated from the disbursement and information system established by HUD. Where applicable, HUD may also consider relevant information pertaining to a grantee's performance gained from other sources, including citizen comments, complaint determinations, and litigation. Reviews to determine compliance with specific requirements of this part will be conducted as necessary, with or without prior notice to the grantee. Onsite comprehensive performance reviews under the standards in paragraph (b) of this section will be conducted after prior notice to the grantee.
            (b) Standards for comprehensive performance review. A grantee's performance will be comprehensively reviewed periodically, as prescribed by HUD, to determine whether the grantee has committed and expended the HTF funds as required by § 93.400; has met the requirements of this part, particularly eligible activities, income targeting, affordability, and property standards; has awarded the funds in accordance with its HTF allocation plan and requirements of this part; has reviewed its subgrantees and recipients to determine whether they have satisfied the requirements of this part and the terms of their written agreements; and has met its performance measures in its consolidated plan.
          
          
            § 93.452
            Corrective and remedial actions.
            (a) General. HUD will use the procedures in this section in conducting the performance review as provided in § 93.451 and in taking corrective and remedial actions.
            (b) Performance review. (1) If HUD determines preliminarily that the grantee has not met a requirement of this part, the grantee will be given notice of this determination and an opportunity to demonstrate, within the time prescribed by HUD (not to exceed 30 calendar days) and on the basis of substantial facts and data, that it has done so.
            (2) If the grantee fails to demonstrate to HUD's satisfaction that it has met the requirement, HUD will take corrective or remedial action in accordance with this section or § 93.453.
            (c) Corrective and remedial actions. Corrective or remedial actions for a performance deficiency (failure to meet a provision of this part) will be designed to prevent a continuation of the deficiency; mitigate, to the extent possible, its adverse effects or consequences; and prevent its recurrence.
            (1) HUD may instruct the grantee to submit and comply with proposals for action to correct, mitigate, and prevent a performance deficiency, including:
            (i) Preparing and following a schedule of actions for carrying out the affected activities, consisting of schedules, timetables, and milestones necessary to implement the affected activities;
            (ii) Establishing and following a management plan that assigns responsibilities for carrying out the remedial actions;
            (iii) Canceling or revising activities likely to be affected by the performance deficiency, before expending HTF funds for the activities;
            (iv) Reprogramming HTF funds that have not yet been expended from affected activities to other eligible activities;
            (v) Reimbursing its HTF account in any amount not used in accordance with the requirements of this part;
            (vi) Suspending disbursement of HTF funds for affected activities; and
            (vii) Establishing procedures to ensure compliance with HTF requirements;
            (2) HUD may also change the method of payment from an advance to reimbursement basis and may require supporting documentation to be submitted for HUD review for each payment request before payment is made; determine the grantee to be high risk and impose special conditions or restrictions on the allocation in accordance with 2 CFR 200.207 or 200.338; and take other remedies that may be legally available.
          
          
            § 93.453
            Notice and opportunity for hearing; sanctions.
            (a) If HUD finds after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing that a grantee has substantially failed to comply with any provision of this part, and until HUD is satisfied that there is no longer any such failure to comply:
            (1) HUD shall reduce the funds in the grantee's HTF account by the amount of any expenditures that were not in accordance with the requirements of this part or require the grantee to repay to HUD any amount of the HTF grant that was not used in accordance with the requirements of this part; and
            (2) HUD may do one or more of the following:
            (i) Prevent withdrawals from the grantee's HTF account for activities affected by the failure to comply;
            (ii) Restrict the grantee's activities under this part to activities or recipients not affected by the failure to comply;

            (iii) Remove the State from participation in allocations or reallocations of funds made available under §§ 93.50 through 93.54 of this part; or
            
            (iv) Terminate any HTF assistance to the grantee. HUD may, on due notice, suspend payments at any time after the issuance of a notice of opportunity for hearing pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, pending such hearing and a final decision, to the extent that HUD determines such action to be necessary to preclude the further expenditure of funds for activities affected by the failure to comply.
            (b) Proceedings. When HUD proposes to take action pursuant to this section, the respondent in the proceedings will be the grantee. Proceedings will be conducted in accordance with 24 CFR part 26.
          
        
      
      
        PARTS 94-99 [RESERVED]
      
      
         
        
          Appendixes A-C to Subtitle A [Reserved]
        
      
    
    
      
      Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
      
        24 CFR Subtitle B, Ch. I (4-1-19 Edition)
        Office of Asst. Secy., Equal Opportunity, HUD
        
          
            
            CHAPTER I—OFFICE OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
          
          
            SUBCHAPTER A—FAIR HOUSING
          
          Part
          Page
          
            100
            Discriminatory conduct under the Fair Housing Act
            671
            103
            Fair housing—complaint processing
            694
            105
            [Reserved]
            107
            Nondiscrimination and equal opportunity in housing under Executive Order 11063
            706
            108
            Compliance procedures for affirmative fair housing marketing
            712
            110
            Fair housing poster
            717
            115
            Certification and funding of State and local fair housing enforcement agencies
            719
            121
            Collection of data
            735
            125
            Fair housing initiatives program
            736
          
          
            SUBCHAPTER B—EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY
          
          
            135
            Economic opportunities for low- and very low-income persons
            741
            146
            Nondiscrimination on the basis of age in HUD programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance
            759
            180
            Consolidated HUD hearing procedures for civil rights matters
            766
            181-199
            [Reserved]
          
        
        
          
          SUBCHAPTER A—FAIR HOUSING
          
            Pt. 100
            PART 100—DISCRIMINATORY CONDUCT UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING ACT
            
              
                Subpart A—General
                Sec.
                100.1
                Authority.
                100.5
                Scope.
                100.7
                Liability for discriminatory housing practices.
                100.10
                Exemptions.
                100.20
                Definitions.
              
              
                Subpart B—Discriminatory Housing Practices
                100.50
                Real estate practices prohibited.
                100.60
                Unlawful refusal to sell or rent or to negotiate for the sale or rental.
                100.65
                Discrimination in terms, conditions and privileges and in services and facilities.
                100.70
                Other prohibited sale and rental conduct.
                100.75
                Discriminatory advertisements, statements and notices.
                100.80
                Discriminatory representations on the availability of dwellings.
                100.85
                Blockbusting.
                100.90
                Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.
              
              
                Subpart C—Discrimination in Residential Real Estate-Related Transactions
                100.110
                Discriminatory practices in residential real estate-related transactions.
                100.115
                Residential real estate-related transactions.
                100.120
                Discrimination in the making of loans and in the provision of other financial assistance.
                100.125
                Discrimination in the purchasing of loans.
                100.130
                Discrimination in the terms and conditions for making available loans or other financial assistance.
                100.135
                Unlawful practices in the selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
                100.140
                General rules.
                100.141
                Definitions.
                100.142
                Types of information.
                100.143
                Appropriate corrective action.
                100.144
                Scope of privilege.
                100.145
                Loss of privilege.
                100.146
                Limited use of privileged information.
                100.147
                Adjudication.
                100.148
                Effective date.
              
              
                Subpart D—Prohibition Against Discrimination Because of Handicap
                100.200
                Purpose.
                100.201
                Definitions.
                100.201a
                Incorporation by reference.
                100.202
                General prohibitions against discrimination because of handicap.
                100.203
                Reasonable modifications of existing premises.
                100.204
                Reasonable accommodations.
                100.205
                Design and construction requirements.
              
              
                Subpart E—Housing for Older Persons
                100.300
                Purpose.
                100.301
                Exemption.
                100.302
                State and Federal elderly housing programs.
                100.303
                62 or over housing.
                100.304
                Housing for persons who are 55 years of age or older.
                100.305
                80 percent occupancy.
                100.306
                Intent to operate as housing designed for persons who are 55 years of age or older.
                100.307
                Verification of occupancy.
                100.308
                Good faith defense against civil money damages.
              
              
                Subpart F—Interference, Coercion or Intimidation
                100.400
                Prohibited interference, coercion or intimidation.
              
              
                Subpart G—Discriminatory Effect
                100.500
                Discriminatory effect prohibited.
              
              
                Subpart H— Quid Pro Quo and Hostile Environment Harassment
                § 100.600
                Quid pro quo and hostile environment harassment.
              
            
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3620.
            
            
              Source:
              54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              Subpart A—General
              
                § 100.1
                Authority.
                This regulation is issued under the authority of the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to administer and enforce title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (the Fair Housing Act).
              
              
                
                § 100.5
                Scope.
                (a) It is the policy of the United States to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the United States. No person shall be subjected to discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin in the sale, rental, or advertising of dwellings, in the provision of brokerage services, or in the availability of residential real estate-related transactions.
                (b) This part provides the Department's interpretation of the coverage of the Fair Housing Act regarding discrimination related to the sale or rental of dwellings, the provision of services in connection therewith, and the availability of residential real estate-related transactions. The illustrations of unlawful housing discrimination in this part may be established by a practice's discriminatory effect, even if not motivated by discriminatory intent, consistent with the standards outlined in § 100.500.
                (c) Nothing in this part relieves persons participating in a Federal or Federally-assisted program or activity from other requirements applicable to buildings and dwellings.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 78 FR 11481, Feb. 15, 2013]
              
              
                § 100.7
                Liability for discriminatory housing practices.
                (a) Direct liability. (1) A person is directly liable for:
                (i) The person's own conduct that results in a discriminatory housing practice.
                (ii) Failing to take prompt action to correct and end a discriminatory housing practice by that person's employee or agent, where the person knew or should have known of the discriminatory conduct.
                (iii) Failing to take prompt action to correct and end a discriminatory housing practice by a third-party, where the person knew or should have known of the discriminatory conduct and had the power to correct it. The power to take prompt action to correct and end a discriminatory housing practice by a third-party depends upon the extent of the person's control or any other legal responsibility the person may have with respect to the conduct of such third-party.
                (2) For purposes of determining liability under paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (iii) of this section, prompt action to correct and end the discriminatory housing practice may not include any action that penalizes or harms the aggrieved person, such as eviction of the aggrieved person.
                (b) Vicarious liability. A person is vicariously liable for a discriminatory housing practice by the person's agent or employee, regardless of whether the person knew or should have known of the conduct that resulted in a discriminatory housing practice, consistent with agency law.
                [81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
              
                § 100.10
                Exemptions.
                (a) This part does not:
                (1) Prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted because of race, color, or national origin;
                (2) Prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which, incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members;
                (3) Limit the applicability of any reasonable local, State or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling; or

                (4) Prohibit conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
                
                (b) Nothing in this part regarding discrimination based on familial status applies with respect to housing for older persons as defined in subpart E of this part.
                (c) Nothing in this part, other than the prohibitions against discriminatory advertising, applies to:
                (1) The sale or rental of any single family house by an owner, provided the following conditions are met:
                (i) The owner does not own or have any interest in more than three single family houses at any one time.
                (ii) The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings. If the owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to such sale, the exemption in this paragraph (c)(1) of this section applies to only one such sale in any 24-month period.
                (2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.
              
              
                § 100.20
                Definitions.
                The terms Department, Fair Housing Act, and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
                
                  Aggrieved person includes any person who—
                (a) Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or
                (b) Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
                
                  Broker or Agent includes any person authorized to perform an action on behalf of another person regarding any matter related to the sale or rental of dwellings, including offers, solicitations or contracts and the administration of matters regarding such offers, solicitations or contracts or any residential real estate-related transactions.
                
                  Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 804, 805, 806, or 818 of the Fair Housing Act.
                
                  Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
                
                  Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with—
                (a) A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or
                (b) The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
                The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
                
                  Handicap is defined in § 100.201.
                
                  Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under title 11 U.S.C., receivers, and fiduciaries.
                
                  Person in the business of selling or renting dwellings means any person who:
                (a) Within the preceding twelve months, has participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
                (b) Within the preceding twelve months, has participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
                (c) Is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
                
                  State means any of the several states, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any of the territories and possessions of the United States.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]
              
            
            
              
              Subpart B—Discriminatory Housing Practices
              
                § 100.50
                Real estate practices prohibited.
                (a) This subpart provides the Department's interpretation of conduct that is unlawful housing discrimination under section 804 and section 806 of the Fair Housing Act. In general the prohibited actions are set forth under sections of this subpart which are most applicable to the discriminatory conduct described. However, an action illustrated in one section can constitute a violation under sections in the subpart. For example, the conduct described in § 100.60(b)(3) and (4) would constitute a violation of § 100.65(a) as well as § 100.60(a).
                (b) It shall be unlawful to:
                (1) Refuse to sell or rent a dwelling after a bona fide offer has been made, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin, or to discriminate in the sale or rental of a dwelling because of handicap.
                (2) Discriminate in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with sales or rentals, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Engage in any conduct relating to the provision of housing which otherwise makes unavailable or denies dwellings to persons because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
                (5) Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that a dwelling is not available for sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact available.
                (6) Engage in blockbusting practices in connection with the sale or rental of dwellings because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (7) Deny access to or membership or participation in, or to discriminate against any person in his or her access to or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' association, or other service organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting a dwelling or in the terms or conditions or membership or participation, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (c) The application of the Fair Housing Act with respect to persons with handicaps is discussed in subpart D of this part.
              
              
                § 100.60
                Unlawful refusal to sell or rent or to negotiate for the sale or rental.

                (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse to sell or rent a dwelling to a person who has made a bona fide offer, because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or to refuse to negotiate with a person for the sale or rental of a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin, or to discriminate against any person in the sale or rental of a dwelling because of handicap.
                (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Failing to accept or consider a bona fide offer because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (2) Refusing to sell or rent a dwelling to, or to negotiate for the sale or rental of a dwelling with, any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Imposing different sales prices or rental charges for the sale or rental of a dwelling upon any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.

                (4) Using different qualification criteria or applications, or sale or rental standards or procedures, such as income standards, application requirements, application fees, credit analysis or sale or rental approval procedures or other requirements, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (5) Evicting tenants because of their race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin or because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of a tenant's guest.
                (6) Conditioning the availability of a dwelling, including the price, qualification criteria, or standards or procedures for securing the dwelling, on a person's response to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (7) Subjecting a person to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that causes the person to vacate a dwelling or abandon efforts to secure the dwelling.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
              
                § 100.65
                Discrimination in terms, conditions and privileges and in services and facilities.
                (a) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, to impose different terms, conditions or privileges relating to the sale or rental of a dwelling or to deny or limit services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling.
                (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Using different provisions in leases or contracts of sale, such as those relating to rental charges, security deposits and the terms of a lease and those relating to down payment and closing requirements, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (2) Failing or delaying maintenance or repairs of sale or rental dwellings because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Failing to process an offer for the sale or rental of a dwelling or to communicate an offer accurately because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Limiting the use of privileges, services or facilities associated with a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of an owner, tenant or a person associated with him or her.
                (5) Denying or limiting services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling, because a person failed or refused to provide sexual favors.
                (6) Conditioning the terms, conditions, or privileges relating to the sale or rental of a dwelling, or denying or limiting the services or facilities in connection therewith, on a person's response to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (7) Subjecting a person to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that has the effect of imposing different terms, conditions, or privileges relating to the sale or rental of a dwelling or denying or limiting services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
              
                § 100.70
                Other prohibited sale and rental conduct.
                (a) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, to restrict or attempt to restrict the choices of a person by word or conduct in connection with seeking, negotiating for, buying or renting a dwelling so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct choices in a community, neighborhood or development.
                (b) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, to engage in any conduct relating to the provision of housing or of services and facilities in connection therewith that otherwise makes unavailable or denies dwellings to persons.

                (c) Prohibited actions under paragraph (a) of this section, which are generally referred to as unlawful steering practices, include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Discouraging any person from inspecting, purchasing or renting a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of persons in a community, neighborhood or development.
                (2) Discouraging the purchase or rental of a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, by exaggerating drawbacks or failing to inform any person of desirable features of a dwelling or of a community, neighborhood, or development.
                (3) Communicating to any prospective purchaser that he or she would not be comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a community, neighborhood or development because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Assigning any person to a particular section of a community, neighborhood or development, or to a particular floor of a building, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (d) Prohibited activities relating to dwellings under paragraph (b) of this section include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Discharging or taking other adverse action against an employee, broker or agent because he or she refused to participate in a discriminatory housing practice.
                (2) Employing codes or other devices to segregate or reject applicants, purchasers or renters, refusing to take or to show listings of dwellings in certain areas because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or refusing to deal with certain brokers or agents because they or one or more of their clients are of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Denying or delaying the processing of an application made by a purchaser or renter or refusing to approve such a person for occupancy in a cooperative or condominium dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Refusing to provide municipal services or property or hazard insurance for dwellings or providing such services or insurance differently because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (5) Enacting or implementing land-use rules, ordinances, policies, or procedures that restrict or deny housing opportunities or otherwise make unavailable or deny dwellings to persons because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 78 FR 11481, Feb. 15, 2013]
              
              
                § 100.75
                Discriminatory advertisements, statements and notices.
                (a) It shall be unlawful to make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling which indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
                (b) The prohibitions in this section shall apply to all written or oral notices or statements by a person engaged in the sale or rental of a dwelling. Written notices and statements include any applications, flyers, brochures, deeds, signs, banners, posters, billboards or any documents used with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling.
                (c) Discriminatory notices, statements and advertisements include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Using words, phrases, photographs, illustrations, symbols or forms which convey that dwellings are available or not available to a particular group of persons because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.

                (2) Expressing to agents, brokers, employees, prospective sellers or renters or any other persons a preference for or limitation on any purchaser or renter because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such persons.
                (3) Selecting media or locations for advertising the sale or rental of dwellings which deny particular segments of the housing market information about housing opportunities because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Refusing to publish advertising for the sale or rental of dwellings or requiring different charges or terms for such advertising because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (d) 24 CFR part 109 provides information to assist persons to advertise dwellings in a nondiscriminatory manner and describes the matters the Department will review in evaluating compliance with the Fair Housing Act and in investigating complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices involving advertising.
              
              
                § 100.80
                Discriminatory representations on the availability of dwellings.
                (a) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, to provide inaccurate or untrue information about the availability of dwellings for sale or rental.
                (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Indicating through words or conduct that a dwelling which is available for inspection, sale, or rental has been sold or rented, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (2) Representing that covenants or other deed, trust or lease provisions which purport to restrict the sale or rental of dwellings because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin preclude the sale of rental of a dwelling to a person.
                (3) Enforcing covenants or other deed, trust, or lease provisions which preclude the sale or rental of a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Limiting information, by word or conduct, regarding suitably priced dwellings available for inspection, sale or rental, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (5) Providing false or inaccurate information regarding the availability of a dwelling for sale or rental to any person, including testers, regardless of whether such person is actually seeking housing, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (6) Representing to an applicant that a unit is unavailable because of the applicant's response to a request for a sexual favor or other harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
              
                § 100.85
                Blockbusting.
                (a) It shall be unlawful, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or with a handicap.
                (b) In establishing a discriminatory housing practice under this section it is not necessary that there was in fact profit as long as profit was a factor for engaging in the blockbusting activity.
                (c) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Engaging, for profit, in conduct (including uninvited solicitations for listings) which conveys to a person that a neighborhood is undergoing or is about to undergo a change in the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of persons residing in it, in order to encourage the person to offer a dwelling for sale or rental.
                (2) Encouraging, for profit, any person to sell or rent a dwelling through assertions that the entry or prospective entry of persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin, or with handicaps, can or will result in undesirable consequences for the project, neighborhood or community, such as a lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other services or facilities.
              
              
                
                § 100.90
                Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.
                (a) It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Setting different fees for access to or membership in a multiple listing service because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (2) Denying or limiting benefits accruing to members in a real estate brokers' organization because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Imposing different standards or criteria for membership in a real estate sales or rental organization because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Establishing geographic boundaries or office location or residence requirements for access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (5) Conditioning access to brokerage services on a person's response to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (6) Subjecting a person to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that has the effect of discouraging or denying access to brokerage services.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
            
            
              Subpart C—Discrimination in Residential Real Estate-Related Transactions
              
                § 100.110
                Discriminatory practices in residential real estate-related transactions.
                (a) This subpart provides the Department's interpretation of the conduct that is unlawful housing discrimination under section 805 of the Fair Housing Act.
                (b) It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
              
              
                § 100.115
                Residential real estate-related transactions.
                The term residential real estate-related transactions means:
                (a) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance—
                (1) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or
                (2) Secured by residential real estate; or
                (b) The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
              
              
                § 100.120
                Discrimination in the making of loans and in the provision of other financial assistance.
                (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available loans or other financial assistance for a dwelling, or which is or is to be secured by a dwelling, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (b) Practices prohibited under this section in connection with a residential real estate-related transaction include, but are not limited to:

                (1) Failing or refusing to provide to any person information regarding the availability of loans or other financial assistance, application requirements, procedures or standards for the review and approval of loans or financial assistance, or providing information which is inaccurate or different from that provided others, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (2) Providing, failing to provide, or discouraging the receipt of loans or other financial assistance in a manner that discriminates in their denial rate or otherwise discriminates in their availability because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Conditioning the availability of a loan or other financial assistance on a person's response to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Subjecting a person to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that affects the availability of a loan or other financial assistance.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 78 FR 11481, Feb. 15, 2013; 81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
              
                § 100.125
                Discrimination in the purchasing of loans.
                (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity engaged in the purchasing of loans or other debts or securities which support the purchase, construction, improvement, repair or maintenance of a dwelling, or which are secured by residential real estate, to refuse to purchase such loans, debts, or securities, or to impose different terms or conditions for such purchases, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (b) Unlawful conduct under this section includes, but is not limited to:
                (1) Purchasing loans or other debts or securities which relate to, or which are secured by dwellings in certain communities or neighborhoods but not in others because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of persons in such neighborhoods or communities.
                (2) Pooling or packaging loans or other debts or securities which relate to, or which are secured by, dwellings differently because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Imposing or using different terms or conditions on the marketing or sale of securities issued on the basis of loans or other debts or securities which relate to, or which are secured by, dwellings because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (c) This section does not prevent consideration, in the purchasing of loans, of factors justified by business necessity, including requirements of Federal law, relating to a transaction's financial security or to protection against default or reduction of the value of the security. Thus, this provision would not preclude considerations employed in normal and prudent transactions, provided that no such factor may in any way relate to race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
              
              
                § 100.130
                Discrimination in the terms and conditions for making available loans or other financial assistance.
                (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity engaged in the making of loans or in the provision of other financial assistance relating to the purchase, construction, improvement, repair or maintenance of dwellings or which are secured by residential real estate to impose different terms or conditions for the availability of such loans or other financial assistance because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (b) Unlawful conduct under this section includes, but is not limited to:
                (1) Using different policies, practices or procedures in evaluating or in determining creditworthiness of any person in connection with the provision of any loan or other financial assistance for a dwelling or for any loan or other financial assistance which is secured by residential real estate because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.

                (2) Determining the type of loan or other financial assistance to be provided with respect to a dwelling, or fixing the amount, interest rate, cost, duration or other terms or conditions for a loan or other financial assistance for a dwelling or which is secured by residential real estate, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (3) Servicing of loans or other financial assistance with respect to dwellings in a manner that discriminates, or servicing of loans or other financial assistance which are secured by residential real estate in a manner that discriminates, or providing such loans or financial assistance with other terms or conditions that discriminate, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (4) Conditioning an aspect of a loan or other financial assistance to be provided with respect to a dwelling, or the terms or conditions thereof, on a person's response to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (5) Subjecting a person to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that has the effect of imposing different terms or conditions for the availability of such loans or other financial assistance.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 78 FR 11481, Feb. 15, 2013; 81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
              
                § 100.135
                Unlawful practices in the selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
                (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in the selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property to discriminate against any person in making available such services, or in the performance of such services, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (b) For the purposes of this section, the term appraisal means an estimate or opinion of the value of a specified residential real property made in a business context in connection with the sale, rental, financing or refinancing of a dwelling or in connection with any activity that otherwise affects the availability of a residential real estate-related transaction, whether the appraisal is oral or written, or transmitted formally or informally. The appraisal includes all written comments and other documents submitted as support for the estimate or opinion of value.
                (c) Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in the business of making or furnishing appraisals of residential real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (d) Practices which are unlawful under this section include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Using an appraisal of residential real property in connection with the sale, rental, or financing of any dwelling where the person knows or reasonably should know that the appraisal improperly takes into consideration race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (2) Conditioning the terms of an appraisal of residential real property in connection with the sale, rental, or financing of a dwelling on a person's response to harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 81 FR 63074, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
              
                § 100.140
                General rules.
                (a) Voluntary self-testing and correction. The report or results of a self-test a lender voluntarily conducts or authorizes are privileged as provided in this subpart if the lender has taken or is taking appropriate corrective action to address likely violations identified by the self-test. Data collection required by law or any governmental authority (federal, state, or local) is not voluntary.
                (b) Other privileges. This subpart does not abrogate any evidentiary privilege otherwise provided by law.
                [62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.141
                Definitions.
                As used in this subpart:
                
                  Lender means a person who engages in a residential real estate-related lending transaction.
                
                  Residential real estate-related lending transaction means the making of a loan:
                
                (1) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or
                (2) Secured by residential real estate.
                
                  Self-test means any program, practice or study a lender voluntarily conducts or authorizes which is designed and used specifically to determine the extent or effectiveness of compliance with the Fair Housing Act. The self-test must create data or factual information that is not available and cannot be derived from loan files, application files, or other residential real estate-related lending transaction records. Self-testing includes, but is not limited to, using fictitious credit applicants (testers) or conducting surveys of applicants or customers, nor is it limited to the pre-application stage of loan processing.
                [62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.142
                Types of information.
                (a) The privilege under this subpart covers:
                (1) The report or results of the self-test;
                (2) Data or factual information created by the self-test;
                (3) Workpapers, draft documents and final documents;
                (4) Analyses, opinions, and conclusions if they directly result from the self-test report or results.
                (b) The privilege does not cover:
                (1) Information about whether a lender conducted a self-test, the methodology used or scope of the self-test, the time period covered by the self-test or the dates it was conducted;
                (2) Loan files and application files, or other residential real estate-related lending transaction records (e.g., property appraisal reports, loan committee meeting minutes or other documents reflecting the basis for a decision to approve or deny a loan application, loan policies or procedures, underwriting standards, compensation records) and information or data derived from such files and records, even if such data has been aggregated, summarized or reorganized to facilitate analysis.
                [62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.143
                Appropriate corrective action.
                (a) The report or results of a self-test are privileged as provided in this subpart if the lender has taken or is taking appropriate corrective action to address likely violations identified by the self-test. Appropriate corrective action is required when a self-test shows it is more likely than not that a violation occurred even though no violation was adjudicated formally.
                (b) A lender must take action reasonably likely to remedy the cause and effect of the likely violation and must:
                (1) Identify the policies or practices that are the likely cause of the violation, such as inadequate or improper lending policies, failure to implement established policies, employee conduct, or other causes; and
                (2) Assess the extent and scope of any likely violation, by determining which areas of operation are likely to be affected by those policies and practices, such as stages of the loan application process, types of loans, or the particular branch where the likely violation has occurred. Generally, the scope of the self-test governs the scope of the appropriate corrective action.
                (c) Appropriate corrective action may include both prospective and remedial relief, except that to establish a privilege under this subpart:
                (1) A lender is not required to provide remedial relief to a tester in a self-test;
                (2) A lender is only required to provide remedial relief to an applicant identified by the self-test as one whose rights were more likely than not violated;
                (3) A lender is not required to provide remedial relief to a particular applicant if the statute of limitations applicable to the violation expired before the lender obtained the results of the self-test or the applicant is otherwise ineligible for such relief.
                (d) Depending on the facts involved, appropriate corrective action may include, but is not limited to, one or more of the following:

                (1) If the self-test identifies individuals whose applications were inappropriately processed, offering to extend credit if the applications were improperly denied; compensating such persons for any damages, both out-of-pocket and compensatory;
                (2) Correcting any institutional policies or procedures that may have contributed to the likely violation, and adopting new policies as appropriate;
                (3) Identifying, and then training and/or disciplining the employees involved;
                (4) Developing outreach programs, marketing strategies, or loan products to serve more effectively the segments of the lender's market that may have been affected by the likely violation; and
                (5) Improving audit and oversight systems to avoid a recurrence of the likely violations.
                (e) Determination of appropriate corrective action is fact-based. Not every corrective measure listed in paragraph (d) of this section need be taken for each likely violation.
                (f) Taking appropriate corrective action is not an admission by a lender that a violation occurred.
                [62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.144
                Scope of privilege.
                The report or results of a self-test may not be obtained or used by an aggrieved person, complainant, department or agency in any:
                (a) Proceeding or civil action in which a violation of the Fair Housing Act is alleged; or
                (b) Examination or investigation relating to compliance with the Fair Housing Act.
                [62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.145
                Loss of privilege.
                (a) The self-test report or results are not privileged under this subpart if the lender or person with lawful access to the report or results:
                (1) Voluntarily discloses any part of the report or results or any other information privileged under this subpart to any aggrieved person, complainant, department, agency, or to the public; or
                (2) Discloses the report or results or any other information privileged under this subpart as a defense to charges a lender violated the Fair Housing Act; or
                (3) Fails or is unable to produce self-test records or information needed to determine whether the privilege applies.
                (b) Disclosures or other actions undertaken to carry out appropriate corrective action do not cause the lender to lose the privilege.
                [62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.146
                Limited use of privileged information.
                Notwithstanding § 100.145, the self-test report or results may be obtained and used by an aggrieved person, applicant, department or agency solely to determine a penalty or remedy after the violation of the Fair Housing Act has been adjudicated or admitted. Disclosures for this limited purpose may be used only for the particular proceeding in which the adjudication or admission is made. Information disclosed under this section remains otherwise privileged under this subpart.
                [62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.147
                Adjudication.
                An aggrieved person, complainant, department or agency that challenges a privilege asserted under § 100.144 may seek a determination of the existence and application of that privilege in:
                (a) A court of competent jurisdiction; or
                (b) An administrative law proceeding with appropriate jurisdiction.
                [62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 100.148
                Effective date.
                The privilege under this subpart applies to self-tests conducted both before and after January 30, 1998, except that a self-test conducted before January 30, 1998 is not privileged:
                (a) If there was a court action or administrative proceeding before January 30, 1998, including the filing of a complaint alleging a violation of the Fair Housing Act with the Department or a substantially equivalent state or local agency; or
                (b) If any part of the report or results were disclosed before January 30, 1998 to any aggrieved person, complainant, department or agency, or to the general public.
                [62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
            
            
              
              Subpart D—Prohibition Against Discrimination Because of Handicap
              
                § 100.200
                Purpose.
                The purpose of this subpart is to effectuate sections 6 (a) and (b) and 15 of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.
              
              
                § 100.201
                Definitions.
                As used in this subpart:
                
                  Accessible, when used with respect to the public and common use areas of a building containing covered multifamily dwellings, means that the public or common use areas of the building can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical disabilities. The phrase “readily accessible to and usable by” is synonymous with accessible. A public or common use area that complies with the appropriate requirements of ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), ANSI A117.1-1986 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), or a comparable standard is deemed “accessible” within the meaning of this paragraph.
                
                  Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. Interior accessible routes may include corridors, floors, ramps, elevators, and lifts. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb ramps, walks, ramps, and lifts. A route that complies with the appropriate requirements of ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992, ANSI A117.1-1986 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), or a comparable standard is an “accessible route.”
                
                  Building means a structure, facility or portion thereof that contains or serves one or more dwelling units.
                
                  Building entrance on an accessible route means an accessible entrance to a building that is connected by an accessible route to public transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger loading zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available. A building entrance that complies with ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), ANSI A117.1-1986 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), or a comparable standard complies with the requirements of this paragraph.
                
                  Common use areas means rooms, spaces or elements inside or outside of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building or the guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas and passageways among and between buildings.
                
                  Controlled substance means any drug or other substance, or immediate precursor included in the definition in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
                
                  Covered multifamily dwellings means buildings consisting of 4 or more dwelling units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground floor dwelling units in other buildings consisting of 4 or more dwelling units.
                
                  Dwelling unit means a single unit of residence for a family or one or more persons. Examples of dwelling units include: a single family home; an apartment unit within an apartment building; and in other types of dwellings in which sleeping accommodations are provided but toileting or cooking facilities are shared by occupants of more than one room or portion of the dwelling, rooms in which people sleep. Examples of the latter include dormitory rooms and sleeping accommodations in shelters intended for occupancy as a residence for homeless persons.
                
                  Entrance means any access point to a building or portion of a building used by residents for the purpose of entering.
                
                  Exterior means all areas of the premises outside of an individual dwelling unit.
                
                
                  First occupancy means a building that has never before been used for any purpose.
                
                  Ground floor means a floor of a building with a building entrance on an accessible route. A building may have more than one ground floor.
                
                  Handicap means, with respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment. This term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. For purposes of this part, an individual shall not be considered to have a handicap solely because that individual is a transvestite. As used in this definition:
                (a) Physical or mental impairment includes:
                (1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or

                (2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by current, illegal use of a controlled substance) and alcoholism.
                (b) Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
                (c) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
                (d) Is regarded as having an impairment means:
                (1) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit one or more major life activities but that is treated by another person as constituting such a limitation;
                (2) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of other toward such impairment; or
                (3) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (a) of this definition but is treated by another person as having such an impairment.
                
                  Interior means the spaces, parts, components or elements of an individual dwelling unit.
                
                  Modification means any change to the public or common use areas of a building or any change to a dwelling unit.
                
                  Premises means the interior or exterior spaces, parts, components or elements of a building, including individual dwelling units and the public and common use areas of a building.
                
                  Public use areas means interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are made available to the general public. Public use may be provided at a building that is privately or publicly owned.
                
                  Site means a parcel of land bounded by a property line or a designated portion of a public right or way.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 69 FR 18803, Apr. 9, 2004; 73 FR 63615, Oct. 24, 2008]
              
              
                § 100.201a
                Incorporation by reference.
                (a) The following standards are incorporated by reference into 24 CFR part 100 pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, as though set forth in full. The incorporation by reference of these standards has been approved by the Director of the Federal Register. The effect of compliance with these standards is as stated in 24 CFR 100.205.
                (b) The addresses of organizations from which the referenced standards can be obtained appear below:

                (1) American National Standard: Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 2003 edition, (ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003), may be obtained from the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW., 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001-2070, telephone number 1-888-422-7233, http://www.iccsafe.org/e/category.html.
                

                (2) American National Standard: Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 1998 edition, (ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998), may be obtained from the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW., 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001-2070, telephone number 1-888-422-7233, http://www.iccsafe.org/e/category.html.
                

                (3) American National Standard: Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 1992 edition, (CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992), may be obtained from the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW., 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001-2070, telephone number 1-888-422-7233, http://www.iccsafe.org/e/category.html.
                

                (4) American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities: Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People, 1986 edition, (ANSI A117.1-1986) may be obtained from Global Engineering Documents, 15 Inverness Way East, Englewood, CO 80112, telephone number 1-800-854-7179, global.ihs.com.
                
                (c) The 1986, 1992, 1998, and 2003 editions of ANSI A117.1 may be inspected at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Room 5240, Washington, DC 20410-0001, telephone number 202-708-2333.
                [73 FR 63615, Oct. 24, 2008]
              
              
                § 100.202
                General prohibitions against discrimination because of handicap.
                (a) It shall be unlawful to discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of—
                (1) That buyer or renter;
                (2) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
                (3) Any person associated with that person.
                (b) It shall be unlawful to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of—
                (1) That buyer or renter;
                (2) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
                (3) Any person associated with that person.
                (c) It shall be unlawful to make an inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling, a person intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available, or any person associated with that person, has a handicap or to make inquiry as to the nature or severity of a handicap of such a person. However, this paragraph does not prohibit the following inquiries, provided these inquiries are made of all applicants, whether or not they have handicaps:
                (1) Inquiry into an applicant's ability to meet the requirements of ownership or tenancy;
                (2) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a dwelling available only to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular type of handicap;
                (3) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is qualified for a priority available to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular type of handicap;
                (4) Inquiring whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance;
                (5) Inquiring whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
                (d) Nothing in this subpart requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
              
              
                § 100.203
                Reasonable modifications of existing premises.

                (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises, occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, if the proposed modifications may be necessary to afford the handicapped person full enjoyment of the premises of a dwelling. In the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted. The landlord may not increase for handicapped persons any customarily required security deposit. However, where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of such a restoration agreement a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interest bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant.
                (b) A landlord may condition permission for a modification on the renter providing a reasonable description of the proposed modifications as well as reasonable assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike manner and that any required building permits will be obtained.

                (c) The application of paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:
                
                
                  Example (1):
                  A tenant with a handicap asks his or her landlord for permission to install grab bars in the bathroom at his or her own expense. It is necessary to reinforce the walls with blocking between studs in order to affix the grab bars. It is unlawful for the landlord to refuse to permit the tenant, at the tenant's own expense, from making the modifications necessary to add the grab bars. However, the landlord may condition permission for the modification on the tenant agreeing to restore the bathroom to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted. It would be reasonable for the landlord to require the tenant to remove the grab bars at the end of the tenancy. The landlord may also reasonably require that the wall to which the grab bars are to be attached be repaired and restored to its original condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. However, it would be unreasonable for the landlord to require the tenant to remove the blocking, since the reinforced walls will not interfere in any way with the landlord's or the next tenant's use and enjoyment of the premises and may be needed by some future tenant.
                
                
                  Example (2):

                  An applicant for rental housing has a child who uses a wheelchair. The bathroom door in the dwelling unit is too narrow to permit the wheelchair to pass. The applicant asks the landlord for permission to widen the doorway at the applicant's own expense. It is unlawful for the landlord to refuse to permit the applicant to make the modification. Further, the landlord may not, in usual circumstances, condition permission for the modification on the applicant paying for the doorway to be narrowed at the end of the lease because a wider doorway will not interfere with the landlord's or the next tenant's use and enjoyment of the premises.
                
              
              
                § 100.204
                Reasonable accommodations.
                (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford a handicapped person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling unit, including public and common use areas.

                (b) The application of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:
                
                
                  Example (1):

                  A blind applicant for rental housing wants live in a dwelling unit with a seeing eye dog. The building has a no pets policy. It is a violation of § 100.204 for the owner or manager of the apartment complex to refuse to permit the applicant to live in the apartment with a seeing eye dog because, without the seeing eye dog, the blind person will not have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
                
                
                  Example (2):

                  Progress Gardens is a 300 unit apartment complex with 450 parking spaces which are available to tenants and guests of Progress Gardens on a first come first served basis. John applies for housing in Progress Gardens. John is mobility impaired and is unable to walk more than a short distance and therefore requests that a parking space near his unit be reserved for him so he will not have to walk very far to get to his apartment. It is a violation of § 100.204 for the owner or manager of Progress Gardens to refuse to make this accommodation. Without a reserved space, John might be unable to live in Progress Gardens at all or, when he has to park in a space far from his unit, might have great difficulty getting from his car to his apartment unit. The accommodation therefore is necessary to afford John an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The accommodation is reasonable because it is feasible and practical under the circumstances.
                
              
              
                § 100.205
                Design and construction requirements.

                (a) Covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991 shall be designed and constructed to have at least one building entrance on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. For purposes of this section, a covered multifamily dwelling shall be deemed to be designed and constructed for first occupancy on or before March 13, 1991, if the dwelling is occupied by that date, or if the last building permit or renewal thereof for the dwelling is issued by a State, County or local government on or before June 15, 1990. The burden of establishing impracticality because of terrain or unusual site characteristics is on the person or persons who designed or constructed the housing facility.

                (b) The application of paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:
                
                
                  Example (1):
                  A real estate developer plans to construct six covered multifamily dwelling units on a site with a hilly terrain. Because of the terrain, it will be necessary to climb a long and steep stairway in order to enter the dwellings. Since there is no practical way to provide an accessible route to any of the dwellings, one need not be provided.
                
                
                  Example (2):
                  A real estate developer plans to construct a building consisting of 10 units of multifamily housing on a waterfront site that floods frequently. Because of this unusual characteristic of the site, the builder plans to construct the building on stilts. It is customary for housing in the geographic area where the site is located to be built on stilts. The housing may lawfully be constructed on the proposed site on stilts even though this means that there will be no practical way to provide an accessible route to the building entrance.
                
                
                  Example (3):
                  A real estate developer plans to construct a multifamily housing facility on a particular site. The developer would like the facility to be built on the site to contain as many units as possible. Because of the configuration and terrain of the site, it is possible to construct a building with 105 units on the site provided the site does not have an accessible route leading to the building entrance. It is also possible to construct a building on the site with an accessible route leading to the building entrance. However, such a building would have no more than 100 dwelling units. The building to be constructed on the site must have a building entrance on an accessible route because it is not impractical to provide such an entrance because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site.
                
                
                (c) All covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991 with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed and constructed in such a manner that—
                (1) The public and common use areas are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
                (2) All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
                (3) All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain the following features of adaptable design:
                (i) An accessible route into and through the covered dwelling unit;
                (ii) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;
                (iii) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars around the toilet, tub, shower, stall and shower seat, where such facilities are provided; and
                (iv) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.

                (d) The application of paragraph (c) of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:
                
                
                  Example (1):
                  A developer plans to construct a 100 unit condominium apartment building with one elevator. In accordance with paragraph (a), the building has at least one accessible route leading to an accessible entrance. All 100 units are covered multifamily dwelling units and they all must be designed and constructed so that they comply with the accessibility requirements of paragraph (c) of this section.
                
                
                  Example (2):

                  A developer plans to construct 30 garden apartments in a three story building. The building will not have an elevator. The building will have one accessible entrance which will be on the first floor. Since the building does not have an elevator, only the ground floor units are covered multifamily units. The ground floor is the first floor because that is the floor that has an accessible entrance. All of the dwelling units on the first floor must meet the accessibility requirements of paragraph (c) of this section and must have access to at least one of each type of public or common use area available for residents in the building.
                
                

                (e)(1) Compliance with the appropriate requirements of ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a), or ANSI A117.1-1986 (incorporated by reference at § 100.201a) suffices to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
                (2) The following also qualify as HUD-recognized safe harbors for compliance with the Fair Housing Act design and construction requirements:
                (i) Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines, March 6, 1991, in conjunction with the Supplement to Notice of Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines: Questions and Answers About the Guidelines, June 28, 1994;
                (ii) Fair Housing Act Design Manual, published by HUD in 1996, updated in 1998;
                (iii) 2000 ICC Code Requirements for Housing Accessibility (CRHA), published by the International Code Council (ICC), October 2000 (with corrections contained in ICC-issued errata sheet), if adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions;
                (iv) 2000 International Building Code (IBC), as amended by the 2001 Supplement to the International Building Code (2001 IBC Supplement), if adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions intended to address the Fair Housing Act's design and construction requirements;
                (v) 2003 International Building Code (IBC), if adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions intended to address the Fair Housing Act's design and construction requirements, and conditioned upon the ICC publishing and distributing a statement to jurisdictions and past and future purchasers of the 2003 IBC stating, “ICC interprets Section 1104.1, and specifically, the Exception to Section 1104.1, to be read together with Section 1107.4, and that the Code requires an accessible pedestrian route from site arrival points to accessible building entrances, unless site impracticality applies. Exception 1 to Section 1107.4 is not applicable to site arrival points for any Type B dwelling units because site impracticality is addressed under Section 1107.7.”
                (vi) 2006 International Building Code; published by ICC, January 2006, with the January 31, 2007, erratum to correct the text missing from Section 1107.7.5, if adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions intended to address the Fair Housing Act's design and construction requirements, and interpreted in accordance with the relevant 2006 IBC Commentary;

                (3) Compliance with any other safe harbor recognized by HUD in the future and announced in the Federal Register will also suffice to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
                (f) Compliance with a duly enacted law of a State or unit of general local government that includes the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
                (g)(1) It is the policy of HUD to encourage States and units of general local government to include, in their existing procedures for the review and approval of newly constructed covered multifamily dwellings, determinations as to whether the design and construction of such dwellings are consistent with paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
                (2) A State or unit of general local government may review and approve newly constructed multifamily dwellings for the purpose of making determinations as to whether the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section are met.
                (h) Determinations of compliance or noncompliance by a State or a unit of general local government under paragraph (f) or (g) of this section are not conclusive in enforcement proceedings under the Fair Housing Amendments Act.
                (i) This subpart does not invalidate or limit any law of a State or political subdivision of a State that requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords handicapped persons greater access than is required by this subpart.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 11665, Mar. 20, 1991; 73 FR 63616, Oct. 24, 2008]
              
            
            
              
              Subpart E—Housing for Older Persons
              
                § 100.300
                Purpose.
                The purpose of this subpart is to effectuate the exemption in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 that relates to housing for older persons.
              
              
                § 100.301
                Exemption.
                (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part do not apply to housing which satisfies the requirements of §§ 100.302, 100.303 or § 100.304.
                (b) Nothing in this part limits the applicability of any reasonable local, State, or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling.
              
              
                § 100.302
                State and Federal elderly housing programs.
                The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not apply to housing provided under any Federal or State program that the Secretary determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the State or Federal program.
              
              
                § 100.303
                62 or over housing.
                (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not apply to housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older. Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even though:
                (1) There are persons residing in such housing on September 13, 1988 who are under 62 years of age, provided that all new occupants are persons 62 years of age or older;
                (2) There are unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons 62 years of age or over;
                (3) There are units occupied by employees of the housing (and family members residing in the same unit) who are under 62 years of age provided they perform substantial duties directly related to the management or maintenance of the housing.

                (b) The following examples illustrate the application of paragraph (a) of this section:
                
                
                  Example (1):
                  John and Mary apply for housing at the Vista Heights apartment complex which is an elderly housing complex operated for persons 62 years of age or older. John is 62 years of age. Mary is 59 years of age. If Vista Heights wishes to retain its “62 or over” exemption it must refuse to rent to John and Mary because Mary is under 62 years of age. However, if Vista Heights does rent to John and Mary, it might qualify for the “55 or over” exemption in § 100.304.
                
                
                  Example (2):
                  The Blueberry Hill retirement community has 100 dwelling units. On September 13, 1988, 15 units were vacant and 35 units were occupied with at least one person who is under 62 years of age. The remaining 50 units were occupied by persons who were all 62 years of age or older. Blueberry Hill can qualify for the “62 or over” exemption as long as all units that were occupied after September 13, 1988 are occupied by persons who were 62 years of age or older. The people under 62 in the 35 units previously described need not be required to leave for Blueberry Hill to qualify for the “62 or over” exemption.
                
              
              
                § 100.304
                Housing for persons who are 55 years of age or older.
                (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not apply to housing intended and operated for persons 55 years of age or older. Housing qualifies for this exemption if:
                (1) The alleged violation occurred before December 28, 1995 and the housing community or facility complied with the HUD regulations in effect at the time of the alleged violation; or
                (2) The alleged violation occurred on or after December 28, 1995 and the housing community or facility complies with:
                (i) Section 807(b)(2)(C) (42 U.S.C. 3607(b)) of the Fair Housing Act as amended; and
                (ii) 24 CFR 100.305, 100.306, and 100.307.
                (b) For purposes of this subpart, housing facility or community means any dwelling or group of dwelling units governed by a common set of rules, regulations or restrictions. A portion or portions of a single building shall not constitute a housing facility or community. Examples of a housing facility or community include, but are not limited to:
                (1) A condominium association;
                (2) A cooperative;
                (3) A property governed by a homeowners' or resident association;
                (4) A municipally zoned area;
                
                (5) A leased property under common private ownership;
                (6) A mobile home park; and
                (7) A manufactured housing community.
                (c) For purposes of this subpart, older person means a person 55 years of age or older.
                [64 FR 16329, Apr. 2, 1999]
              
              
                § 100.305
                80 percent occupancy.
                (a) In order for a housing facility or community to qualify as housing for older persons under § 100.304, at least 80 percent of its occupied units must be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
                (b) For purposes of this subpart, occupied unit means:
                (1) A dwelling unit that is actually occupied by one or more persons on the date that the exemption is claimed; or
                (2) A temporarily vacant unit, if the primary occupant has resided in the unit during the past year and intends to return on a periodic basis.
                (c) For purposes of this subpart, occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older means that on the date the exemption for housing designed for persons who are 55 years of age or older is claimed:
                (1) At least one occupant of the dwelling unit is 55 years of age or older; or
                (2) If the dwelling unit is temporarily vacant, at least one of the occupants immediately prior to the date on which the unit was temporarily vacated was 55 years of age or older.
                (d) Newly constructed housing for first occupancy after March 12, 1989 need not comply with the requirements of this section until at least 25 percent of the units are occupied. For purposes of this section, newly constructed housing includes a facility or community that has been wholly unoccupied for at least 90 days prior to re-occupancy due to renovation or rehabilitation.
                (e) Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even though:
                (1) On September 13, 1988, under 80 percent of the occupied units in the housing facility or community were occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older, provided that at least 80 percent of the units occupied by new occupants after September 13, 1988 are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
                (2) There are unoccupied units, provided that at least 80 percent of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
                (3) There are units occupied by employees of the housing facility or community (and family members residing in the same unit) who are under 55 years of age, provided the employees perform substantial duties related to the management or maintenance of the facility or community.
                (4) There are units occupied by persons who are necessary to provide a reasonable accommodation to disabled residents as required by § 100.204 and who are under the age of 55.
                (5) For a period expiring one year from the effective date of this final regulation, there are insufficient units occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older, but the housing facility or community, at the time the exemption is asserted:
                (i) Has reserved all unoccupied units for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older until at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older; and
                (ii) Meets the requirements of §§ 100.304, 100.306, and 100.307.
                (f) For purposes of the transition provision described in § 100.305(e)(5), a housing facility or community may not evict, refuse to renew leases, or otherwise penalize families with children who reside in the facility or community in order to achieve occupancy of at least 80 percent of the occupied units by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
                (g) Where application of the 80 percent rule results in a fraction of a unit, that unit shall be considered to be included in the units that must be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
                (h) Each housing facility or community may determine the age restriction, if any, for units that are not occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older, so long as the housing facility or community complies with the provisions of § 100.306.
                [64 FR 16329, Apr. 2, 1999]
              
              
                
                § 100.306
                Intent to operate as housing designed for persons who are 55 years of age or older.
                (a) In order for a housing facility or community to qualify as housing designed for persons who are 55 years of age or older, it must publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate its intent to operate as housing for persons 55 years of age or older. The following factors, among others, are considered relevant in determining whether the housing facility or community has complied with this requirement:
                (1) The manner in which the housing facility or community is described to prospective residents;
                (2) Any advertising designed to attract prospective residents;
                (3) Lease provisions;
                (4) Written rules, regulations, covenants, deed or other restrictions;
                (5) The maintenance and consistent application of relevant procedures;
                (6) Actual practices of the housing facility or community; and
                (7) Public posting in common areas of statements describing the facility or community as housing for persons 55 years of age or older.
                (b) Phrases such as “adult living”, “adult community”, or similar statements in any written advertisement or prospectus are not consistent with the intent that the housing facility or community intends to operate as housing for persons 55 years of age or older.
                (c) If there is language in deed or other community or facility documents which is inconsistent with the intent to provide housing for persons who are 55 years of age or older housing, HUD shall consider documented evidence of a good faith attempt to remove such language in determining whether the housing facility or community complies with the requirements of this section in conjunction with other evidence of intent.
                (d) A housing facility or community may allow occupancy by families with children as long as it meets the requirements of §§ 100.305 and 100.306(a).
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0046)
                [64 FR 16330, Apr. 2, 1999]
              
              
                § 100.307
                Verification of occupancy.
                (a) In order for a housing facility or community to qualify as housing for persons 55 years of age or older, it must be able to produce, in response to a complaint filed under this title, verification of compliance with § 100.305 through reliable surveys and affidavits.
                (b) A facility or community shall, within 180 days of the effective date of this rule, develop procedures for routinely determining the occupancy of each unit, including the identification of whether at least one occupant of each unit is 55 years of age or older. Such procedures may be part of a normal leasing or purchasing arrangement.
                (c) The procedures described in paragraph (b) of this section must provide for regular updates, through surveys or other means, of the initial information supplied by the occupants of the housing facility or community. Such updates must take place at least once every two years. A survey may include information regarding whether any units are occupied by persons described in paragraphs (e)(1), (e)(3), and (e)(4) of § 100.305.
                (d) Any of the following documents are considered reliable documentation of the age of the occupants of the housing facility or community:
                (1) Driver's license;
                (2) Birth certificate;
                (3) Passport;
                (4) Immigration card;
                (5) Military identification;
                (6) Any other state, local, national, or international official documents containing a birth date of comparable reliability; or
                (7) A certification in a lease, application, affidavit, or other document signed by any member of the household age 18 or older asserting that at least one person in the unit is 55 years of age or older.

                (e) A facility or community shall consider any one of the forms of verification identified above as adequate for verification of age, provided that it contains specific information about current age or date of birth.
                
                (f) The housing facility or community must establish and maintain appropriate policies to require that occupants comply with the age verification procedures required by this section.
                (g) If the occupants of a particular dwelling unit refuse to comply with the age verification procedures, the housing facility or community may, if it has sufficient evidence, consider the unit to be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older. Such evidence may include:
                (1) Government records or documents, such as a local household census;
                (2) Prior forms or applications; or
                (3) A statement from an individual who has personal knowledge of the age of the occupants. The individual's statement must set forth the basis for such knowledge and be signed under the penalty of perjury.
                (h) Surveys and verification procedures which comply with the requirements of this section shall be admissible in administrative and judicial proceedings for the purpose of verifying occupancy.
                (i) A summary of occupancy surveys shall be available for inspection upon reasonable notice and request by any person.
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0046)
                [64 FR 16330, Apr. 2, 1999]
              
              
                § 100.308
                Good faith defense against civil money damages.
                (a) A person shall not be held personally liable for monetary damages for discriminating on the basis of familial status, if the person acted with the good faith belief that the housing facility or community qualified for a housing for older persons exemption under this subpart.
                (b)(1) A person claiming the good faith belief defense must have actual knowledge that the housing facility or community has, through an authorized representative, asserted in writing that it qualifies for a housing for older persons exemption.
                (2) Before the date on which the discrimination is claimed to have occurred, a community or facility, through its authorized representatives, must certify, in writing and under oath or affirmation, to the person subsequently claiming the defense that it complies with the requirements for such an exemption as housing for persons 55 years of age or older in order for such person to claim the defense.
                (3) For purposes of this section, an authorized representative of a housing facility or community means the individual, committee, management company, owner, or other entity having the responsibility for adherence to the requirements established by this subpart.
                (4) For purposes of this section, a person means a natural person.
                (5) A person shall not be entitled to the good faith defense if the person has actual knowledge that the housing facility or community does not, or will not, qualify as housing for persons 55 years of age or older. Such a person will be ineligible for the good faith defense regardless of whether the person received the written assurance described in paragraph (b) of this section.
                [64 FR 16330, Apr. 2, 1999]
              
            
            
              Subpart F—Interference, Coercion or Intimidation
              
                § 100.400
                Prohibited interference, coercion or intimidation.
                (a) This subpart provides the Department's interpretation of the conduct that is unlawful under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act.
                (b) It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of that person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this part.
                (c) Conduct made unlawful under this section includes, but is not limited to, the following:

                (1) Coercing a person, either orally, in writing, or by other means, to deny or limit the benefits provided that person in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling or in connection with a residential real estate-related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                
                (2) Threatening, intimidating or interfering with persons in their enjoyment of a dwelling because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such persons, or of visitors or associates of such persons.
                (3) Threatening an employee or agent with dismissal or an adverse employment action, or taking such adverse employment action, for any effort to assist a person seeking access to the sale or rental of a dwelling or seeking access to any residential real estate-related transaction, because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of that person or of any person associated with that person.
                (4) Intimidating or threatening any person because that person is engaging in activities designed to make other persons aware of, or encouraging such other persons to exercise, rights granted or protected by this part.
                (5) Retaliating against any person because that person has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in a proceeding under the Fair Housing Act.
                (6) Retaliating against any person because that person reported a discriminatory housing practice to a housing provider or other authority.
                [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 81 FR 63075, Sept. 14, 2016]
              
            
            
              Subpart G—Discriminatory Effect
              
                § 100.500
                Discriminatory effect prohibited.
                Liability may be established under the Fair Housing Act based on a practice's discriminatory effect, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section, even if the practice was not motivated by a discriminatory intent. The practice may still be lawful if supported by a legally sufficient justification, as defined in paragraph (b) of this section. The burdens of proof for establishing a violation under this subpart are set forth in paragraph (c) of this section.
                (a) Discriminatory effect. A practice has a discriminatory effect where it actually or predictably results in a disparate impact on a group of persons or creates, increases, reinforces, or perpetuates segregated housing patterns because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
                (b) Legally sufficient justification. (1) A legally sufficient justification exists where the challenged practice:
                (i) Is necessary to achieve one or more substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interests of the respondent, with respect to claims brought under 42 U.S.C. 3612, or defendant, with respect to claims brought under 42 U.S.C. 3613 or 3614; and
                (ii) Those interests could not be served by another practice that has a less discriminatory effect.
                (2) A legally sufficient justification must be supported by evidence and may not be hypothetical or speculative. The burdens of proof for establishing each of the two elements of a legally sufficient justification are set forth in paragraphs (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section.
                (c) Burdens of proof in discriminatory effects cases. (1) The charging party, with respect to a claim brought under 42 U.S.C. 3612, or the plaintiff, with respect to a claim brought under 42 U.S.C. 3613 or 3614, has the burden of proving that a challenged practice caused or predictably will cause a discriminatory effect.
                (2) Once the charging party or plaintiff satisfies the burden of proof set forth in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the respondent or defendant has the burden of proving that the challenged practice is necessary to achieve one or more substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interests of the respondent or defendant.
                (3) If the respondent or defendant satisfies the burden of proof set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the charging party or plaintiff may still prevail upon proving that the substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interests supporting the challenged practice could be served by another practice that has a less discriminatory effect.
                (d) Relationship to discriminatory intent. A demonstration that a practice is supported by a legally sufficient justification, as defined in paragraph (b) of this section, may not be used as a defense against a claim of intentional discrimination.
                [78 FR 11482, Feb. 15, 2013]
              
            
            
              Subpart H— Quid Pro Quo and Hostile Environment Harassment
              
                Source:
                81 FR 63075, Sept. 14, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
              
              
                § 100.600
                Quid pro quo and hostile environment harassment.
                (a) General. Quid pro quo and hostile environment harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or handicap may violate sections 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Act, depending on the conduct. The same conduct may violate one or more of these provisions.
                (1) Quid pro quo harassment. Quid pro quo harassment refers to an unwelcome request or demand to engage in conduct where submission to the request or demand, either explicitly or implicitly, is made a condition related to: The sale, rental or availability of a dwelling; the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental, or the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith; or the availability, terms, or conditions of a residential real estate-related transaction. An unwelcome request or demand may constitute quid pro quo harassment even if a person acquiesces in the unwelcome request or demand.
                (2) Hostile environment harassment. Hostile environment harassment refers to unwelcome conduct that is sufficiently severe or pervasive as to interfere with: The availability, sale, rental, or use or enjoyment of a dwelling; the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental, or the provision or enjoyment of services or facilities in connection therewith; or the availability, terms, or conditions of a residential real estate-related transaction. Hostile environment harassment does not require a change in the economic benefits, terms, or conditions of the dwelling or housing-related services or facilities, or of the residential real-estate transaction.
                (i) Totality of the circumstances. Whether hostile environment harassment exists depends upon the totality of the circumstances.
                (A) Factors to be considered to determine whether hostile environment harassment exists include, but are not limited to, the nature of the conduct, the context in which the incident(s) occurred, the severity, scope, frequency, duration, and location of the conduct, and the relationships of the persons involved.
                (B) Neither psychological nor physical harm must be demonstrated to prove that a hostile environment exists. Evidence of psychological or physical harm may, however, be relevant in determining whether a hostile environment existed and, if so, the amount of damages to which an aggrieved person may be entitled.
                (C) Whether unwelcome conduct is sufficiently severe or pervasive as to create a hostile environment is evaluated from the perspective of a reasonable person in the aggrieved person's position.
                (ii) Title VII affirmative defense. The affirmative defense to an employer's vicarious liability for hostile environment harassment by a supervisor under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 does not apply to cases brought pursuant to the Fair Housing Act.
                (b) Type of conduct. Harassment can be written, verbal, or other conduct, and does not require physical contact.
                (c) Number of incidents. A single incident of harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, or handicap may constitute a discriminatory housing practice, where the incident is sufficiently severe to create a hostile environment, or evidences a quid pro quo.
              
            
          
          
            Pt. 103
            PART 103—FAIR HOUSING—COMPLAINT PROCESSING
            
              
                Subpart A—Purpose and Definitions
                Sec.
                103.1
                Purpose and applicability.
                103.5
                Other civil rights authorities.
                103.9
                Definitions.
              
              
                Subpart B—Complaints
                103.10

                What can I do if I believe someone is discriminating against me in the sale, rental, finance, or advertisement of housing?
                
                103.15
                Can I file a claim if the discrimination has not yet occurred?
                103.20
                Can someone help me with filing a claim?
                103.25
                What information should I provide to HUD?
                103.30
                How should I bring a claim that I am the victim of discrimination?
                103.35
                Is there a time limit on when I can file?
                103.40
                Can I change my complaint after it is filed?
              
              
                Subpart C—Referral of Complaints to State and Local Agencies
                103.100
                Notification and referral to substantially equivalent State or local agencies.
                103.105
                Cessation of action on referred complaints.
                103.110
                Reactivation of referred complaints.
                103.115
                Notification upon reactivation.
              
              
                Subpart D—Investigation Procedures
                103.200
                Investigations.
                103.201
                Service of notice on aggrieved person.
                103.202
                Notification of respondent; joinder of additional or substitute respondents.
                103.203
                Answer to complaint.
                103.204
                HUD complaints and compliance reviews.
                103.205
                Systemic processing.
                103.215
                Conduct of investigation.
                103.220
                Cooperation of Federal, State and local agencies.
                103.225
                Completion of investigation.
                103.230
                Final investigative report.
              
              
                Subpart E—Conciliation Procedures
                103.300
                Conciliation.
                103.310
                Conciliation agreement.
                103.315
                Relief sought for aggrieved persons.
                103.320
                Provisions sought for the public interest.
                103.325
                Termination of conciliation efforts.
                103.330
                Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information obtained during conciliation.
                103.335
                Review of compliance with conciliation agreements.
              
              
                Subpart F—Issuance of Charge
                103.400
                Reasonable cause determination.
                103.405
                Issuance of charge.
                103.410
                Election of civil action or provision of administrative proceeding.
              
              
                Subpart G—Prompt Judicial Action
                103.500
                Prompt judicial action.
              
              
                Subpart H—Other Action
                103.510
                Other action by HUD.
                103.515
                Action by other agencies.
              
            
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3619.
            
            
              Source:
              54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              Subpart A—Purpose and Definitions
              
                § 103.1
                Purpose and applicability.
                (a) This part contains the procedures established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for the investigation and conciliation of complaints under section 810 of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3610.
                (b) This part applies to:
                (1) Complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin; and
                (2) Complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices on account of handicap or familial status occurring on or after March 12, 1989.
                (c) Part 180 of this chapter governs the administrative proceedings before an administrative law judge adjudicating charges issued under § 103.405.
                (d) The Department will reasonably accommodate persons with disabilities who are participants in complaint processing.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 103.5
                Other civil rights authorities.

                In addition to the Fair Housing Act, other civil rights authorities may be applicable in a particular case. Thus, where a person charged with a discriminatory housing practice in a complaint filed under section 810 of the Fair Housing Act is also prohibited from engaging in similar practices under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-5), section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5309), Executive Order 11063 of November 20, 1962, on Equal Opportunity in Housing (27 FR 11527-11530, November 24, 1962), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), the Age Discrimination Act (42 U.S.C. 6101) or other applicable law, the person may also be subject to action by HUD or other Federal agencies under the rules, regulations, and procedures prescribed under title VI (24 CFR parts 1 and 2), section 109 (24 CFR 570.602)), Executive Order 11063 (24 CFR part 107), section 504 (24 CFR part 8), or other applicable law.
              
              
                § 103.9
                Definitions.
                The terms Fair Housing Act, General Counsel, and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
                
                  Aggrieved person includes any person who:
                (a) Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or
                (b) Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
                
                  Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity in HUD.
                
                  Attorney General means the Attorney General of the United States.
                
                  Complainant means the person (including the Assistant Secretary) who files a complaint under this part.
                
                  Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or by the investigation of a complaint, through informal negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the Assistant Secretary.
                
                  Conciliation agreement means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation.
                
                  Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing Act, as described in part 100.
                
                  Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
                
                  Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustee in cases under title 11 U.S.C., receivers and fiduciaries.
                
                  Personal service means handing a copy of the document to the person to be served or leaving a copy of the document with a person of suitable age and discretion at the place of business, residence or usual place of abode of the person to be served.
                
                  Receipt of notice means the day that personal service is completed by handing or delivering a copy of the document to an appropriate person or the date that a document is delivered by certified mail.
                
                  Respondent means:
                (a) The person or other entity accused in a complaint of a discriminatory housing practice; and
                (b) Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation and notified as required under § 103.50.
                
                  State means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any of the territories and possessions of the United States.
                
                  Substantially equivalent State or local agency means a State or local agency certified by HUD under 24 CFR part 115 (including agencies certified for interim referrals).
                
                  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]
              
            
            
              Subpart B—Complaints
              
                § 103.10
                What can I do if I believe someone is discriminating against me in the sale, rental, finance, or advertisement of housing?
                You can notify HUD if you believe there has been discrimination against you in any activity related to housing because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, or the presence of children under the age of 18 in a household.
                [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.15
                Can I file a claim if the discrimination has not yet occurred?
                Yes, you may file a claim with HUD if you have knowledge that a discriminatory action is about to occur.
                [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                
                § 103.20
                Can someone help me with filing a claim?
                HUD's Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity can help you in filing a claim, if you contact them directly. You, or anyone who acts for you, may also ask any HUD office or an organization, individual, or attorney to help you.
                [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.25
                What information should I provide to HUD?
                You should provide us with:
                (a) Your name, address, and telephone numbers where you can be reached;
                (b) The name and address of the persons, businesses, or organizations you believe discriminated against you;
                (c) If there is a specific property involved, you should provide the property's address and physical description, such as apartment, condominium, house, or vacant lot; and
                (d) A brief description of how you were discriminated against in an activity related to housing. You should include in this description the date when the discrimination happened and why you believe the discrimination occurred because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, or the presence of children under the age of 18 in a household.
                [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.30
                How should I bring a claim that I am the victim of discrimination?
                (a) You can file a claim by mail or telephone with any of HUD's Offices of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity or with any State or local agency that HUD has certified to receive complaints.
                (b) You can call or go to any other HUD office for help in filing a claim. These offices will send your claim to HUD's Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, which will contact you about the filing of your complaint.
                [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.35
                Is there a time limit on when I can file?
                Yes, you must notify us within one year that you are a victim of discrimination. If you indicate that there is more than one act of discrimination, or that the discrimination is continuing, we must receive your information within one year of the last incident of discrimination.
                [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.40
                Can I change my complaint after it is filed?
                (a) Yes, you may change your fair housing complaint:
                (1) At any time to add or remove people according to the law and the facts; or
                (2) To correct other items, such as to add additional information found during the investigation of the complaint.
                (b) You must approve any change to your complaint; we will consider the changes made as of the date of your original complaint.
                [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
            
            
              Subpart C—Referral of Complaints to State and Local Agencies
              
                § 103.100
                Notification and referral to substantially equivalent State or local agencies.
                (a) Whenever a complaint alleges a discriminatory housing practice that is within the jurisdiction of a substantially equivalent State or local agency and the agency is certified or may accept interim referrals under 24 CFR part 115 with regard to the alleged discriminatory housing practice, the Assistant Secretary will notify the agency of the filing of the complaint and refer the complaint to the agency for further processing before HUD takes any action with respect to the complaint. The Assistant Secretary will notify the State or local agency of the referral by certified mail.

                (b) The Assistant Secretary will notify the aggrieved person and the respondent, by certified mail or personal service, of the notification and referral under paragraph (a) of this section. The notice will advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the aggrieved person's right to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing Act in an appropriate United States District Court, not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will state that the computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending under this part or part 180 with respect to complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will also state that the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act is pending.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]
              
              
                § 103.105
                Cessation of action on referred complaints.
                A referral under § 103.100 does not prohibit the Assistant Secretary from taking appropriate action to review or investigate matters in the complaint that raise issues cognizable under other civil rights authorities applicable to departmental programs (see § 103.5).
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 14379, Apr. 1, 1996]
              
              
                § 103.110
                Reactivation of referred complaints.
                The Assistant Secretary may reactivate a complaint referred under § 103.100 for processing by HUD if:
                (a) The substantially equivalent State or local agency consents or requests the reactivation;
                (b) The Assistant Secretary determines that, with respect to the alleged discriminatory housing practice, the agency no longer qualifies for certification as a substantially equivalent State or local agency and may not accept interim referrals; or
                (c) The substantially equivalent State or local agency has failed to commence proceedings with respect to the complaint within 30 days of the date that it received the notification and referral of the complaint; or the agency commenced proceedings within this 30-day period, but the Assistant Secretary determines that the agency has failed to carry the proceedings forward with reasonable promptness.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 14379, Apr. 1, 1996]
              
              
                § 103.115
                Notification upon reactivation.
                (a) Whenever a complaint referred to a State or local fair housing agency under § 103.100 is reactivated under § 103.110, the Assistant Secretary will notify the substantially equivalent State or local agency, the aggrieved person and the respondent of HUD's reactivation. The notification will be made by certified mail or personal service.
                (b) The notification to the respondent and the aggrieved person will:
                (1) Advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the time limits applicable to complaint processing and the procedural rights and obligations of the aggrieved person and the respondent under this part and part 180.
                (2) State that HUD will process the complaint under the Fair Housing Act and that the State or local agency to which the complaint was referred may continue to process the complaint under State or local law.
                (3) Advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the aggrieved person's right to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing Act in an appropriate United States District Court, not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will state that the computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending under this part or part 180 with respect to a complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice under part 180. The notices will also state that the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act is pending.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]
              
            
            
              Subpart D—Investigation Procedures
              
                § 103.200
                Investigations.

                (a) Upon the filing of a complaint under § 103.40, the Assistant Secretary will initiate an investigation. The purposes of an investigation are:
                
                (1) To obtain information concerning the events or transactions that relate to the alleged discriminatory housing practice identified in the complaint.
                (2) To document policies or practices of the respondent involved in the alleged discriminatory housing practice raised in the complaint.
                (3) To develop factual data necessary for the General Counsel to make a determination under § 103.400 whether reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, and for the Assistant Secretary to make a determination under § 103.400 that no reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, and to take other actions provided under this part.
                (b) Upon the written direction of the Assistant Secretary, HUD may initate an investigation of housing practices to determine whether a complaint should be filed under subpart B of this part. Such investigations will be conducted in accordance with the procedures described under this subpart.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 53293, Dec. 28, 1990, 57 FR 39116, Aug. 28, 1992]
              
              
                § 103.201
                Service of notice on aggrieved person.
                Upon the filing of a complaint, the Assistant Secretary will notify, by certified mail or personal service, each aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed. The notice will:
                (a) Acknowledge the filing of the complaint and state the date that the complaint was accepted for filing.
                (b) Include a copy of the complaint.
                (c) Advise the aggrieved person of the time limits applicable to complaint processing and of the procedural rights and obligations of the aggrieved person under this part and part 180.
                (d) Advise the aggrieved person of his or her right to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing Act in an appropriate United States District Court, not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will state that the computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending under this part or part 180 with respect to a complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will also state that the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act is pending.
                (e) Advise the aggrieved person that retaliation against any person because he or she made a complaint or testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation or conciliation under this part or an administrative proceeding under part 180, is a discriminatory housing practice that is prohibited under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996. Redesignated at 64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.202
                Notification of respondent; joinder of additional or substitute respondents.
                (a) Within ten days of the filing of a complaint under § 103.40 or the filing of an amended complaint under § 103.42, the Assistant Secretary will serve a notice on each respondent by certified mail or by personal service. A person who is not named as a respondent in a complaint, but who is identified in the course of the investigation under subpart D of this part as a person who is alleged to be engaged, to have engaged, or to be about to engage in the discriminatory housing practice upon which the complaint is based may be joined as an additional or substitute respondent by service of a notice on the person under this section within ten days of the identification.
                (b) The Assistant Secretary will also serve notice on any person who directs or controls, or who has the right to direct or control, the conduct of another person who is involved in a fair housing complaint.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996. Redesignated and amended at 64 FR 18540, 18541, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.203
                Answer to complaint.

                (a) The respondent may file an answer not later than ten days after receipt of the notice described in § 103.50. The respondent may assert any defense that might be available to a defendant in a court of law. The answer must be signed and affirmed by the respondent. The affirmation must state: “I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.”
                (b) An answer may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time with the consent of the Assistant Secretary.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989. Redesignated at 64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.204
                HUD complaints and compliance reviews.
                (a) The Assistant Secretary may conduct an investigation and file a complaint under this subpart based on information that one or more discriminatory housing practices has occurred, or is about to occur.
                (b) HUD may also initiate compliance reviews under other appropriate civil rights authorities, such as E.O. 11063 on Equal Opportunity in Housing, title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
                (c) HUD may also make the information you provide available to other Federal, State, or local agencies having an interest in the matter. In making such information available, HUD will take steps to protect the confidentiality of any informant or complainant when desired by the informant or complainant.
                [64 FR 18541, Apr. 14, 1999]
              
              
                § 103.205
                Systemic processing.
                Where the Assistant Secretary determines that the alleged discriminatory practices contained in a complaint are pervasive or institutional in nature, or that the processing of the complaint will involve complex issues, novel questions of fact or law, or will affect a large number of persons, the Assistant Secretary may identify the complaint for systemic processing. This determination can be based on the face of the complaint or on information gathered in connection with an investigation. Systemic investigations may focus not only on documenting facts involved in the alleged discriminatory housing practice that is the subject of the complaint but also on review of other policies and procedures related to matters under investigation, to make sure that they also comply with the nondiscrimination requirements of the Fair Housing Act.
              
              
                § 103.215
                Conduct of investigation.
                (a) In conducting investigations under this part, the Assistant Secretary will seek the voluntary cooperation of all persons to obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other possible sources of information; to examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and to take and record testimony or statements of persons reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
                (b) The Assistant Secretary may conduct and order discovery in aid of the investigation by the same methods and to the same extent that discovery may be ordered in an administrative proceeding under 24 CFR part 180, except that the Assistant Secretary shall have the power to issue subpoenas described in 24 CFR 180.545 in support of the investigation. Subpoenas issued by the Assistant Secretary must be approved by the General Counsel as to their legality before issuance.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 41482, Aug. 8, 1996; 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996; 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
              
                § 103.220
                Cooperation of Federal, State and local agencies.
                The Assistant Secretary, in processing Fair Housing Act complaints, may seek the cooperation and utilize the services of Federal, State or local agencies, including any agency having regulatory or supervisory authority over financial institutions.
              
              
                § 103.225
                Completion of investigation.

                The investigation will remain open until a determination is made under § 103.400, or a conciliation agreement is executed and approved under § 103.310. Unless it is impracticable to do so, the Assistant Secretary will complete the investigation of the alleged discriminatory housing practice within 100 days of the filing of the complaint (or where the Assistant Secretary reactivates the complaint, within 100 days after service of the notice of reactivation under § 103.115). If the Assistant Secretary is unable to complete the investigation within the 100-day period, HUD will notify the aggrieved person and the respondent, by mail, of the reasons for the delay.
                [61 FR 14380, Apr. 1, 1996]
              
              
                § 103.230
                Final investigative report.
                (a) At the end of each investigation under this part, the Assistant Secretary will prepare a final investigative report. The investigative report will contain:
                (1) The names and dates of contacts with witnesses, except that the report will not disclose the names of witnesses that request anonymity. HUD, however, may be required to disclose the names of such witnesses in the course of an administrative hearing under part 180 of this chapter or a civil action under title VIII of the Fair Housing Act;
                (2) A summary and the dates of correspondence and other contacts with the aggrieved person and the respondent;
                (3) A summary description of other pertinent records;
                (4) A summary of witness statements; and
                (5) Answers to interrogatories.
                (b) A final investigative report may be amended at any time, if additional evidence is discovered.
                (c) Notwithstanding the prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information contained in § 103.330, the Assistant Secretary will make information derived from an investigation, including the final investigative report, available to the aggrieved person and the respondent. Following the completion of investigation, the Assistant Secretary shall notify the aggrieved person and the respondent that the final investigation report is complete and will be provided upon request.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]
              
            
            
              Subpart E—Conciliation Procedures
              
                § 103.300
                Conciliation.
                (a) During the period beginning with the filing of the complaint and ending with the filing of a charge or the dismissal of the complaint by the General Counsel or the Assistant Secretary, the Assistant Secretary will, to the extent feasible, attempt to conciliate the complaint.
                (b) In conciliating a complaint, HUD will attempt to achieve a just resolution of the complaint and to obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violations of the rights of the aggrieved person, and take such action as will assure the elimination of discriminatory housing practices, or the prevention of their occurrence, in the future.
                (c) Generally, officers, employees, and agents of HUD engaged in the investigation of a complaint under this part will not participate or advise in the conciliation of the same complaint or in any factually related complaint. Where the rights of the aggrieved party and the respondent can be protected and the prohibitions with respect to the disclosure of information can be observed, the investigator may suspend fact finding and engage in efforts to resolve the complaint by conciliation.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 53294, Dec. 28, 1990]
              
              
                § 103.310
                Conciliation agreement.
                (a) The terms of a settlement of a complaint will be reduced to a written conciliation agreement. The conciliation agreement shall seek to protect the interests of the aggrieved person, other persons similarly situated, and the public interest. The types of relief that may be sought for the aggrieved person are described in § 103.315. The provisions that may be sought for the vindication of the public interest are described in § 103.320.

                (b)(1) The agreement must be executed by the respondent and the complainant. The agreement is subject to the approval of the Assistant Secretary, who will indicate approval by signing the agreement. The Assistant Secretary will approve an agreement and, if the Assistant Secretary is the complainant, will execute the agreement, only if:
                (i) The complainant and the respondent agree to the relief accorded the aggrieved person;
                (ii) The provisions of the agreement will adequately vindicate the public interest; and
                (iii) If the Assistant Secretary is the complainant, all aggrieved persons named in the complaint are satisfied with the relief provided to protect their interests.
                (2) The General Counsel may issue a charge under § 103.405 if the aggrieved person and the respondent have executed a conciliation agreement that has not been approved by the Assistant Secretary.
              
              
                § 103.315
                Relief sought for aggrieved persons.
                (a) The following types of relief may be sought for aggrieved persons in conciliation:
                (1) Monetary relief in the form of damages, including damages caused by humiliation or embarrassment, and attorney fees;
                (2) Other equitable relief including, but not limited to, access to the dwelling at issue, or to a comparable dwelling, the provision of services or facilities in connection with a dwelling, or other specific relief; or
                (3) Injunctive relief appropriate to the elimination of discriminatory housing practices affecting the aggrieved person or other persons.
                (b) The conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration of the dispute arising from the complaint. Arbitration may award appropriate relief as described in paragraph (a) of this section. The aggrieved person and the respondent may, in the conciliation agreement, limit the types of relief that may be awarded under binding arbitration.
              
              
                § 103.320
                Provisions sought for the public interest.
                The following are types of provisions may be sought for the vindication of the public interest:
                (a) Elimination of discriminatory housing practices.
                (b) Prevention of future discriminatory housing practices.
                (c) Remedial affirmative activities to overcome discriminatory housing practices.
                (d) Reporting requirements.
                (e) Monitoring and enforcement activities.
              
              
                § 103.325
                Termination of conciliation efforts.
                (a) HUD may terminate its efforts to conciliate the complaint if the respondent fails or refuses to confer with HUD; the aggrieved person or the respondent fail to make a good faith effort to resolve any dispute; or HUD finds, for any reason, that voluntary agreement is not likely to result.
                (b) Where the aggrieved person has commenced a civil action under an Act of Congress or a State law seeking relief with respect to the alleged discriminatory housing practice, and the trial in the action has commenced, HUD will terminate conciliation unless the court specifically requests assistance from the Assistant Secretary.
              
              
                § 103.330
                Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information obtained during conciliation.
                (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section and § 103.230(c), nothing that is said or done in the course of conciliation under this part may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent administrative hearing under part 180 or in civil actions under title VIII of the Fair Housing Act, without the written consent of the persons concerned.
                (b) Conciliation agreements shall be made public, unless the aggrieved person and respondent request nondisclosure and the Assistant Secretary determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of the Fair Housing Act. Notwithstanding a determination that disclosure of a conciliation agreement is not required, the Assistant Secretary may publish tabulated descriptions of the results of all conciliation efforts.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]
              
              
                
                § 103.335
                Review of compliance with conciliation agreements.
                HUD may, from time to time, review compliance with the terms of any conciliation agreement. Whenever HUD has reasonable cause to believe that a respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the Assistant Secretary shall refer the matter to the Attorney General with a recommendation for the filing of a civil action under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act for the enforcement of the terms of the conciliation agreement.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994]
              
            
            
              Subpart F—Issuance of Charge
              
                § 103.400
                Reasonable cause determination.
                (a) If a conciliation agreement under § 103.310 has not been executed by the complainant and the respondent and approved by the Assistant Secretary, the Assistant Secretary shall conduct a review of the factual circumstances revealed as part of HUD's investigation.
                (1) If the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity determines that, based on the totality of factual circumstances known at the time of the Assistant Secretary's review, no reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the Assistant Secretary shall: Issue a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has based the no reasonable cause determination; dismiss the complaint; notify the aggrieved person and the respondent of the dismissal (including the written statement of facts) by mail; and make public disclosure of the dismissal. The respondent may request that no public disclosure be made. Notwithstanding such a request, the fact of dismissal, including the names of the parties, shall be public information available on request. The Assistant Secretary's determination shall be based solely upon the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice provided by complainant and respondent and otherwise disclosed during the investigation. In making this determination, the Assistant Secretary shall consider whether the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice are sufficient to warrant the initiation of a civil action in federal court.
                (2) If, based on the totality of the factual circumstances known at the time of the decision, the Assistant Secretary believes that reasonable cause may exist to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the Assistant Secretary shall determine that reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, in all cases not involving the legality of local land use laws or ordinances (except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section). The Assistant Secretary's determination shall be based solely on the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practices provided by complainants and respondents and otherwise identified during the investigation in making this determination. In making this determination, the Assistant Secretary shall consider whether the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice are sufficient to warrant the initiation of a civil action in federal court.
                (i) If the Assistant Secretary determines that reasonable cause exists, the Assistant Secretary, upon receipt of concurrence of the General Counsel, will issue such determination and direct the issuance of a charge under § 103.405 on behalf of the aggrieved person, and shall notify the complainant and the respondent of this determination by certified mail or personal service.

                (ii) If the Assistant Secretary determines that no reasonable cause exists, the Assistant Secretary shall: Issue a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has based the no reasonable cause determination; dismiss the complaint; notify the complainant and the respondent of the dismissal (including the written statement of facts) by mail; and make public disclosure of the dismissal. The complainant or respondent may request that no public disclosure be made. Notwithstanding such a request, the fact of dismissal, including the names of the parties, shall be public information available on request.
                (3) If the Assistant Secretary determines that the matter involves the legality of local zoning or land use laws or ordinances, the Assistant Secretary, in lieu of making a determination regarding reasonable cause, shall refer the investigative material to the Attorney General for appropriate action under section 814(b)(1) of the Fair Housing Act, and shall notify the complainant and the respondent of this action by mail or personal service.
                (b) The Assistant Secretary may not issue a charge under paragraph (a) of this section regarding an alleged discriminatory housing practice, if an aggrieved person has commenced a civil action under an Act of Congress or a state law seeking relief with respect to the alleged housing practice and the trial in the action has commenced. If a charge may not be issued because of the commencement of such a trial, the Assistant Secretary shall so notify the complainant and the respondent by certified mail or personal service.
                (c)(1) A determination of reasonable cause or no reasonable cause by the Assistant Secretary shall be made within 100 days after filing of the complaint (or where the Assistant Secretary has reactivated a complaint, within 100 days after service of the notice of reactivation under § 103.115), unless it is impracticable to do so.
                (2) If the Assistant Secretary is unable to make the determination within the 100-day period specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the Assistant Secretary will notify the complainant and the respondent by mail of the reasons for the delay.
                [55 FR 53294, Dec. 28, 1990, as amended at 57 FR 18398, Apr. 30, 1992; 59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994; 59 FR 46759, Sept. 12, 1994]
              
              
                § 103.405
                Issuance of charge.
                (a) A charge:
                (1) Shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur;
                (2) Shall be based on the final investigative report; and
                (3) Need not be limited to facts or grounds that are alleged in the complaint filed under subpart B of this part. If the charge is based on grounds that are not alleged in the complaint, HUD will not issue a charge with regard to the grounds unless the record of investigation demonstrates that the respondent has been given notice and an opportunity to respond to the allegation.
                (b) Within three business days after the issuance of the charge, the General Counsel shall:
                (1) Obtain a time and place for hearing from the Docket Clerk for the Office of Administrative Law Judges;
                (2) File the charge along with the notifications described in 24 CFR 180.410(b) with the Office of Administrative Law Judges;
                (3) Serve the charge and notifications in accordance with 24 CFR 180.410(a); and
                (4) Notify the Assistant Secretary of the filing of the charge.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 55078, Oct. 24, 1991; 59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994; 59 FR 46759, Sept. 12, 1994; 60 FR 58452, Nov. 27, 1995; 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997; 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
              
                § 103.410
                Election of civil action or provision of administrative proceeding.
                (a) If a charge is issued under § 103.405, a complainant (including the Assistant Secretary, if HUD filed the complaint), a respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint is filed may elect, in lieu of an administrative proceeding under 24 CFR part 180, to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under section 812(o) of the Fair Housing Act.

                (b) The election must be made not later than 20 says after the receipt of service of the charge, or in the case of the Assistant Secretary, not later than 20 days after service. The notice of election must be filed with the Docket Clerk in the Office of Administrative Law Judges and served on the General Counsel, the Assistant Secretary, the respondent, and the aggrieved persons on whose behalf the complaint was filed. The notification will be filed and served in accordance with the procedures established under 24 CFR part 180.
                (c) If an election is not made under this section, the General Counsel will maintain an administrative proceeding based on the charge in accordance with the procedures under 24 CFR part 180.
                (d) If an election is made under this section, the General Counsel shall immediately notify and authorize the Attorney General to commence and maintain a civil action seeking relief under section 812(o) of the Fair Housing Act on behalf of the aggrieved person in an appropriate United States District Court. Such notification and authorization shall include transmission of the file in the case, including a copy of the final investigative report and the charge, to the Attorney General.
                (e) The General Counsel shall be available for consultation concerning any legal issues raised by the Attorney General as to how best to proceed in the event that a new court decision or newly discovered evidence is regarded as relevant to the reasonable cause determination.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996; 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
            
            
              Subpart G—Prompt Judicial Action
              
                § 103.500
                Prompt judicial action.
                (a) If at any time following the filing of a complaint, the General Counsel concludes that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purposes of this part or 24 CFR part 180, the General Counsel may authorize the Attorney General to commence a civil action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the complaint. To ensure the prompt initiation of the civil action, the General Counsel will consult with the Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division before making the determination that prompt judicial action is necessary. The commencement of a civil action by the Attorney General under this section will not affect the initiation or continuation of proceedings under this part or administrative proceedings under part 180.
                (b) If the General Counsel has reason to believe that a basis exists for the commencement of proceedings against the respondent under section 814(a) of the Fair Housing Act (Pattern or Practice Cases), proceedings under section 814(c) of the Fair Housing Act (Enforcement of Subpoenas), or proceedings by any governmental licensing or supervisory authorities, the General Counsel shall transmit the information upon which that belief is based to the Attorney General and to other appropriate authorities.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]
              
            
            
              Subpart H—Other Action
              
                § 103.510
                Other action by HUD.
                In addition to the actions described in § 103.500, HUD may pursue one or more of the following courses of action:
                (a) Refer the matter to the Attorney General for appropriate action (e.g., enforcement of criminal penalties under section 811(c) of the Act).
                (b) Take appropriate steps to initiate proceedings leading to the debarment of the respondent under 2 CFR part 2424, or initiate other actions leading to the imposition of administrative sanctions, where HUD determines that such actions are necessary to the effective operation and administration of federal programs or activities.
                (c) Take appropriate steps to initiate proceedings under:
                (1) 24 CFR part 1, implementing title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;
                (2) 24 CFR 570.912, implementing section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974;
                (3) 24 CFR part 8, implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
                (4) 24 CFR part 107, implementing Executive Order 11063; or
                (5) The Age Discrimination Act, 42 U.S.C. 6101.
                (d) Inform any other Federal, State or local agency with an interest in the enforcement of respondent's obligations with respect to nondiscrimination in housing.
                [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007]
              
              
                
                § 103.515
                Action by other agencies.
                In accordance with section 808 (d) and (e) of the Fair Housing Act and Executive Order No. 12259, other Federal agencies, including any agency having regulatory or supervisory authority over financial institutions, are responsible for ensuring that their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development are administered in a manner affirmatively to further the goal of fair housing, and for cooperating with the Assistant Secretary in furthering the purposes of the Fair Housing Act.
              
            
          
          
            PART 105 [RESERVED]
          
          
            Pt. 107
            PART 107—NONDISCRIMINATION AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN HOUSING UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER 11063
            
              Sec.
              107.10
              Purpose.
              107.11
              Relation to other authorities.
              107.15
              Definitions.
              107.20
              Prohibition against discriminatory practices.
              107.21
              Prevention of discriminatory practices.
              107.25
              Provisions in legal instruments.
              107.30
              Recordkeeping requirements.
              107.35
              Complaints.
              107.40
              Compliance meeting.
              107.45
              Resolution of matters.
              107.50
              Compliance reviews.
              107.51
              Findings of noncompliance.
              107.55
              Compliance report.
              107.60
              Sanctions and penalties.
              107.65
              Referral to the Attorney General.
            
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3535(d); E.O. 11063, 27 FR 11527, 3 CFR, 1958-1963 Comp., p. 652; E.O. 12892, 59 FR 2939, 3 CFR, 1994 Comp., p. 849.
            
            
              Source:
              45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 107.10
              Purpose.
              These regulations are to carry out the requirements of E.O. 11063 that all action necessary and appropriate be taken to prevent discrimination because of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin in the sale, rental, leasing or other disposition of residential property and related facilities or in the use or occupancy thereof where such property or facilities are owned or operated by the Federal Government, or provided with Federal assistance by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and in the lending practices with respect to residential property and related facilities of lending institutions insofar as such practices relate to loans insured, guaranteed or purchased by the Department. These regulations are intended to assure compliance with the established policy of the United States that the benefits under programs and activities of the Department which provide financial assistance, directly or indirectly, for the provision, rehabilitation, or operation of housing and related facilities are made available without discrimination based on race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin. These regulations are also intended to assure compliance with the policy of this Department to administer its housing programs affirmatively, so as to achieve a condition in which individuals of similar income levels in the same housing market area have a like range of housing choices available to them regardless of their race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]
            
            
              § 107.11
              Relation to other authorities.
              (a) Where allegations of discrimination on the grounds of race, color, or national origin are made in a program or activity of Federal financial assistance of the Department which does not involve a contract of insurance or guaranty, the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and regulations implementing title VI, Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs, under part 1 of this title shall apply. Any complaint alleging discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin in a program or activity of the Department involving a contract of insurance or guaranty will be received and processed according to this part.

              (b) Where a complaint filed pursuant to this part alleges a discriminatory housing practice which is also covered by title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, the complainant shall be advised of the right to file a complaint pursuant to section 810 of that title and of the availability of Department procedures regarding fair housing complaints under part 105 of this title. The complainant shall also be advised of the right to initiate a civil action in court pursuant to section 812 of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 without first filing a complaint with HUD.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]
            
            
              § 107.15
              Definitions.
              (a) Department and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
              (b) State means each of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealths of Puerto Rico and the Northern Marianas, and the territories of the United States.
              (c) Assistance includes (1) grants, loans, contributions, and advances of Federal funds; (2) the grant or donation of Federal property and interests in property; (3) the sale, lease, and rental of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or transient basis), Federal property or any interest in such property without consideration or at a nominal consideration or at a consideration which is reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of the public interest to be served by such sale or lease to the recipient, when such order granting permission accompanies the sale, lease, or rental of Federal properties; (4) loans in whole or in part insured, guaranteed, or otherwise secured by the credit of the Federal Government; and (5) any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance.
              (d) Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives or agents, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries and public entities.
              (e) Public entity means a government or governmental subdivision or agency.
              (f) Discriminatory practice means: (1) Any discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin or the existence or use of a policy or practice, or any arrangement, criterion or other method of administration which has the effect of denying equal housing opportunity or which substantially impairs the ability of persons to apply for or receive the benefits of assistance because of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin, in the sale, rental or other disposition of residential property or related facilities (including land to be developed for residential use), or in the use or occupancy thereof, where such property or related facilities are:
              (i) Owned or operated by the Secretary;
              (ii) Provided in whole or in part with the aid of loans, advances, grants, or contributions agreed to be made by the Department after November 20, 1962;
              (iii) Provided in whole or in part by loans insured, guaranteed or otherwise secured by the credit of the Department after November 20, 1962; or
              (iv) Provided by the development or the redevelopment of real property purchased, leased, or otherwise obtained from a State or local public agency or unit of general purpose local government receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department under a loan or grant contract entered into after November 20, 1962.
              (2) Any discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin or the existence or use of a policy, practice, or any arrangement, criterion or other method of administration which has the effect of denying equal housing opportunity or which substantially impairs the ability of persons to apply for or receive the benefits of assistance because of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin in lending practices with respect to residential property and related facilities (including land to be developed for residential use) of lending institutions, insofar as such practices relate to loans, insured or guaranteed, by the Department after November 20, 1962. Examples of discriminatory practices under subsections (1) and (2) include but are not limited to the following when based on race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin:

              (i) Denial to a person of any housing accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, financing or other benefit provided under a program or activity;
              
              (ii) Providing any housing accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, financing or other benefits to a person which are different, or are provided in a different manner, from those provided to others in a program or activity;
              (iii) Subjecting a person to segregation or separate treatment in any matter related to the receipt of housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, financing or other benefits under a program or activity;
              (iv) Restricting a person in any way in access to housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, financing or other benefits, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in connection with such housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits under a program or activity;
              (v) Treating persons differently in determining whether they satisfy any occupancy, admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement or condition which persons must meet in order to be provided any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, financing or other benefits under a program or activity; and
              (vi) Denying a person opportunity to participate in a program or activity through the provision of services or otherwise, or affording the person an opportunity to do so which is different from that afforded others in a program or activity.
              (3) Noncompliance with relevant affirmative fair housing marketing requirements contained in Department programs and regulations.
              (4) A formal finding of a violation of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 or a state or local fair housing law with respect to activities also covered by E.O. 11063.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985; 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]
            
            
              § 107.20
              Prohibition against discriminatory practices.
              (a) No person receiving assistance from or participating in any program or activity of the Department involving housing and related facilities shall engage in a discriminatory practice.
              (b) Where such person has been found by the Department or any other Federal Department, agency, or court to have previously discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin, he or she must take affirmative action to overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
              (c) Nothing in this part precludes such person from taking affirmative action to prevent discrimination in housing or related facilities where the purpose of such action is to overcome prior discriminatory practice or usage or to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]
            
            
              § 107.21
              Prevention of discriminatory practices.
              All persons receiving assistance from, or participating in any program or activity of the Department involving housing and related facilities shall take all action necessary and proper to prevent discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]
            
            
              § 107.25
              Provisions in legal instruments.
              (a) The following documents shall contain provisions or statements requiring compliance with E.O. 11063 and this part:
              (1) Contracts, grants and agreements providing Departmental assistance for the provision of housing and related facilities,
              (2) Contracts, grants and agreements regarding the sale, rental or management of properties owned by the Secretary,
              (3) Corporate charters and regulatory agreements relating to multifamily and land development projects assisted by the Department,
              (4) Approvals of financial institutions and other lenders as approved FHA mortgagees,

              (5) Requests for subdivision reports under home mortgage procedures and for preapplication analysis of multifamily and land development projects, and
              (6) Contracts and agreements providing for Departmental insurance or guarantee of loans with respect to housing and related facilities.
              (b) The provision or statement required pursuant to this section shall indicate that the failure or refusal to comply with the requirements of E.O. 11063 or this part shall be a proper basis for the imposition of sanctions provided in § 107.60.
            
            
              § 107.30
              Recordkeeping requirements.
              (a) All persons receiving assistance through any program or activity of the Department involving the provision of housing and related activities subject to Executive Order 11063 shall maintain racial, religious, national origin and sex data required by the Department in connection with its programs and activities.
              (b) All lenders participating in Departmental mortgage insurance programs, home improvement loan programs, GNMA mortgage purchase programs, or special mortgage assistance programs, shall maintain data regarding the race, religion, national origin and sex of each applicant and joint applicant for assistance with regard to residential property and related facilities. Racial data shall be noted in the following categories: American Indian/Alaskan Native, Asian/Pacific Islander, Black, White, Hispanic. If an applicant or joint applicant refuses to voluntarily provide the information or any part of it, that fact shall be noted and the information shall be obtained, to the extent possible, through observation. Applications shall be retained for a period of at least twenty-five (25) months following the date the record was made.
              (c) If an investigation or compliance review under this part reveals a failure to comply with any of the requirements of paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, the respondent shall have the burden of establishing its compliance with this part and with the equal housing opportunity requirements of the Executive order.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 52442, Dec. 24, 1985]
            
            
              § 107.35
              Complaints.
              (a) The Assistant Secretary for FH&EO, or designee, shall conduct such compliance reviews, investigations, inquiries, and informal meetings as may be necessary to effect compliance with this part.
              (b) Complaints under this part may be filed by any person and must be filed within one year of date of the alleged act of discrimination unless the time for filing is extended by the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO. Complaints must be signed by the complainant and may be filed with the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410, or any Regional or Area Office of the Department. All complaints shall be forwarded to the Director, Office of Regional Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity in the appropriate Regional Office which has jurisdiction in the area in which the property is located.
              (c) Upon receipt of a timely complaint, the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall determine whether the complaint indicates a possible violation of the Executive Order or this part. The Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO or a designee within a reasonable period of time shall conduct an investigation into the facts. The complainant shall be notified of the determination.
            
            
              § 107.40
              Compliance meeting.

              (a) Where preliminary analysis of a complaint, a compliance review initiated by the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO, or other information indicates a possible violation of E.O. 11063, or this part, the person allegedly in violation (respondent) shall be sent a Notice of Compliance Meeting and requested to attend a compliance meeting. The Notice shall advise the respondent of the matters to be addressed in the Compliance Meeting and the allegations contained in a complaint received pursuant to § 107.35. The purpose of the compliance meeting is to provide the respondent with the opportunity to address matters raised and to remedy such possible violations speedily and informally, to identify possible remedies; and to effect a resolution as provided in § 107.45.
              
              (b) The Notice of Compliance Meeting shall be sent to the last known address of the person allegedly in violation, by certified mail, or through personal service. The Notice will advise such person of the right to respond within seven (7) days to the matters and to submit information and relevant data evidencing compliance with E.O. 11063, the Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Regulations, 24 CFR 200.600, the Fair Housing Poster Regulations, 24 CFR part 110, the Advertising Guidelines for Fair Housing, 37 FR 6700, April 1, 1972, other affirmative marketing requirements applicable to the program or activity and any revisions thereto. Further, the person will be offered an opportunity to be present at the meeting in order to submit any other evidence showing such compliance. The date, place, and time of the scheduled meeting will be included in the Notice.
              (c) Whenever a compliance meeting is scheduled as a result of a complaint, the complainant shall be sent a copy of the Notice of Compliance Meeting and shall be provided an opportunity to attend the meeting.
              (d) The Area Office having jurisdiction over the program will prepare a report concerning the status of the respondent's participation in Department programs to be presented to the respondent at the meeting. The Area Manager shall be notified of the meeting and may attend the meeting.
              (e) At the Compliance Meeting the respondent and the complainant may be represented by counsel and shall have a fair opportunity to present any matters relevant to the complaint.
              (f) During and pursuant to the Compliance Meeting, the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall consider all evidence relating to the alleged violation, including any action taken by the person allegedly in violation to comply with E.O. 11063.
              (g) If the evidence shows no violation of the Executive order or this part, the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall so notify the person(s) involved within ten (10) days of the meeting. A copy of this notification shall be sent to the complainant, if any, and shall be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO.
              (h) If the evidence indicates an apparent failure to comply with the Executive order or this part, and the matter cannot be resolved informally pursuant to § 107.45, the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall so notify the respondent and the complainant, if any, no later than ten (10) days after the date on which the compliance meeting is held, in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall advise the complainant, if any, and the respondent whether the Department will conduct a compliance review pursuant to § 107.50 or, where appropriate, refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO for possible imposition of sanctions. A copy of this notification shall be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO. The compliance review shall be conducted to determine whether the respondent has complied with the provisions of E.O. 11063, title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, Department regulations and the Department's Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing requirements.
              (i) If the respondent fails to attend a compliance meeting scheduled pursuant to this section, the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall notify the respondent no later than ten (10) days after the date of the scheduled meeting, in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, as to whether the Department will conduct a compliance review or, where appropriate, refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO for possible imposition of sanctions. A copy of this notification shall be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO and sent to the complainant, if any.
            
            
              § 107.45
              Resolution of matters.
              (a) Attempts to resolve and remedy matters found in a complaint investigation or a compliance review shall be made through the methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion.

              (b) Resolution of matters pursuant to this section and § 107.40 need not be attempted where similar efforts by another Federal agency have been unsuccessful in ending and remedying the violation found with respect to the same respondent.
              
              (c) Efforts to remedy matters shall be directed toward achieving a just resolution of the probable violation and obtaining assurance(s) that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of E.O. 11063 and will take actions to eliminate the discriminatory practices and prevent reoccurrences. Compensation to individuals from the respondent may also be considered.
              (d) The terms of settlements shall be reduced to a written agreement, signed by the respondent and the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO or a designee. Such settlements shall seek to protect the interests of the complainant, if any, other persons similarly affected, and the public interest. A written notice of the disposition of matters pursuant to this section and of the terms of settlements shall be given to the Area Manager by the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO or a designee and to the complainant, if any. When the Assistant Secretary or a designee determines that there has been a violation of a settlement agreement, the Assistant Secretary immediately may take action to impose sanctions provided under this part, including the referral of the matter to the Attorney General for appropriate action.
            
            
              § 107.50
              Compliance reviews.
              (a) Compliance reviews shall be conducted by the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO or a designee. Complaints alleging a violation(s) of this part or information ascertained in the absence of a complaint indicating apparent failure to comply with this part shall be referred immediately to the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO. The Regional Director of the Office having jurisdiction over the programs involved and the Area Manager shall be notified of all alleged violations of the regulations. A complaint is not a prerequisite for the initiation of compliance review.
              (b) The purpose of a compliance review is to determine whether the respondent is in compliance with the Executive order and this part. Where allegations may also indicate a violation of the provisions of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, HUD regulations issued thereunder and Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing requirements, a review may be undertaken to determine compliance with those requirements. The respondent shall be given at least five (5) days notice of the time set for any compliance review and the place or places for such review. The complainant shall also be notified of the compliance review.
            
            
              § 107.51
              Findings of noncompliance.
              (a) A finding of noncompliance shall be made when the facts disclosed during an investigation or compliance review, or other information, indicate a failure to comply with the provisions of E.O. 11063 or this part. In no event will a finding of noncompliance precede the completion of the compliance meeting procedures set forth in § 107.40.
              (b) Determinations of noncompliance with E.O. 11063 shall be made in any case in which the facts establish the existence of a discriminatory practice under § 107.15(g)
              (c) The existence or use of a policy or practice, or any arrangement, criterion or other method of administration which has the effect of denying equal housing opportunity or which substantially impairs the ability of persons, because of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin, to apply for or receive the benefits of assistance shall be a basis for finding a discriminatory practice unless the respondent can establish that:
              (1) The policy or practice is designed to serve a legitimate business necessity or governmental purpose of the respondent;
              (2) The policy or practice effectively carries out the interest it is designed to serve; and
              (3) No alternative course of action could be adopted that would enable respondent's interest to be served with a less discriminatory impact.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]
            
            
              § 107.55
              Compliance report.

              (a) Following completion of efforts under this part, the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO or a designee shall prepare a compliance report promptly and the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO shall make a finding of compliance or noncompliance. If it is found that the respondent is in compliance, all persons concerned shall be notified of the finding. Where a finding of noncompliance is made, the report shall specify the violations found. The Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall send a copy of the report to the respondent by certified mail, return receipt requested, together with a Notice that the matter will be forwarded to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO for a determination as to whether actions will be initiated for the imposition of sanctions. The Regional Director of the Office having jurisdiction over the programs involved and the Area Manager shall also receive a copy of the report and the notice of intention to refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO.
              (b) The Notice will provide that the respondent shall have seven (7) days to respond to the violations found and resolve and remedy matters in the compliance report. At the expiration of the seven (7) day period the matter shall be referred to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO.
              (c) The complainant shall be sent a copy of the findings and compliance report and shall have seven (7) days to comment thereon.
            
            
              § 107.60
              Sanctions and penalties.
              (a) Failure or refusal to comply with E.O. 11063 or the requirements of this part shall be proper basis for applying sanctions. Violations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 or a state or local fair housing law, with respect to activities covered by the Executive order, or of the regulations and requirements under E.O. 11063 of other Federal Departments and agencies may also result in the imposition of sanctions by this Department.
              (b) Such sanctions as are specified by E.O. 11063, the contract through which federal assistance is provided, and such sanctions as are specified by the rules or regulations of the Department governing the program under which federal assistance to the project is provided shall be applied in accordance with the relevant regulations. Actions that may be taken include: cancellation or termination, in whole or in part, of the contract or agreement; refusal to approve a lender or withdrawal of approval; or a determination of ineligibility, suspension, or debarment from any further assistance or contracts; provided, however, that sanctions of debarment, suspension, and ineligibility are subject to the Department's regulations under 2 CFR part 2424, and, further, that no sanction under section 302 (a), (b), and (c) of Executive Order 11063 shall be applied by the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity without the concurrence of the Secretary.
              (c) The Department shall use its good offices in order to promote the abandonment of discriminatory practices with regard to residential property and related facilities provided with assistance prior to the effective date of E.O. 11063 and take appropriate actions permitted by law including the institution of appropriate litigation to provide such equal housing opportunities.
              (d) In any case involving the failure of a lender to comply with the requirements of the Executive order or this part, the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO shall notify the Federal financial regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the lender of the findings in the case.
              [45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007]
            
            
              § 107.65
              Referral to the Attorney General.
              If the results of a complaint investigation or a compliance review demonstrate that any person, or specified class of persons, has violated E.O. 11063 or this part, and efforts to resolve the matter(s) by informal means have failed, the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO in appropriate cases shall recommend that the General Counsel refer the case to the Attorney General of the United States for appropriate civil or criminal action under section 303 of E.O. 11063.
            
          
          
            Pt. 108
            PART 108—COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES FOR AFFIRMATIVE FAIR HOUSING MARKETING
            
              Sec.
              108.1
              Purpose and application.
              108.5
              Authority.
              108.15
              Pre-occupancy conference.
              
              108.20
              Monitoring office responsibility for monitoring plans and reports.
              108.21
              Civil rights/compliance reviewing office compliance responsibility.
              108.25
              Compliance meeting.
              108.35
              Complaints.
              108.40
              Compliance reviews.
              108.45
              Compliance report.
              108.50
              Sanctions.
            
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3608, 3535(d); E.O. 11063, 27 FR 11527, 3 CFR, 1958-1963 Comp., p. 652; E.O. 12892, 59 FR 2939, 3 CFR, 1994 Comp., p. 849.
            
            
              Source:
              44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 108.1
              Purpose and application.
              (a) The primary purpose of this regulation is to establish procedures for determining whether or not an applicant's actions are in compliance with its approved Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing (AFHM) plan, AFHM Regulation (24 CFR 200.600), and AFHM requirements in Departmental programs.
              (b) These regulations apply to all applicants for participation in subsidized and unsubsidized housing programs administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and to all other persons subject to Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing requirements in Department programs.
              (c) The term applicant includes:

              (1) All persons whose applications are approved for development or rehabilitation of: Subdivisions; multifamily projects; manufactured home parks of five or more lots, units or spaces; or dwelling units, when the applicant's participation in FHA housing programs has exceeded, or would thereby exceed, development of five or more such dwelling units during the year preceding the application, except that there shall not be included in a determination of the number of dwelling units developed or rehabilitated by an applicant, those in which a single family dwelling is constructed or rehabilitated for occupancy by a mortgagor on property owned by the mortgagor and in which the applicant had no interest prior to entering into the contract for construction or rehabilitation. For the purposes of this definition, a person remains an applicant from the date of submission of an application through duration of receipt of assistance pursuant to such application.
              (2) All other persons subject to AFHM requirements in Departmental programs.
              (d) The term person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives or agents, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries and public entities.

              (e) The term monitoring office includes any office within HUD designated by HUD to act as a monitoring office. As necessary, HUD will designate specific offices within HUD to act as monitoring offices through a notice published in the Federal Register.
              
              (f) The term civil rights/compliance reviewing office includes any office within HUD designated by HUD to act as a civil rights/compliance reviewing office. As necessary, HUD will designate specific offices within HUD to act as civil rights/compliance reviewing offices through a notice published in the Federal Register.
              
              [44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 50 FR 9268, Mar. 7, 1985; 64 FR 44095, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              § 108.5
              Authority.
              The regulations in this part are issued pursuant to the authority to issue regulations granted to the Secretary by section 7(d) of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. 3535(d). They implement the functions, powers, and duties imposed on the Secretary by Executive Order 11063, 27 FR 11527 and title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. 3608.
            
            
              § 108.15
              Pre-occupancy conference.

              Applicants shall submit a Notification of Intent to Begin Marketing to the monitoring office no later than 90 days prior to engaging in sales or rental marketing activities. Upon receipt of the Notification of Intent to Begin Marketing from the applicant, the monitoring office shall review any previously approved plan and may schedule a pre-occupancy conference. Such pre-occupancy conference shall be held prior to initiation of sales or rental marketing activities. At this conference, the previously approved AFHM plan shall be reviewed with the applicant to determine if the plan, and/or its proposed implementation, requires modification previous to initiation of marketing in order to achieve the objectives of the AFHM regulation and the plan.
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2535-0027)
              [44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 20903, May 10, 1983; 64 FR 44095, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              § 108.20
              Monitoring office responsibility for monitoring plans and reports.
              (a) Submission of documentation. Pursuant to initiation of marketing, the applicant shall submit to the monitoring office reports documenting the implementation of the AFHM plan, including sales or rental reports, as required by the Department. Copies of such documentation shall be forwarded to the civil rights/compliance reviewing office by the monitoring office as requested.
              (b) Monitoring of AFHM plan. The monitoring office is responsible for monitoring AFHM plans and providing technical assistance to the applicant in preparation or modification of such plans during the period of development and initial implementation.
              (c) Review of applicant's reports. Each sales or rental report shall be reviewed by the monitoring office as it is received. When sales or rental reports show that 20% of the units covered by the AFHM plan have been sold or rented, or whenever it appears that the plan may not accomplish its intended objective, the monitoring office shall notify the civil rights/compliance reviewing office.
              (d) Failure of applicant to file documentation. If the applicant fails to file required documentation, the applicant shall be sent a written notice indicating that if the delinquent documentation is not submitted to the monitoring office within 10 days from date of receipt of the notice, the matter will be referred to the civil rights/compliance reviewing office by the monitoring office for action which may lead to the imposition of sanctions.
              [64 FR 44096, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              § 108.21
              Civil rights/compliance reviewing office compliance responsibility.
              The civil rights/compliance reviewing office shall be responsible for determining whether an applicant's actions are in apparent compliance with its approved AFHM plan, the AFHM regulations, and this part and for determining changes or modifications necessary in the plan after initiation of marketing.
              [64 FR 44096, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              § 108.25
              Compliance meeting.
              (a) Scheduling meeting. If an applicant fails to comply with requirements under § 108.15 or § 108.20 or it appears that the goals of the AFHM plan may not be achieved, or that the implementation of the Plan should be modified, the civil rights/compliance reviewing office shall schedule a meeting with the applicant. The meeting shall be held at least ten days before the next sales or rental report is due. The purpose of the compliance meeting is to review the applicant's compliance with AFHM requirements and the implementation of the AFHM Plan and to indicate any changes or modifications which may be required in the Plan.
              (b) Notice of Compliance Meeting. A Notice of Compliance Meeting shall be sent to the last known address of the applicant, by certified mail or through personal service. The Notice will advise the applicant of the right to respond within seven (7) days to the matters identified as subjects of the meeting and to submit information and relevant data evidencing compliance with the AFHM regulations, the AFHM Plan, Executive Order 11063 and title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, when appropriate. If the applicant is a small entity, as defined by the regulations of the Small Business Administration, the Notice shall include notification that the entity may submit comment on HUD's actions to the Small Business and Agriculture Regulatory Enforcement Ombudsman, and shall include the appropriate contact information.
              (c) Applicant data required. The applicant will be requested in writing to provide, prior to or at the compliance meeting, specific documents, records, and other information relevant to compliance, including but not limited to:
              (1) Copies or scripts of all advertising in the Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA) or housing market area, as appropriate, including newspaper, radio and television advertising, and a photograph of any sale or rental sign at the site of construction;
              (2) Copies of brochures and other printed material used in connection with sales or rentals;
              (3) Evidence of outreach to community organizations;
              (4) Any other evidence of affirmative outreach to groups which are not likely to apply for the subject housing;
              (5) Evidence of instructions to employees with respect to company policy of nondiscrimination in housing;
              (6) Description of training conducted with sales/rental staff;
              (7) Evidence of nondiscriminatory hiring and recruiting policies for staff engaged in the sale or rental of properties, and data by race and sex of the composition of the staff;
              (8) Copies of applications and waiting lists of prospective buyers or renters maintained by applicant;
              (9) Copies of Sign-in Lists maintained on site for prospective buyers and renters who are shown the facility;
              (10) Copies of the selection and screening criteria;
              (11) Copies of relevant lease or sales agreements;
              (12) Any other information which documents efforts to comply with an approved plan.
              (d) Preparation for the compliance meeting. The monitoring office will provide information concerning the status of the project or housing involved to be presented to the applicant at the meeting. The monitoring office shall be notified of the meeting and may send representatives to the meeting.
              (e) Resolution of matters. Where matters raised in the compliance meetings are resolved through revision to the plan or its implementation, the terms of the resolution shall be reduced to writing and submitted to the civil rights/compliance reviewing office within 10 days of the date of the compliance meeting.
              (f) Determination of compliance. If the evidence shows no violation of the AFHM regulations and that the applicant is complying with its approved AFHM plan and this part, the civil rights/compliance reviewing office shall so notify the applicant within 10 days of the meeting.
              (g) Determination of possible noncompliance. If the evidence indicates an apparent failure to comply with the AFHM plan or the AFHM regulation, or if the matters raised cannot be resolved, the civil rights/compliance reviewing office shall so notify the applicant no later than ten (10) days after the date the compliance meeting is held, in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall advise the applicant that the Department will conduct a comprehensive compliance review or refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity for consideration of action including the imposition of sanctions. The purpose of a compliance review is to determine whether the applicant has complied with the provisions of Executive Order 11063, title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, and the AFHM regulations in conjunction with the applicant's specific AFHM plan previously approved by HUD.
              (h) Failure of applicant to attend the meeting. If the applicant fails to attend the meeting scheduled pursuant to this section, the civil rights/compliance reviewing office shall so notify the applicant no later than ten (10) days after the date of the scheduled meeting, in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall advise the applicant as to whether the civil rights/compliance reviewing office will conduct a comprehensive compliance review or refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity for consideration of action including the imposition of sanctions.
              [44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 64 FR 44096, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              
              § 108.35
              Complaints.
              Individuals and private and public entities may file complaints alleging violations of the AFHM regulations or an approved AFHM plan with any monitoring office, civil rights/compliance reviewing office, or with the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO. Complaints will be referred to the civil rights/compliance reviewing office. Where there is an allegation of a violation of title VIII the complaint also will be processed under part 105.
              [44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 64 FR 44096, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              § 108.40
              Compliance reviews.
              (a) General. All compliance reviews shall be conducted by the civil rights/compliance reviewing office. Complaints alleging a violation(s) of the AFHM regulations, or information ascertained in the absence of a complaint indicating an applicant's failure to comply with an AFHM plan, shall be referred immediately to the civil rights/compliance reviewing office. The monitoring office shall be notified as appropriate of all alleged violations of the AFHM regulations or alleged failure to comply with an AFHM plan.
              (b) Initiation of compliance reviews. Even in the absence of a complaint or other information indicating noncompliance pursuant to paragraph (a), the civil rights/compliance reviewing office may conduct periodic compliance reviews throughout the life of the mortgage in the case of multi-family projects and throughout the duration of the Housing Assistance Payments Contract with the Department in the case of housing assisted under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 1437.
              (c) Nature of compliance reviews. The purpose of a compliance review is to determine whether the applicant is in compliance with the Department's AFHM requirements and the applicant's approved AFHM plan. Where allegations under this part may also constitute a violation of the provisions of Executive Order 11063 or title VIII, the review will also determine compliance with the requirements thereof. The applicant shall be given at least five (5) days notice of the time set for any compliance review and the place or places for such review. The compliance review will cover the following areas:
              (1) Applicant's sales and rental practices, including practices in soliciting buyers and tenants, determining eligibility, selecting and rejecting buyers and renters, and in concluding sales and rental transactions.
              (2) Programs to attract minority and majority buyers and renters regardless of sex, including:
              (i) Use of advertising media, brochures, and pamphlets;
              (ii) Conformance with both the Department's Fair Housing Poster Regulation (24 CFR part 110) and the Advertising Guidelines for Fair Housing (37 FR 6700) and any revisions thereto.
              (3) Data relating to:
              (i) The size and location of units;
              (ii) Services provided;
              (iii) Sales and/or rental price ranges;
              (iv) The race and sex of buyers and/or renters;
              (v) Race and sex of staff engaged in sale or rental of dwellings.
              (4) Other matters relating to the marketing or sales of dwellings under HUD affirmative marketing requirements, the AFMH Plan and this part.
              [44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 64 FR 44096, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              § 108.45
              Compliance report.
              Following a compliance review, a report shall be prepared promptly and the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO shall make a finding of compliance or noncompliance. If it is found that the applicant is in compliance, all parties concerned shall be notified of the findings. Whenever a finding of noncompliance is made pursuant to this part, the report shall list specifically the violations found. The applicant shall be sent a copy of the report by certified mail, return receipt requested, together with a notice that, if the matter cannot be resolved within ten days of receipt of the Notice, the matter will be referred to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO to make a determination as to whether actions will be initiated for the imposition of sanctions.
              [44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 64 FR 44097, Aug. 12, 1999]
            
            
              
              § 108.50
              Sanctions.
              Applicants failing to comply with the requirements of these regulations, the AFHM regulations, or an AFHM plan will make themselves liable to sanctions authorized by law, regulations, agreements, rules, or policies governing the program pursuant to which the application was made, including, but not limited to, denial of further participation in Departmental programs and referral to the Department of Justice for suit by the United States for injunctive or other appropriate relief.
            
          
          
            Pt. 110
            PART 110—FAIR HOUSING POSTER
            
              
                Subpart A—Purpose and Definitions
                Sec.
                110.1
                Purpose.
                110.5
                Definitions.
              
              
                Subpart B—Requirements for Display of Posters
                110.10
                Persons subject.
                110.15
                Location of posters.
                110.20
                Availability of posters.
                110.25
                Description of posters.
              
              
                Subpart C—Enforcement
                110.30
                Effect of failure to display poster.
              
            
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3620.
            
            
              Source:
              37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              Subpart A—Purpose and Definitions
              
                § 110.1
                Purpose.
                The regulations set forth in this part contain the procedures established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development with respect to the display of a fair housing poster by persons subject to sections 804 through 806 of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3604-3606.
                [54 FR 3310, Jan. 23, 1989]
              
              
                § 110.5
                Definitions.
                (a) The terms Department and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
                (b) Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 804, 805, 806, or 818 of the Act.
                (c) Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
                (d) Family includes a single individual.
                (e) Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under title 11 U.S.C., receivers and fiduciaries.
                (f) Fair housing poster means the poster prescribed by the Secretary for display by persons subject to sections 804-806 of the Act.
                (g) The Act means the Fair Housing Act (The Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988), 42 U.S.C. 3600, et seq.
                
                (h) Person in the business of selling or renting dwellings means a person as defined in section 803(c) of the Act.
                [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989; 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]
              
            
            
              Subpart B—Requirements for Display of Posters
              
                § 110.10
                Persons subject.
                (a) Except to the extent that paragraph (b) of this section applies, all persons subject to section 804 of the Act, Discrimination in the Sale or Rental of Housing and Other Prohibited Practices, shall post and maintain a fair housing poster as follows:
                (1) With respect to a single-family dwelling (not being offered for sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of other dwellings) offered for sale or rental through a real estate broker, agent, salesman, or person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, such person shall post and maintain a fair housing poster at any place of business where the dwelling is offered for sale or rental.

                (2) With respect to all other dwellings covered by the Act:
                
                (i) A fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained at any place of business where the dwelling is offered for sale or rental, and
                (ii) A fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained at the dwelling, except that with respect to a single-family dwelling being offered for sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of other dwellings, the fair housing poster may be posted and maintained at the model dwellings instead of at each of the individual dwellings.
                (3) With respect to those dwellings to which paragraph (a)(2) of this section applies, the fair housing poster must be posted at the beginning of construction and maintained throughout the period of construction and sale or rental.
                (b) This part shall not require posting and maintaining a fair housing poster:
                (1) On vacant land, or
                (2) At any single-family dwelling, unless such dwelling
                (i) Is being offered for sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of other dwellings in which circumstances a fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained as specified in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, or
                (ii) Is being offered for sale or rental through a real estate broker, agent, salesman, or person in the business of selling or renting dwellings in which circumstances a fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained as specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section,
                (c) All persons subject to section 805 of the Act, Discrimination In Residential Real Estate-Related Transactions shall post and maintain a fair housing poster at all their places of business which participate in the covered activities.
                (d) All persons subject to section 806 of the Act, Discrimination in the Provision of Brokerage Services, shall post and maintain a fair housing poster at all their places of business.
                [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]
              
              
                § 110.15
                Location of posters.
                All fair housing posters shall be prominently displayed so as to be readily apparent to all persons seeking housing accommodations or seeking to engage in residential real estate-related transactions or brokerage services as contemplated by sections 804 through 806 of the Act.
                [54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]
              
              
                § 110.20
                Availability of posters.
                All persons subject to this part may obtain fair housing posters from the Department's regional and area offices. A facsimile may be used if the poster and the lettering are equivalent in size and legibility to the poster available from the Department.
                [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972]
              
              
                § 110.25
                Description of posters.
                (a) The fair housing poster shall be 11 inches by 14 inches and shall bear the following legend:
                
                  EC12OC91.008
                
                
                EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
                We do Business in Accordance With the Fair Housing Act
                
                  (The Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988)
                  IT IS ILLEGAL TO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST
                  ANY PERSON BECAUSE OF RACE, COLOR, RELIGION, SEX, HANDICAP, FAMILIAL STATUS (HAVING ONE OR MORE CHILDREN), OR NATIONAL ORIGIN
                  • In the sale or rental of housing or residential lots.
                  • In advertising the sale or rental of housing.
                  • In the financing of housing.
                  • In the appraisal of housing.
                  • In the provision of real estate brokerage services.
                  • Blockbusting is also illegal.

                  Anyone who feels he or she has been discriminated against should send a complaint to:
                  
                  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Washington, DC 20410
                  
                    or
                  
                  HUD Region or [Area Office stamp]
                
                
                (b) The Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity may grant a waiver permitting the substitution of a poster prescribed by a Federal financial regulatory agency for the fair housing poster described in paragraph (a) of this section. While such waiver remains in effect, compliance with the posting requirements of such regulatory agency shall be deemed compliance with the posting requirements of this part. Such waiver shall not affect the applicability of all other provisions of this part.
                [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 40 FR 20079, May 8, 1975; 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]
              
            
            
              Subpart C—Enforcement
              
                § 110.30
                Effect of failure to display poster.
                Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice may file a complaint with the Secretary pursuant to part 105 of this chapter. A failure to display the fair housing poster as required by this part shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a discriminatory housing practice.
                [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972]
              
            
          
          
            Pt. 115
            PART 115—CERTIFICATION AND FUNDING OF STATE AND LOCAL FAIR HOUSING ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
            
              
                Subpart A—General
                Sec.
                115.100
                Definitions.
                115.101
                Program administration.
                115.102
                Public notices.
              
              
                Subpart B—Certification of Substantially Equivalent Agencies
                115.200
                Purpose.
                115.201
                The two phases of substantial equivalency certification.
                115.202
                Request for interim certification.
                115.203
                Interim certification procedures.
                115.204
                Criteria for adequacy of law.
                115.205
                Certification procedures.
                115.206
                Performance assessments; Performance standards.
                115.207
                Consequences of interim certification and certification.
                115.208
                Procedures for renewal of certification.
                115.209
                Technical assistance.
                115.210
                Performance deficiency procedures; Suspension; Withdrawal.
                115.211
                Changes limiting effectiveness of agency's law; Corrective actions; Suspension; Withdrawal; Consequences of repeal; Changes not limiting effectiveness.
                115.212
                Request after withdrawal.
              
              
                Subpart C—Fair Housing Assistance Program
                115.300
                Purpose.
                115.301
                Agency eligibility criteria; Funding availability.
                115.302
                Capacity building funds.
                115.303
                Eligible activities for capacity building funds.
                115.304
                Agencies eligible for contributions funds.
                115.305
                Special enforcement effort (SEE) funds.
                115.306
                Training funds.
                115.307
                Requirements for participation in the FHAP; Corrective and remedial action for failing to comply with requirements.
                115.308
                Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
                115.309
                Subcontracting under the FHAP.
                115.310
                FHAP and the First Amendment.
                115.311
                Testing.
              
            
            
              
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3601-19; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
            
            
              Source:
              72 FR 19074, Apr. 16, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              Subpart A—General
              
                § 115.100
                Definitions.
                (a) The terms “Fair Housing Act,” “HUD,” and “the Department,” as used in this part, are defined in 24 CFR 5.100.
                (b) The terms “aggrieved person,” “complainant,” “conciliation,” “conciliation agreement,” “discriminatory housing practice,” “dwelling,” “handicap,” “person,” “respondent,” “secretary,” and “state,” as used in this part, are defined in Section 802 of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3602).
                (c) Other definitions. The following definitions also apply to this part:
                
                  Act means the Fair Housing Act, as defined in 24 CFR 5.100.
                
                  Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
                
                  Certified agency is an agency that has been granted certification by the Assistant Secretary in accordance with the requirements of this part.
                
                  Cooperative agreement is the instrument HUD will use to provide funds. The Cooperative Agreement includes attachments and/or appendices establishing requirements relating to the operation and performance of the agency.
                
                  Cooperative agreement officer (CAO) is the administrator of the funds awarded pursuant to this part and is a regional director of the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
                
                  Dual-filed complaint means a housing discrimination complaint that has been filed with both HUD and the agency that has been granted interim certification or certification by the Assistant Secretary.
                
                  FHAP means the Fair Housing Assistance Program.
                
                  FHEO means HUD's Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
                
                  FHEO regional director means a regional director of the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
                
                  Fair housing law or Law refers to both state fair housing laws and local fair housing laws.
                
                  Final administrative disposition means an agency's completion of a case following a reasonable cause finding, including, but not limited to, an agency-approved settlement or a final, administrative decision issued by commissioners, hearing officers or administrative law judges. Final administrative disposition does not include dispositions in judicial proceedings resulting from election or appeal.
                
                  Government Technical Monitor (GTM) means the HUD staff person who has been designated to provide technical and financial oversight and evaluation of the FHAP grantee's performance.
                
                  Government Technical Representative (GTR) means the HUD staff person who is responsible for the technical administration of the FHAP grant, the evaluation of performance under the FHAP grant, the acceptance of technical reports or projects, the approval of payments, and other such specific responsibilities as may be stipulated in the FHAP grant.
                
                  Impracticable, as used in this part, is when complaint processing is delayed by circumstances beyond the control of the interim or certified agency. Those situations include, but are not limited to, complaints involving complex issues requiring extensive investigations, complaints involving new and complicated areas of law that need to be analyzed, and where a witness is discovered late in the investigation and needs to be interviewed.
                
                  Interim agency is an agency that has been granted interim certification by the Assistant Secretary.
                
                  Ordinance, as used in this part, means a law enacted by the legislative body of a municipality.
                
                  Statute, as used in this part, means a law enacted by the legislative body of a state.
                
                  Testing refers to the use of an individual or individuals (“testers”) who, without a bona fide intent to rent or purchase a house, apartment, or other dwelling, pose as prospective renters or purchasers for the purpose of gathering information that may indicate whether a housing provider is complying with fair housing laws.
              
              
                
                § 115.101
                Program administration.
                (a) Authority and responsibility. The Secretary has delegated the authority and responsibility for administering this part to the Assistant Secretary.
                (b) Delegation of Authority. The Assistant Secretary retains the right to make final decisions concerning the granting and withdrawal of substantial equivalency interim certification and certification. The Assistant Secretary delegates the authority and responsibility for administering the remainder of this part to the FHEO regional director. This includes assessing the performance of interim and certified agencies as described in § 115.206. This also includes the offering of a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) as described in § 115.210 and the suspension of interim certification or certification due to performance deficiencies as described in § 115.210.
              
              
                § 115.102
                Public notices.

                (a) Periodically, the Assistant Secretary will publish the following public notices in the Federal Register:
                (1) A list of all interim and certified agencies; and
                (2) A list of agencies to which a withdrawal of interim certification or certification has been proposed.

                (b) On an annual basis, the Assistant Secretary may publish in the Federal Register a notice that identifies all agencies that have received interim certification during the prior year. The notice will invite the public to comment on the state and local laws of the new interim agencies, as well as on the performance of the agencies in enforcing their laws. All comments will be considered before a final decision on certification is made.
              
            
            
              Subpart B—Certification of Substantially Equivalent Agencies
              
                § 115.200
                Purpose.
                This subpart implements section 810(f) of the Fair Housing Act. The purpose of this subpart is to set forth:
                (a) The basis for agency interim certification and certification;
                (b) Procedures by which a determination is made to grant interim certification or certification;
                (c) How the Department will evaluate the performance of an interim and certified agency;
                (d) Procedures that the Department will utilize when an interim or certified agency performs deficiently;
                (e) Procedures that the Department will utilize when there are changes limiting the effectiveness of an interim or certified agency's law;
                (f) Procedures for renewal of certification; and
                (g) Procedures when an agency requests interim certification or certification after a withdrawal.
              
              
                § 115.201
                The two phases of substantial equivalency certification.
                Substantial equivalency certification is granted if the Department determines that a state or local agency enforces a law that is substantially equivalent to the Fair Housing Act with regard to substantive rights, procedures, remedies, and the availability of judicial review. The Department has developed a two-phase process of substantial equivalency certification.
                (a) Adequacy of Law. In the first phase, the Assistant Secretary will determine whether, on its face, the fair housing law that the agency administers provides rights, procedures, remedies, and the availability of judicial review that are substantially equivalent to those provided in the federal Fair Housing Act. An affirmative conclusion may result in the Department offering the agency interim certification. An agency must obtain interim certification prior to obtaining certification.
                (b) Adequacy of Performance. In the second phase, the Assistant Secretary will determine whether, in operation, the fair housing law that the agency administers provides rights, procedures, remedies, and the availability of judicial review that are substantially equivalent to those provided in the federal Fair Housing Act. An affirmative conclusion will result in the Department offering the agency certification.
              
              
                § 115.202
                Request for interim certification.

                (a) A request for interim certification under this subpart shall be filed with the Assistant Secretary by the state or local official having principal responsibility for the administration of the state or local fair housing law. The request shall be supported by the text of the jurisdiction's fair housing law, the law creating and empowering the agency, all laws referenced in the jurisdiction's fair housing law, any regulations and directives issued under the law, and any formal opinions of the State Attorney General or the chief legal officer of the jurisdiction that pertain to the jurisdiction's fair housing law. A request shall also include organizational information of the agency responsible for administering and enforcing the law.
                (b) The request and supporting materials shall be filed with the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410-2000. The Assistant Secretary shall forward a copy of the request and supporting materials to the appropriate FHEO regional director. A copy of the request and supporting materials will be kept available for public examination and copying at:
                (1) The office of the Assistant Secretary; and
                (2) The office of the state or local agency charged with administration and enforcement of the state or local fair housing law.
                (c) Upon receipt of a request, HUD will analyze the agency's fair housing law to determine whether it meets the criteria identified in § 115.204.
                (d) HUD shall review a request for interim certification from a local agency located in a state with an interim certified or certified substantially equivalent state agency. However, in the request for interim certification, the local agency must certify that the substantially equivalent state law does not prohibit the local agency from administering and enforcing its own fair housing law within the locality.
              
              
                § 115.203
                Interim certification procedures.
                (a) Upon receipt of a request for interim certification filed under § 115.202, the Assistant Secretary may request further information necessary for a determination to be made under this section. The Assistant Secretary may consider the relative priority given to fair housing administration, as compared to the agency's other duties and responsibilities, as well as the compatibility or potential conflict of fair housing objectives with these other duties and responsibilities.
                (b) If the Assistant Secretary determines, after application of the criteria set forth in § 115.204, that the state or local law, on its face, provides substantive rights, procedures, remedies, and judicial review procedures for alleged discriminatory housing practices that are substantially equivalent to those provided in the Act, the Assistant Secretary may offer to enter into an Agreement for the Interim Referral of Complaints and Other Utilization of Services (interim agreement). The interim agreement will outline the procedures and authorities upon which the interim certification is based.
                (c) Such interim agreement, after it is signed by all appropriate signatories, will result in the agency receiving interim certification. Appropriate signatories include the Assistant Secretary, the FHEO regional director, and the state or local official having principal responsibility for the administration of the state or local fair housing law.
                (d) Interim agreements shall be for a term of no more than three years.
                (e) All regulations, rules, directives, and/or opinions of the State Attorney General or the jurisdiction's chief legal officer that are necessary for the law to be substantially equivalent on its face must be enacted and effective in order for the Assistant Secretary to offer the agency an interim agreement.
                (f) Interim certification required prior to certification. An agency is required to obtain interim certification prior to obtaining certification.
              
              
                § 115.204
                Criteria for adequacy of law.

                (a) In order for a determination to be made that a state or local fair housing agency administers a law, which, on its face, provides rights and remedies for alleged discriminatory housing practices that are substantially equivalent to those provided in the Act, the law must:
                
                (1) Provide for an administrative enforcement body to receive and process complaints and provide that:
                (i) Complaints must be in writing;
                (ii) Upon the filing of a complaint, the agency shall serve notice upon the complainant acknowledging the filing and advising the complainant of the time limits and choice of forums provided under the law;
                (iii) Upon the filing of a complaint, the agency shall promptly serve notice on the respondent or person charged with the commission of a discriminatory housing practice advising of his or her procedural rights and obligations under the statute or ordinance, together with a copy of the complaint;
                (iv) A respondent may file an answer to a complaint.
                (2) Delegate to the administrative enforcement body comprehensive authority, including subpoena power, to investigate the allegations of complaints, and power to conciliate complaints, and require that:
                (i) The agency commences proceedings with respect to the complaint before the end of the 30th day after receipt of the complaint;
                (ii) The agency investigates the allegations of the complaint and complete the investigation within the timeframe established by section 810(a)(1)(B)(iv) of the Act or comply with the notification requirements of section 810(a)(1)(C) of the Act;
                (iii) The agency make final administrative disposition of a complaint within one year of the date of receipt of a complaint, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the agency is unable to do so, it shall notify the parties, in writing, of the reasons for not doing so;
                (iv) Any conciliation agreement arising out of conciliation efforts by the agency shall be an agreement between the respondent, the complainant, and the agency and shall require the approval of the agency;
                (v) Each conciliation agreement shall be made public, unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the agency determines that disclosure is not required to further the purpose of the law.
                (3) Not place excessive burdens on the aggrieved person that might discourage the filing of complaints, such as:
                (i) A provision that a complaint must be filed within any period of time less than 180 days after an alleged discriminatory practice has occurred or terminated;
                (ii) Anti-testing provisions;
                (iii) Provisions that could subject an aggrieved person to costs, criminal penalties, or fees in connection with the filing of complaints.
                (4) Not contain exemptions that substantially reduce the coverage of housing accommodations as compared to section 803 of the Act.
                (5) Provide the same protections as those afforded by sections 804, 805, 806, and 818 of the Act, consistent with HUD's implementing regulations found at 24 CFR part 100.
                (b) In addition to the factors described in paragraph (a) of this section, the provisions of the state or local law must afford administrative and judicial protection and enforcement of the rights embodied in the law.
                (1) The agency must have the authority to:
                (i) Grant or seek prompt judicial action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of a complaint, if such action is necessary to carry out the purposes of the law;
                (ii) Issue and seek enforceable subpoenas;
                (iii) Grant actual damages in an administrative proceeding or provide adjudication in court at agency expense to allow the award of actual damages to an aggrieved person;
                (iv) Grant injunctive or other equitable relief, or be specifically authorized to seek such relief in a court of competent jurisdiction;
                (v) Provide an administrative proceeding in which a civil penalty may be assessed or provide adjudication in court, at agency expense, allowing the assessment of punitive damages against the respondent.
                (2) If an agency's law offers an administrative hearing, the agency must also provide parties an election option substantially equivalent to the election provisions of section 812 of the Act.

                (3) Agency actions must be subject to judicial review upon application by any party aggrieved by a final agency order.
                (4) Judicial review of a final agency order must be in a court with authority to:
                (i) Grant to the petitioner, or to any other party, such temporary relief, restraining order, or other order as the court determines is just and proper;
                (ii) Affirm, modify, or set aside, in whole or in part, the order, or remand the order for further proceeding; and
                (iii) Enforce the order to the extent that the order is affirmed or modified.
                (c) The requirement that the state or local law prohibit discrimination on the basis of familial status does not require that the state or local law limit the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling.
                (d) The state or local law may assure that no prohibition of discrimination because of familial status applies to housing for older persons, as described in 24 CFR part 100, subpart E.
                (e) A determination of the adequacy of a state or local fair housing law “on its face” is intended to focus on the meaning and intent of the text of the law, as distinguished from the effectiveness of its administration. Accordingly, this determination is not limited to an analysis of the literal text of the law. Regulations, directives, rules of procedure, judicial decisions, or interpretations of the fair housing law by competent authorities will be considered in making this determination.
                (f) A law will be found inadequate “on its face” if it permits any of the agency's decision-making authority to be contracted out or delegated to a non-governmental authority. For the purposes of this paragraph, “decision-making authority” includes but is not limited to:
                (1) Acceptance of a complaint;
                (2) Approval of a conciliation agreement;
                (3) Dismissal of a complaint;
                (4) Any action specified in § 115.204(a)(2)(iii) or (b)(1); and
                (5) Any decision-making regarding whether a particular matter will or will not be pursued.
                (g) The state or local law must provide for civil enforcement of the law by an aggrieved person by the commencement of an action in an appropriate court at least one year after the occurrence or termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The court must be empowered to:
                (1) Award the plaintiff actual and punitive damages;
                (2) Grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any temporary or permanent injunction, temporary restraining order or other order; and
                (3) Allow reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
                (h) If a state or local law is different than the Act in a way that does not diminish coverage of the Act, including, but not limited to, the protection of additional prohibited bases, then the state or local law may still be found substantially equivalent.
              
              
                § 115.205
                Certification procedures.
                (a) Certification. (1) If the Assistant Secretary determines, after application of criteria set forth in §§ 115.204, 115.206, and this section, that the state or local law, both “on its face” and “in operation,” provides substantive rights, procedures, remedies, and judicial review procedures for alleged discriminatory housing practices that are substantially equivalent to those provided in the Act, the Assistant Secretary may enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the agency.
                (2) The MOU is a written agreement providing for the referral of complaints to the agency and for communication procedures between the agency and HUD that are adequate to permit the Assistant Secretary to monitor the agency's continuing substantial equivalency certification.
                (3) The MOU, after it is signed by all appropriate signatories, may authorize an agency to be a certified agency for a period of not more than five years. Appropriate signatories include the Assistant Secretary, the FHEO regional director, and the authorized employee(s) of the agency.

                (b) In order to receive certification, during the 60 days prior to the expiration of the agency's interim agreement, the agency must certify to the Assistant Secretary that the state or local fair housing law, “on its face,” continues to be substantially equivalent to the Act (i.e., there have been no amendments to the state or local fair housing law, adoption of rules or procedures concerning the fair housing law, or judicial or other authoritative interpretations of the fair housing law that limit the effectiveness of the agency's fair housing law).
              
              
                § 115.206
                Performance assessments; Performance standards.
                (a) Frequency of on-site performance assessment during interim certification. The Assistant Secretary, through the appropriate FHEO regional office, may conduct an on-site performance assessment not later than six months after the execution of the interim agreement. An on-site performance assessment may also be conducted during the six months immediately prior to the expiration of the interim agreement. HUD has the discretion to conduct additional performance assessments during the period of interim certification, as it deems necessary.
                (b) Frequency of on-site performance assessment during certification. During certification, the Assistant Secretary through the FHEO regional office, may conduct on-site performance assessments every 24 months. HUD has the discretion to conduct additional performance assessments during the period of certification, as it deems necessary.
                (c) In conducting the performance assessment, the FHEO regional office shall determine whether the agency engages in timely, comprehensive, and thorough fair housing complaint investigation, conciliation, and enforcement activities. In the performance assessment report, the FHEO regional office may recommend to the Assistant Secretary whether the agency should continue to be interim certified or certified. In conducting the performance assessment, the FHEO regional office shall also determine whether the agency is in compliance with the requirements for participation in the FHAP enumerated in §§ 115.307, 115.308, 115.309, 115.310, and 115.311 of this part. In the performance assessment report, the FHEO regional office shall identify whether the agency meets the requirements of §§ 115.307, 115.308, 115.309, 115.310, and 115.311 of this part, and, therefore, should continue receiving funding under the FHAP.
                (d) At a minimum, the performance assessment will consider the following to determine the effectiveness of an agency's fair housing complaint processing, consistent with such guidance as may be issued by HUD:
                (1) The agency's case processing procedures;
                (2) The thoroughness of the agency's case processing;
                (3) A review of cause and no cause determinations for quality of investigations and consistency with appropriate standards;
                (4) A review of conciliation agreements and other settlements;
                (5) A review of the agency's administrative closures; and
                (6) A review of the agency's enforcement procedures, including administrative hearings and judicial proceedings.
                (e) Performance standards. HUD shall utilize the following performance standards while conducting performance assessments. If an agency does not meet one or more performance standard(s), HUD shall utilize the performance deficiency procedures enumerated in § 115.210.
                (1) Performance Standard 1. Commence complaint proceedings, carry forward such proceedings, complete investigations, issue determinations, and make final administrative dispositions in a timely manner. To meet this standard, the performance assessment will consider the timeliness of the agency's actions with respect to its complaint processing, including, but not limited to:
                (i) Whether the agency began its processing of fair housing complaints within 30 days of receipt;
                (ii) Whether the agency completes the investigative activities with respect to a complaint within 100 days from the date of receipt or, if it is impracticable to do so, notifies the parties in writing of the reason(s) for the delay;

                (iii) Whether the agency makes a determination of reasonable cause or no reasonable cause with respect to a complaint within 100 days from the date of receipt or, if it is impracticable to do so, notifies the parties in writing of the reason(s) for the delay;
                (iv) Whether the agency makes a final administrative disposition of a complaint within one year from the date of receipt or, if it is impracticable to do so, notifies the parties in writing of the reason(s) for the delay; and
                (v) Whether the agency completed the investigation of the complaint and prepared a complete, final investigative report.
                (vi) When an agency is unable to complete investigative activities with respect to a complaint within 100 days, the agency must send written notification to the parties, indicating the reason(s) for the delay, within 110 days of the filing of the complaint.
                (2) Performance Standard 2. Administrative closures are utilized only in limited and appropriate circumstances. Administrative closures should be distinguished from a closure on the merits and may not be used instead of making a recommendation or determination of reasonable or no reasonable cause. HUD will provide further guidance to interim and certified agencies on the appropriate circumstances for administrative closures.
                (3) Performance Standard 3. During the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending with filing of a charge or dismissal, the agency will, to the extent feasible, attempt to conciliate the complaint. After a charge has been issued, the agency will, to the extent feasible, continue to attempt settlement until a hearing or a judicial proceeding has begun.
                (4) Performance Standard 4. The agency conducts compliance reviews of settlements, conciliation agreements, and orders resolving discriminatory housing practices. The performance assessment shall include, but not be limited to:
                (i) An assessment of the agency's procedures for conducting compliance reviews; and
                (ii) Terms and conditions of agreements and orders issued.
                (5) Performance Standard 5. The agency must consistently and affirmatively seek and obtain the type of relief designed to prevent recurrences of discriminatory practices. The performance assessment shall include, but not be limited to:
                (i) An assessment of the agency's use of its authority to seek actual damages, as appropriate;
                (ii) An assessment of the agency's use of its authority to seek and assess civil penalties or punitive damages, as appropriate;
                (iii) An assessment of the types of relief sought by the agency with consideration for the inclusion of affirmative provisions designed to protect the public interest;
                (iv) A review of all types of relief obtained;
                (v) A review of the adequacy of the relief sought and obtained in light of the issues raised by the complaint;
                (vi) The number of complaints closed with relief and the number closed without relief;
                (vii) The number of complaints that proceed to administrative hearing and the result; and
                (viii) The number of complaints that proceed to judicial proceedings and the result.
                (6) Performance Standard 6. The agency must consistently and affirmatively seek to eliminate all prohibited practices under its fair housing law. An assessment under this standard will include, but not be limited to, an identification of the education and outreach efforts of the agency.
                (7) Performance Standard 7. The agency must demonstrate that it receives and processes a reasonable number of complaints cognizable under both the federal Fair Housing Act and the agency's fair housing statute or ordinance. The reasonable number will be determined by HUD and based on all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to, the population of the jurisdiction that the agency serves, the length of time that the agency has participated in the FHAP, and the number of complaints that the agency has received and processed in the past. If an agency fails to receive and process a reasonable number of complaints during a year of FHAP participation, given education and outreach efforts conducted and receipts of complaints, then the FHEO regional director may offer the agency a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP), as described in § 115.210(a)(2). The PIP will set forth the number of complaints the agency must process during subsequent years of FHAP participation. After issuing the PIP, the FHEO regional office will provide the agency with technical assistance on ways to increase awareness of fair housing rights and responsibilities in the jurisdiction.
                (8) Performance Standard 8. The agency must report to HUD on the final status of all dual-filed complaints where a determination of reasonable cause was made. The report must identify, at a minimum, how complaints were resolved (e.g., settlement, judicial proceedings, or administrative hearing), when they were resolved, the forum in which they were resolved, and types and amounts of relief obtained.
                (9) Performance Standard 9. The agency must conform its performance to the provisions of any written agreements executed by the agency and the Department related to substantial equivalency certification, including, but not limited to, the interim agreement or MOU.
              
              
                § 115.207
                Consequences of interim certification and certification.
                (a) Whenever a complaint received by the Assistant Secretary alleges violations of a fair housing law administered by an agency that has been interim certified or certified as substantially equivalent, the complaint will be referred to the agency, and no further action shall be taken by the Assistant Secretary with respect to such complaint except as provided for by the Act, this part, 24 CFR part 103, subpart C, and any written agreements executed by the Agency and the Assistant Secretary. HUD shall make referrals to interim certified and certified local agencies in accordance with this section even when the local agency is located in a state with an interim certified or certified state agency.
                (b) If HUD determines that a complaint has not been processed in a timely manner in accordance with the performance standards set forth in § 115.206, HUD may reactivate the complaint, conduct its own investigation and conciliation efforts, and make a determination consistent with 24 CFR part 103.
                (c) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, whenever the Assistant Secretary has reason to believe that a complaint demonstrates a basis for the commencement of proceedings against any respondent under section 814(a) of the Act or for proceedings by any governmental licensing or supervisory authorities, the Assistant Secretary shall transmit the information upon which such belief is based to the Attorney General, federal financial regulatory agencies, other federal agencies, or other appropriate governmental licensing or supervisory authorities.
              
              
                § 115.208
                Procedures for renewal of certification.
                (a) If the Assistant Secretary affirmatively concludes that the agency's law and performance have complied with the requirements of this part in each of the five years of certification, the Assistant Secretary may renew the certification of the agency.
                (b) In determining whether to renew the certification of an agency, the Assistant Secretary's review may include, but is not limited to:
                (1) Performance assessments of the agency conducted by the Department during the five years of certification;
                (2) The agency's own certification that the state or local fair housing law continues to be substantially equivalent both “on its face” and “in operation;” (i.e., there have been no amendments to the state or local fair housing law, adoption of rules or procedures concerning the fair housing law, or judicial or other authoritative interpretations of the fair housing law that limit the effectiveness of the agency's fair housing law); and
                (3) Any and all public comments regarding the relevant state and local laws and the performance of the agency in enforcing the law.
                (c) If the Assistant Secretary decides to renew an agency's certification, the Assistant Secretary will offer the agency either a new MOU or an Addendum to the Memorandum of Understanding (addendum). The new MOU or addendum will extend and update the MOU between HUD and the agency.

                (d) The new MOU or addendum, when signed by all appropriate signatories, will result in the agency's certification being renewed for five years from the date on which the previous MOU was to expire. Appropriate signatories include the Assistant Secretary, the FHEO regional director, and the authorized employee(s) of the agency.
                (e) The provisions of this section may be applied to an agency that has an expired MOU or an expired addendum.
              
              
                § 115.209
                Technical assistance.
                (a) The Assistant Secretary, through the FHEO regional office, may provide technical assistance to the interim and certified agencies at any time. The agency may request such technical assistance or the FHEO regional office may determine the necessity for technical assistance and require the agency's cooperation and participation.
                (b) The Assistant Secretary, through FHEO headquarters or regional staff, will require that the agency participate in training conferences and seminars that will enhance the agency's ability to process complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices.
              
              
                § 115.210
                Performance deficiency procedures; Suspension; Withdrawal.
                (a) HUD may utilize the following performance deficiency procedures if it determines at any time that the agency does not meet one or more of the performance standards enumerated in § 115.206. The performance deficiency procedures may be applied to agencies with either interim certification or certification. If an agency fails to meet performance standard 7, HUD may bypass the technical assistance performance deficiency procedure and proceed to the PIP.
                (1) Technical assistance. After discovering the deficiency, the FHEO regional office should immediately inform the agency and provide the agency with technical assistance.
                (2) Performance improvement plan. If, following technical assistance, the agency does not bring its performance into compliance with § 115.206 within a time period identified by the FHEO regional director, the FHEO regional director may offer the agency a PIP.
                (i) The PIP will outline the agency's performance deficiencies, identify the necessary corrective actions, and include a timetable for completion.
                (ii) If the agency receives a PIP, funding under the FHAP may be suspended for the duration of the PIP.
                (iii) Once the agency has implemented the corrective actions to eliminate the deficiencies, and such corrective actions are accepted by the FHEO regional director, funding may be restored.
                (iv) The FHEO regional office may provide the agency with technical assistance during the period of the PIP, if appropriate.
                (b) Suspension. If the agency does not agree to implement the PIP or does not implement the corrective actions identified in the PIP within the time allotted, then the FHEO regional director may suspend the agency's interim certification or certification.
                (1) The FHEO regional director shall notify the agency in writing of the specific reasons for the suspension and provide the agency with an opportunity to respond within 30 days.
                (2) Suspension shall not exceed 180 days.
                (3) During the period of suspension, HUD will not refer complaints to the agency.
                (4) If an agency is suspended, the FHEO regional office may elect not to provide funding under the FHAP to the agency during the period of suspension, unless and until the Assistant Secretary determines that the agency is fully in compliance with § 115.206.
                (5) HUD may provide the agency with technical assistance during the period of suspension, if appropriate.
                (6) No more than 60 days prior to the end of suspension, the FHEO regional office shall conduct a performance assessment of the agency.
                (c) Withdrawal. If, following the performance assessment conducted at the end of suspension, the Assistant Secretary determines that the agency has not corrected the deficiencies, the Assistant Secretary may propose to withdraw the interim certification or certification of the agency.

                (1) The Assistant Secretary shall proceed with withdrawal, unless the agency provides information or documentation that establishes that the agency's administration of its law meets all of the substantial equivalency certification criteria set forth in 24 CFR part 115.
                (2) The Assistant Secretary shall inform the agency in writing of the reasons for the withdrawal.
                (3) During any period after which the Assistant Secretary proposes withdrawal, until such time as the agency establishes that administration of its law meets all of the substantial equivalency certification criteria set forth in 24 CFR part 115, the agency shall be ineligible for funding under the FHAP.
              
              
                § 115.211
                Changes limiting effectiveness of agency's law; Corrective actions; Suspension; Withdrawal; Consequences of repeal; Changes not limiting effectiveness.
                (a) Changes limiting effectiveness of agency's law. (1) If a state or local fair housing law that HUD has previously deemed substantially equivalent to the Act is amended; or rules or procedures concerning the fair housing law are adopted; or judicial or other authoritative interpretations of the fair housing law are issued, the interim-certified or certified agency must inform the Assistant Secretary of such amendment, adoption, or interpretation within 60 days of its discovery.
                (2) The requirements of this section shall apply equally to the amendment, adoption, or interpretation of any related law that bears on any aspect of the effectiveness of the agency's fair housing law.
                (3) The Assistant Secretary may conduct a review to determine if the amendment, adoption, or interpretation limits the effectiveness of the interim agency's fair housing law.
                (b) Corrective actions. (1) If the review indicates that the agency's law no longer meets the criteria identified in § 115.204, the Assistant Secretary will so notify the agency in writing. Following notification, HUD may take appropriate actions, including, but not limited to, any or all of the following:
                (i) Declining to refer some or all complaints to the agency unless and until the fair housing law meets the criteria identified in § 115.204;
                (ii) Electing not to provide payment for complaints processed by the agency unless and until the fair housing law meets the criteria identified in § 115.204;
                (iii) Providing technical assistance and/or guidance to the agency to assist the agency in curing deficiencies in its fair housing law.
                (2) Suspension based on changes in the law. If the corrective actions identified in paragraph (b)(1)(i) through (iii) of this section fail to bring the state or local fair housing law back into compliance with the criteria identified in § 115.204 within the timeframe identified in HUD's notification to the agency, the Assistant Secretary may suspend the agency's interim certification or certification based on changes in the law or a related law.
                (i) The Assistant Secretary will notify the agency in writing of the specific reasons for the suspension and provide the agency with an opportunity to respond within 30 days.
                (ii) During the period of suspension, the Assistant Secretary has the discretion to not refer some or all complaints to the agency unless and until the agency's law meets the criteria identified in § 115.204.
                (iii) During suspension, HUD may elect not to provide payment for complaints processed unless and until the agency's law meets the criteria identified in § 115.204.
                (iv) During the period of suspension, if the fair housing law is brought back into compliance with the criteria identified in § 115.204, and the Assistant Secretary determines that the fair housing law remains substantially equivalent to the Act, the Assistant Secretary will rescind the suspension and reinstate the agency's interim certification or certification.
                (3) Withdrawal based on changes in the law. If the Assistant Secretary determines that the agency has not brought its law back into compliance with the criteria identified in § 115.204 during the period of suspension, the Assistant Secretary may propose to withdraw the agency's interim certification or certification.

                (i) The Assistant Secretary will proceed with withdrawal unless the agency provides information or documentation that establishes that the agency's current law meets the criteria of substantial equivalency certification identified in § 115.204.
                
                (ii) The Assistant Secretary will inform the agency in writing of the reasons for the withdrawal.
                (c)(1) If, following notification from HUD that its fair housing law no longer meets the criteria identified in § 115.204, an interim-certified or certified agency unequivocally expresses to HUD that its fair housing law will not be brought back into compliance, the Assistant Secretary may forgo suspension and proceed directly to withdrawal of the agency's interim certification or certification.
                (2) During any period after which the Assistant Secretary proposes withdrawal, until such time as the agency establishes that administration of its law meets all of the substantial equivalency certification criteria set forth in 24 CFR part 115, the agency shall be ineligible for funding under the FHAP.
                (d) Consequences of repeal. If a state or local fair housing law that HUD has previously deemed substantially equivalent to the Act is repealed, in whole or in part, or a related law that bears on any aspect of the effectiveness of the agency's fair housing law is repealed, in whole or in part, the Assistant Secretary may immediately withdraw the agency's interim certification or certification.
                (e) Changes not limiting effectiveness. Nothing in this section is meant to limit the Assistant Secretary's authority to determine that a change to a fair housing law does not jeopardize the substantial equivalency interim certification or certification of an agency.
                (1) Under such circumstances, the Assistant Secretary may proceed in maintaining the existing relationship with the agency, as set forth in the interim agreement or MOU.
                (2) Alternatively, the Assistant Secretary may decide not to refer certain types of complaints to the agency. The Assistant Secretary may elect not to provide payment for these complaints and may require the agency to refer such complaints to the Department for investigation, conciliation, and enforcement activities.
                (3) When the Assistant Secretary determines that a change to a fair housing law does not jeopardize an agency's substantial equivalency certification, the Assistant Secretary need not proceed to suspension or withdrawal if the change is not reversed.
              
              
                § 115.212
                Request after withdrawal.
                (a) An agency that has had its interim certification or certification withdrawn, either voluntarily or by the Department, may request substantial equivalency interim certification or certification.
                (b) The request shall be filed in accordance with § 115.202.
                (c) The Assistant Secretary shall determine whether the state or local law, on its face, provides substantive rights, procedures, remedies, and judicial review procedures for alleged discriminatory housing practices that are substantially equivalent to those provided in the federal Fair Housing Act. To meet this standard, the state or local law must meet the criteria enumerated in § 115.204.
                (d) Additionally, if the agency had documented performance deficiencies that contributed to the past withdrawal, then the Department shall consider the agency's performance and any steps the agency has taken to correct performance deficiencies and to prevent them from recurring in determining whether to grant interim certification or certification. The review of the agency's performance shall include HUD conducting a performance assessment in accordance with § 115.206.
              
            
            
              Subpart C—Fair Housing Assistance Program
              
                § 115.300
                Purpose.
                The purpose of the Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP) is to provide assistance and reimbursement to state and local fair housing enforcement agencies. The intent of this funding program is to build a coordinated intergovernmental enforcement effort to further fair housing and to encourage the agencies to assume a greater share of the responsibility for the administration and enforcement of fair housing laws.
                The financial assistance is designed to provide support for:
                (a) The processing of dual-filed complaints;

                (b) Training under the Fair Housing Act and the agencies' fair housing law;
                
                (c) The provision of technical assistance;
                (d) The creation and maintenance of data and information systems; and
                (e) The development and enhancement of fair housing education and outreach projects, special fair housing enforcement efforts, fair housing partnership initiatives, and other fair housing projects.
              
              
                § 115.301
                Agency eligibility criteria; Funding availability.
                An agency with certification or interim certification under subpart B of this part, and which has entered into a MOU or interim agreement, is eligible to participate in the FHAP. All FHAP funding is subject to congressional appropriation.
              
              
                § 115.302
                Capacity building funds.
                (a) Capacity building (CB) funds are funds that HUD may provide to an agency with interim certification.
                (b) CB funds will be provided in a fixed annual amount to be utilized for the eligible activities established pursuant to § 115.303. When the fixed annual amount will not adequately compensate an agency in its first year of participation in the FHAP due to the large number of fair housing complaints that the agency reasonably anticipates processing, HUD may provide the agency with additional funds.
                (c) HUD may provide CB funds during an agency's first three years of participation in the FHAP. However, in the second and third year of the agency's participation in the FHAP, HUD has the option to permit the agency to receive contribution funds under § 115.304, instead of CB funds.
                (d) In order to receive CB funding, agencies must submit a statement of work prior to the signing of the cooperative agreement. The statement of work must identify:
                (1) The objectives and activities to be carried out with the CB funds received;
                (2) A plan for training all of the agency's employees involved in the administration of the agency's fair housing law;
                (3) A statement of the agency's intention to participate in HUD-sponsored training in accordance with the training requirements set out in the cooperative agreement;
                (4) A description of the agency's complaint processing data and information system, or, alternatively, whether the agency plans to use CB funds to purchase and install a data system;
                (5) A description of any other fair housing activities that the agency will undertake with its CB funds. All such activities must address matters affecting fair housing enforcement that are cognizable under the Fair Housing Act. Any activities that do not address the implementation of the agency's fair housing law, and that are therefore not cognizable under the Fair Housing Act, will be disapproved.
              
              
                § 115.303
                Eligible activities for capacity building funds.
                The primary purposes of capacity-building funding are to provide for complaint activities and to support activities that produce increased awareness of fair housing rights and remedies. All such activities must support the agency's administration and enforcement of its fair housing law and address matters affecting fair housing that are cognizable under the Fair Housing Act.
              
              
                § 115.304
                Agencies eligible for contributions funds.
                (a) An agency that has received CB funds for one to three consecutive years may be eligible for contributions funding. Contributions funding consists of five categories:
                (1) Complaint processing (CP) funds;
                (2) Special enforcement effort (SEE) funds (see § 115.305);
                (3) Training funds (see § 115.306);
                (4) Administrative cost (AC) funds; and
                (5) Partnership (P) funds.
                (b) CP funds. (1) Agencies receiving CP funds will receive such support based solely on the number of complaints processed by the agency and accepted for payment by the FHEO regional director during a consecutive, specifically identified, 12-month period. The 12-month period will be identified in the cooperative agreement between HUD and the agency. The FHEO regional office shall determine whether or not cases are acceptably processed based on requirements enumerated in the cooperative agreement and its attachments/appendices, performance standards set forth in 24 CFR 115.206, and provisions of the interim agreement or MOU.
                (2) The amount of funding to agencies that are new to contributions funding will be based on the number of complaints acceptably processed by the agency during the specifically identified 12-month period preceding the signing of the cooperative agreement.
                (c) AC funds. (1) Agencies that acceptably process 100 or more cases will receive no less than 10 percent of the agency's total FHAP payment amount for the preceding year, in addition to CP funds, contingent on fiscal year appropriations. Agencies that acceptably process fewer than 100 cases will receive a flat rate, contingent on fiscal year appropriations.
                (2) Agencies will be required to provide HUD with a statement of how they intend to use the AC funds. HUD may require that some or all AC funding be directed to activities designed to create, modify, or improve local, regional, or national information systems concerning fair housing matters (including the purchase of state-of-the-art computer systems, obtaining and maintaining Internet access, etc.).
                (d) P funds. The purpose of P funds is for an agency participating in the FHAP to utilize the services of individuals and/or public, private, for-profit, or not-for-profit organizations that have expertise needed to effectively carry out the provisions of the agency's fair housing law. P funds are fixed amounts and shall be allocated based on the FHAP appropriation. Agencies must consult with the CAO and GTR in identifying appropriate usage of P funds for the geographical area that the agency services. Some examples of proper P fund usage include, but are not limited to:
                (1) Contracting with qualified organizations to conduct fair housing testing in appropriate cases;
                (2) Hiring experienced, temporary staff to assist in the investigation of complex or aged cases;
                (3) Partnering with grassroots, faith-based or other community-based organizations to conduct education and outreach to people of different backgrounds on how to live together peacefully in the same housing complex, neighborhood, or community;
                (4) Contracting with individuals outside the agency who have special expertise needed for the investigation of fair housing cases (e.g., architects for design and construction cases or qualified individuals from colleges and universities for the development of data and statistical analyses).
              
              
                § 115.305
                Special enforcement effort (SEE) funds.
                (a) SEE funds are funds that HUD may provide to an agency to enhance enforcement activities of the agency's fair housing law. SEE funds will be a maximum of 20 percent of the agency's total FHAP cooperative agreement for the previous contract year, based on approval of eligible activity or activities, and contingent upon the appropriation of funds. All agencies receiving contributions funds are eligible to receive SEE funds if they meet three of the six criteria set out in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section:
                (1) The agency enforced a subpoena or made use of its prompt judicial action authority within the past year;
                (2) The agency has held at least one administrative hearing or has had at least one case on a court's docket for civil proceedings during the past year;
                (3) At least ten percent of the agency's fair housing caseload resulted in written conciliation agreements providing monetary relief for the complainant as well as remedial action, monitoring, reporting, and public interest relief provisions;
                (4) The agency has had in the most recent three years, or is currently engaged in, at least one major fair housing systemic investigation requiring an exceptional amount of funds expenditure;

                (5) The agency's administration of its fair housing law received meritorious mention for its fair housing complaint processing or other fair housing activities that were innovative. The meritorious mention criterion may be met by an agency's successful fair housing work being identified and/or published by a reputable source. Examples of meritorious mention include, but are not limited to:
                (i) An article in a minority newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation that identifies the agency's role in the successful resolution of a housing discrimination complaint;
                (ii) A letter from a sponsoring organization of a fair housing conference or symposium that identifies the agency's successful participation and presentation at the conference or symposium;
                (iii) A letter of praise, proclamation, or other formal documentation from the mayor, county executive, or governor recognizing the fair housing achievement of the agency.
                (6) The agency has completed the investigation of at least 10 fair housing complaints during the previous funding year.
                (b) Regardless of whether an agency meets the eligibility criteria set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, an agency is ineligible for SEE funds if:
                (1) Twenty percent or more of an agency's fair housing complaints result in administrative closures; or
                (2) The agency is currently on a PIP, or its interim certification or certification has been suspended during the federal fiscal year in which SEE funds are sought.

                (c) SEE funding amounts are subject to the FHAP appropriation by Congress and will be described in writing in the cooperative agreements annually. HUD will periodically publish a list of activities eligible for SEE funding in the Federal Register.
                
              
              
                § 115.306
                Training funds.
                (a) All agencies, including agencies that receive CB funds, are eligible to receive training funds. Training funds are fixed amounts based on the number of agency employees to be trained. Training funds shall be allocated based on the FHAP appropriation. Training funds may be used only for HUD-approved or HUD-sponsored training. Agency-initiated training or other formalized training may be included in this category. However, such training must first be approved by the CAO and the GTR. Specifics on the amount of training funds that an agency will receive and, if applicable, amounts that may be deducted, will be set out in the cooperative agreement each year.
                (b) Each agency must send staff to mandatory FHAP training sponsored by HUD, including, but not necessarily limited to, the National Fair Housing Training Academy and the National Fair Housing Policy Conference. If the agency does not participate in mandatory HUD-approved and HUD-sponsored training, training funds will be deducted from the agency's overall training amount. All staff of the agency responsible for the administration and enforcement of the fair housing law must participate in HUD-approved or HUD-sponsored training each year.
              
              
                § 115.307
                Requirements for participation in the FHAP; Corrective and remedial action for failing to comply with requirements.
                (a) Agencies that participate in the FHAP must meet the requirements enumerated in this section. The FHEO regional office shall review the agency's compliance with the requirements of this section when it conducts on-site performance assessments in accordance with § 115.206. The requirements for participation in the FHAP are as follows:
                (1) The agency must conform to all reporting and record maintenance requirements set forth in § 115.308, as well as any additional reporting and record maintenance requirements identified by the Assistant Secretary.
                (2) The agency must agree to on-site technical assistance and guidance and implementation of corrective actions set out by the Department in response to deficiencies found during the technical assistance or performance assessment evaluations of the agency's operations.
                (3) The agency must use the Department's official complaint data information system and must input all relevant data and information into the system in a timely manner.

                (4) The agency must agree to implement and adhere to policies and procedures (as the agency's laws allow) provided to the agency by the Assistant Secretary, including, but not limited to, guidance on investigative techniques, case file preparation and organization, and implementation of data elements for complaint tracking.
                (5) If an agency that participates in the FHAP enforces antidiscrimination laws other than a fair housing law (e.g., administration of a fair employment law), the agency must annually provide a certification to HUD stating that it spends at least 20 percent of its total annual budget on fair housing activities. The term “total annual budget,” as used in this subsection, means the entire budget assigned by the jurisdiction to the agency for enforcing and administering antidiscrimination laws, but does not include FHAP funds.
                (6) The agency may not co-mingle FHAP funds with other funds. FHAP funds must be segregated from the agency's and the state or local government's other funds and must be used for the purpose that HUD provided the funds.
                (7) An agency may not unilaterally reduce the level of financial resources currently committed to fair housing activities (budget and staff reductions or other actions outside the control of the agency will not, alone, result in a negative determination for the agency's participation in the FHAP).
                (8) The agency must comply with the provisions, certifications, and assurances required in any and all written agreements executed by the agency and the Department related to participation in the FHAP, including, but not limited to, the cooperative agreement.
                (9) The agency must draw down its funds in a timely manner.
                (10) The agency must be audited and receive copies of the audit reports in accordance with applicable rules and regulations of the state and local government in which it is located.
                (11) The agency must participate in all required training, as described in § 115.306(b).
                (12) If the agency subcontracts any activity for which the subcontractor will receive FHAP funds, the agency must conform to the subcontracting requirements of § 115.309.
                (13) If the agency receives a complaint that may implicate the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, then the agency must conform to the requirements of § 115.310.
                (14) If the agency utilizes FHAP funds to conduct fair housing testing, then the agency must conform to the requirements of § 115.311.
                (b) Corrective and remedial action for failing to comply with requirements. The agency's refusal to provide information, assist in implementation, or carry out the requirements of this section may result in the denial or interruption of its receipt of FHAP funds. Prior to denying or interrupting an agency's receipt of FHAP funds, HUD will put the agency on notice of its intent to deny or interrupt. HUD will identify its rationale for the denial or interruption and provide the agency with an opportunity to respond within a reasonable period of time. If, within the time period requested, the agency does not provide information or documentation indicating that the requirement(s) enumerated in this section is/are met, HUD may proceed with the denial or interruption of FHAP funds. If, at any time following the denial or interruption, HUD learns that the agency meets the requirements enumerated in this section, HUD may opt to reinstate the agency's receipt of FHAP funds.
              
              
                § 115.308
                Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
                (a) The agency shall establish and maintain records demonstrating:
                (1) Its financial administration of FHAP funds; and
                (2) Its performance under the FHAP.
                (b) The agency will provide to the FHEO regional director reports maintained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. The agency will provide reports to the FHEO regional director in accordance with the frequency and content requirements identified in the cooperative agreement. In addition, the agency will provide reports on the final status of complaints following reasonable cause findings, in accordance with Performance Standard 8 identified in § 115.206.

                (c) The agency will permit reasonable public access to its records consistent with the jurisdiction's requirements for release of information. Documents relevant to the agency's participation in the FHAP must be made available at the agency's office during normal working hours (except that documents with respect to ongoing fair housing complaint investigations are exempt from public review consistent with federal and/or state law).
                (d) The Secretary, Inspector General of HUD, and the Comptroller General of the United States or any of their duly authorized representatives shall have access to all pertinent books, accounts, reports, files, and other payments for surveys, audits, examinations, excerpts, and transcripts as they relate to the agency's participation in FHAP.
                (e) All files will be kept in such fashion as to permit audits under 2 CFR part 200, subpart F.
                [72 FR 19074, Apr. 16, 2007, as amended at 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
              
              
                § 115.309
                Subcontracting under the FHAP.
                If an agency subcontracts to a public or private organization any activity for which the organization will receive FHAP funds, the agency must ensure and certify in writing that the organization is:
                (a) Using services, facilities, and electronic information technologies that are accessible in accordance with the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) (42 U.S.C. 12101), Section 504 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act (29 U.S.C. 701), and Section 508(a)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act amendments of 1998;
                (b) Complying with the standards of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 1441);
                (c) Affirmatively furthering fair housing in the provision of housing and housing-related services; and
                (d) Not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from covered transactions by any federal debarment or agency.
              
              
                § 115.310
                FHAP and the First Amendment.
                None of the funding made available under the FHAP may be used to investigate or prosecute any activity engaged in by one or more persons, including the filing or maintaining of a non-frivolous legal action, that may be protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. HUD guidance is available that sets forth the procedures HUD will follow when it is asked to accept and dual-file a case that may implicate the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
              
              
                § 115.311
                Testing.
                The following requirements apply to testing activities funded under the FHAP:
                (a) The testing must be done in accordance with a HUD-approved testing methodology;
                (b) Testers must not have prior felony convictions or convictions of any crimes involving fraud or perjury.
                (c) Testers must receive training or be experienced in testing procedures and techniques.
                (d) Testers and the organizations conducting tests, and the employees and agents of these organizations may not:
                (1) Have an economic interest in the outcome of the test, without prejudice to the right of any person or entity to recover damages for any cognizable injury;
                (2) Be a relative or acquaintance of any party in a case;
                (3) Have had any employment or other affiliation, within five years, with the person or organization to be tested; or
                (4) Be a competitor of the person or organization to be tested in the listing, rental, sale, or financing of real estate.
              
            
          
          
            Pt. 121
            PART 121—COLLECTION OF DATA
            
              Sec.
              121.1
              Purpose.
              121.2
              Furnishing of data by program participation.
            
            
              Authority:
              Title VIII, Civil Rights Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3600-3620); E.O. 11063, 27 FR 11527; sec. 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1); sec. 562, Housing and Community Development Act of 1987 (42 U.S.C. 3608a); sec. 2, National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1703; sec. 7(d), Department of Housing and Urban Development Act, 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
            
            
              Source:
              54 FR 3317, Jan. 23, 1989, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              
              § 121.1
              Purpose.
              The purpose of this part is to enable the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to carry out his or her responsibilities under the Fair Housing Act, Executive Order 11063, dated November 20, 1962, title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and section 562 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987. These authorities prohibit discrimination in housing and in programs receiving financial assistance from the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and they direct the Secretary to administer the Department's housing and urban development programs and activities in a manner affirmatively to further these policies and to collect certain data to assess the extent of compliance with these policies.
            
            
              § 121.2
              Furnishing of data by program participants.
              Participants in the programs administered by the Department shall furnish to the Department such data concerning the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap, and family characteristics of persons and households who are applicants for, participants in, or beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries of, those programs as the Secretary may determine to be necessary or appropriate to enable him or her to carry out his or her responsibilities under the authorities referred to in § 121.1.
            
          
          
            Pt. 125
            PART 125—FAIR HOUSING INITIATIVES PROGRAM
            
              Sec.
              125.103
              Definitions.
              125.104
              Program administration.
              125.105
              Application requirements.
              125.106
              Waivers.
              125.107
              Testers.
              125.201
              Administrative Enforcement Initiative.
              125.301
              Education and Outreach Initiative.
              125.401
              Private Enforcement Initiative.
              125.501
              Fair Housing Organizations Initiative.
            
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3616 note.
            
            
              Source:
              60 FR 58452, Nov. 27, 1995, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              § 125.103
              Definitions.
              In addition to the definitions that appear at section 802 of title VIII (42 U.S.C. 3602), the following definitions apply to this part:
              
                Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity in the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
              
                Expert witness means a person who testifies, or who would have testified but for a resolution of the case before a verdict is entered, and who qualifies as an expert witness under the rules of the court where the litigation funded by this part is brought.
              
                Fair housing enforcement organization (FHO) means any organization, whether or not it is solely engaged in fair housing enforcement activities, that—
              (1) Is organized as a private, tax-exempt, nonprofit, charitable organization;
              (2) Is currently engaged in complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing for fair housing violations and enforcement of meritorious claims; and
              (3) Upon the receipt of FHIP funds will continue to be engaged in complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing for fair housing violations and enforcement of meritorious claims.
              The Department may request an organization to submit documentation to support its claimed status as an FHO.
              
                FHIP means the Fair Housing Initiatives Program authorized by section 561 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987 (42 U.S.C. 3616 note).
              
                Meritorious claims means enforcement activities by an organization that resulted in lawsuits, consent decrees, legal settlements, HUD and/or substantially equivalent agency (under 24 CFR 115.6) conciliations and organization initiated settlements with the outcome of monetary awards for compensatory and/or punitive damages to plaintiffs or complaining parties, or other affirmative relief, including the provision of housing.
              
                Qualified fair housing enforcement organization (QFHO) means any organization, whether or not it is solely engaged in fair housing enforcement activities, that—
              
              (1) Is organized as a private, tax-exempt, nonprofit, charitable organization;
              (2) Has at least 2 years experience in complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing for fair housing violations and enforcement of meritorious claims; and
              (3) Is engaged in complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing for fair housing violations and enforcement of meritorious claims at the time of application for FHIP assistance.
              For the purpose of meeting the 2-year qualification period for the activities included in paragraph (2) of this definition, it is not necessary that the activities were conducted simultaneously, as long as each activity was conducted for 2 years. It is also not necessary for the activities to have been conducted for 2 consecutive or continuous years. An organization may aggregate its experience in each activity over the 3 year period preceding its application to meet the 2-year qualification period requirement.
              The Department may request an organization to submit documentation to support its claimed status as a QFHO.
              
                Title VIII means title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 3600-3620), commonly cited as the Fair Housing Act.
              [60 FR 58452, Nov. 27, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 5206, Feb. 9, 1996]
            
            
              § 125.104
              Program administration.
              (a) FHIP is administered by the Assistant Secretary.
              (b) FHIP funding is made available under the following initiatives:
              (1) The Administrative Enforcement Initiative;
              (2) The Education and Outreach Initiative;
              (3) The Private Enforcement Initiative; and
              (4) The Fair Housing Organizations Initiative.
              (c) FHIP funding is made available in accordance with the requirements of the authorizing statute (42 U.S.C. 3616 note), the regulation in this part, and Notices of Funding Availability (NOFAs), and is awarded through a grant or other funding instrument.

              (d) Notices of Funding Availability under this program will be published periodically in the Federal Register. Such notices will announce amounts available for award, eligible applicants, and eligible activities, and may limit funding to one or more of the Initiatives. Notices of Funding Availability will include the specific selection criteria for awards, and will indicate the relative weight of each criterion. The selection criteria announced in Notices of Funding Availability will be designed to permit the Department to target and respond to areas of concern, and to promote the purposes of the FHIP in an equitable and cost efficient manner.
              (e) All recipients of FHIP funds must conform to reporting and record maintenance requirements determined appropriate by the Assistant Secretary. Each funding instrument will include provisions under which the Department may suspend, terminate or recapture funds if the recipient does not conform to these requirements.
              (f) Recipients of FHIP funds may not use such funds for the payment of expenses in connection with litigation against the United States.
              (g) All recipients of funds under this program must conduct audits in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart F.
              [60 FR 58452, Nov. 27, 1995, as amended at 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
            
            
              § 125.105
              Application requirements.
              Each application for funding under the FHIP must contain the following information, which will be assessed against the specific selection criteria set forth in a Notice of Funding Availability.
              (a) A description of the practice (or practices) that has affected adversely the achievement of the goal of fair housing, and that will be addressed by the applicant's proposed activities.
              (b) A description of the specific activities proposed to be conducted with FHIP funds including the final product(s) and/or any reports to be produced; the cost of each activity proposed; and a schedule for completion of the proposed activities.

              (c) A description of the applicant's experience in formulating or carrying out programs to prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing practices.
              
              (d) An estimate of public or private resources that may be available to assist the proposed activities.
              (e) A description of the procedures to be used for monitoring conduct and assessing results of the proposed activities.
              (f) A description of the benefits that successful completion of the project will produce to enhance fair housing, and the indicators by which these benefits are to be measured.
              (g) A description of the expected long term viability of project results.

              (h) Any additional information that may be required by a Notice of Funding Availability published in the Federal Register.
              
              (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0033. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the collection displays a valid control number.)
            
            
              § 125.106
              Waivers.

              Upon determination of good cause, the Assistant Secretary may waive, in a published Notice of Funding Availability or other Federal Register notice, any requirement in this part that is not required by statute.
            
            
              § 125.107
              Testers.
              The following requirements apply to testing activities funded under the FHIP:
              (a) Testers must not have prior felony convictions or convictions of crimes involving fraud or perjury.
              (b) Testers must receive training or be experienced in testing procedures and techniques.
              (c) Testers and the organizations conducting tests, and the employees and agents of these organizations may not:
              (1) Have an economic interest in the outcome of the test, without prejudice to the right of any person or entity to recover damages for any cognizable injury;
              (2) Be a relative of any party in a case;
              (3) Have had any employment or other affiliation, within one year, with the person or organization to be tested; or
              (4) Be a licensed competitor of the person or organization to be tested in the listing, rental, sale, or financing of real estate.
            
            
              § 125.201
              Administrative Enforcement Initiative.
              The Administrative Enforcement Initiative provides funding to State and local fair housing agencies administering fair housing laws recognized by the Assistant Secretary under § 115.6 of this subchapter as providing rights and remedies which are substantially equivalent to those provided in title VIII.
            
            
              § 125.301
              Education and Outreach Initiative.
              (a) The Education and Outreach Initiative provides funding for the purpose of developing, implementing, carrying out, or coordinating education and outreach programs designed to inform members of the public concerning their rights and obligations under the provisions of fair housing laws.
              (b) Notices of Funding Availability published for the FHIP may divide Education and Outreach Initiative funding into separate competitions for each of the separate types of programs (i.e., national, regional and/or local, community-based) eligible under this Initiative.

              (c) National program applications, including those for Fair Housing Month funding, may be eligible to receive, as provided for in Notices of Funding Availability published in the Federal Register, a preference consisting of additional points if they:
              (1) Demonstrate cooperation with real estate industry organizations; and/or
              (2) Provide for the dissemination of educational information and technical assistance to support compliance with the housing adaptability and accessibility guidelines contained in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.

              (d) Activities that are regional are activities that are implemented in adjoining States or two or more units of general local government within a state. Activities that are local are activities whose implementation is limited to a single unit of general local government, meaning a city, town, township, county, parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a State. Activities that are community-based in scope are those which are primarily focused on a particular neighborhood area within a unit of general local government.
              (e) Each non-governmental recipient of regional, local, or community-based funding for activities located within the jurisdiction of a State or local enforcement agency or agencies administering a substantially equivalent (under part 115 of this subchapter) fair housing law must consult with the agency or agencies to coordinate activities funded under FHIP.
            
            
              § 125.401
              Private Enforcement Initiative.
              (a) The Private Enforcement Initiative provides funding on a single-year or multi-year basis, to investigate violations and obtain enforcement of the rights granted under the Fair Housing Act or State or local laws that provide rights and remedies for discriminatory housing practices that are substantially equivalent to the rights and remedies provided in the Fair Housing Act. Multi-year funding may be contingent upon annual performance reviews and annual appropriations.
              (b) Organizations that are eligible to receive assistance under the Private Enforcement Initiative are:
              (1) Qualified fair housing enforcement organizations.
              (2) Fair housing enforcement organizations with at least 1 year of experience in complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing for fair housing violations and enforcement of meritorious claims. For the purpose of meeting this 1 year qualification period, it is not necessary that the activities were conducted simultaneously, as long as each activity was conducted for 1 year. It is also not necessary for the activities to have been conducted for a continuous year. An organization may aggregate its experience in each activity over the 2-year period preceding its application to meet this 1 year qualification period requirement.
            
            
              § 125.501
              Fair Housing Organizations Initiative.
              (a) The Fair Housing Organizations Initiative of the FHIP provides funding to develop or expand the ability of existing eligible organizations to provide fair housing enforcement, and to establish, on a single-year or multi-year basis contingent upon annual performance reviews and annual appropriations, new fair housing enforcement organizations.
              (b) Continued development of existing organizations—(1) Eligible applicants. Eligible for funding under this component of the Fair Housing Organizations Initiative are:
              (i) Qualified fair housing enforcement organizations;
              (ii) Fair housing enforcement organizations; and
              (iii) Nonprofit groups organizing to build their capacity to provide fair housing enforcement.
              (2) Operating budget limitation. (i) Funding under this component of the Fair Housing Organizations Initiative may not be used to provide more than 50 percent of the operating budget of a recipient organization for any one year.

              (ii) For purposes of the limitation in this paragraph, operating budget means the applicant's total planned budget expenditures from all sources, including the value of in-kind and monetary contributions, in the year for which funding is sought.
              (c) Establishing new organizations—(1) Eligible applicants. Eligible for funding under this component of the Fair Housing Organizations Initiative are:
              (i) Qualified fair housing enforcement organizations;
              (ii) Fair housing enforcement organizations; and
              (iii) Organizations with at least three years of experience in complaint intake, complaint investigation, and enforcement of meritorious claims involving the use of testing evidence.
              (2) Targeted areas. FHIP Notices of Funding Availability may identify target areas of the country that may receive priority for funding under this component of the Fair Housing Organizations Initiative. An applicant may also seek funding to establish a new organization in a locality not identified as a target area, but in such a case, the applicant must submit sufficient evidence to establish the proposed area as being currently underserved by fair housing enforcement organizations or as containing large concentrations of protected classes.
            
          
        
        
          
          SUBCHAPTER B—EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY
          
            Pt. 135
            PART 135—ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOW- AND VERY LOW-INCOME PERSONS
            
              
                Subpart A—General Provisions
                Sec.
                135.1
                Purpose.
                135.2
                Effective date of regulation.
                135.3
                Applicability.
                135.5
                Definitions.
                135.7
                Delegation of authority.
                135.9
                Requirements applicable to HUD NOFAs for section 3 covered programs.
                135.11
                Other laws governing training, employment, and contracting.
              
              
                Subpart B—Economic Opportunities for Section 3 Residents and Section 3 Business Concerns
                135.30
                Numerical goals for meeting the greatest extent feasible requirement.
                135.32
                Responsibilities of the recipient.
                135.34
                Preference for section 3 residents in training and employment opportunities.
                135.36
                Preference for section 3 business concerns in contracting opportunities.
                135.38
                Section 3 clause.
                135.40
                Providing other economic opportunities.
              
              
                Subpart C [Reserved]
              
              
                Subpart D—Complaint and Compliance Review
                135.70
                General.
                135.72
                Cooperation in achieving compliance.
                135.74
                Section 3 compliance review procedures.
                135.76
                Filing and processing complaints.
              
              
                Subpart E—Reporting and Recordkeeping
                135.90
                Reporting.
                135.92
                Recordkeeping and access to records.
                Appendix to Part 135
              
            
            
              Authority:
              12 U.S.C. 1701u; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
            
            
              Source:
              59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              Effective Date Note:
              At 59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, part 135 was revised effective Aug. 1, 1994, through June 30, 1995. At 60 FR 28325, May 31, 1995, the effective period was extended until the final rule implementing changes made to section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 is published and becomes effective.
            
            
              Subpart A—General Provisions
              
                § 135.1
                Purpose.
                (a) Section 3. The purpose of section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u) (section 3) is to ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated by certain HUD financial assistance shall, to the greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing Federal, State and local laws and regulations, be directed to low- and very low-income persons, particularly those who are recipients of government assistance for housing, and to business concerns which provide economic opportunities to low- and very low-income persons.
                (b) Part 135. The purpose of this part is to establish the standards and procedures to be followed to ensure that the objectives of section 3 are met.
              
              
                § 135.2
                Effective date of regulation.
                The regulations of this part will remain in effect until the date the final rule adopting the regulations of this part with or without changes is published and becomes effective, at which point the final rule will remain in effect.
                [60 FR 28326, May 31, 1995]
              
              
                § 135.3
                Applicability.
                (a) Section 3 covered assistance. Section 3 applies to the following HUD assistance (section 3 covered assistance):
                (1) Public and Indian housing assistance. Section 3 applies to training, employment, contracting and other economic opportunities arising from the expenditure of the following public and Indian housing assistance:
                (i) Development assistance provided pursuant to section 5 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (1937 Act);

                (ii) Operating assistance provided pursuant to section 9 of the 1937 Act; and
                
                (iii) Modernization assistance provided pursuant to section 14 of the 1937 Act;
                (2) Housing and community development assistance. Section 3 applies to training, employment, contracting and other economic opportunities arising in connection with the expenditure of housing assistance (including section 8 assistance, and including other housing assistance not administered by the Assistant Secretary of Housing) and community development assistance that is used for the following projects;
                (i) Housing rehabilitation (including reduction and abatement of lead-based paint hazards, but excluding routine maintenance, repair and replacement);
                (ii) Housing construction; and
                (iii) Other public construction.
                (3) Thresholds—(i) No thresholds for section 3 covered public and Indian housing assistance. The requirements of this part apply to section 3 covered assistance provided to recipients, notwithstanding the amount of the assistance provided to the recipient. The requirements of this part apply to all contractors and subcontractors performing work in connection with projects and activities funded by public and Indian housing assistance covered by section 3, regardless of the amount of the contract or subcontract.
                (ii) Thresholds for section 3 covered housing and community development assistance—(A) Recipient thresholds. The requirements of this part apply to recipients of other housing and community development program assistance for a section 3 covered project(s) for which the amount of the assistance exceeds $200,000.
                (B) Contractor and subcontractor thresholds. The requirements of this part apply to contractors and subcontractors performing work on section 3 covered project(s) for which the amount of the assistance exceeds $200,000; and the contract or subcontract exceeds $100,000.
                (C) Threshold met for recipients, but not contractors or subcontractors. If a recipient receives section 3 covered housing or community development assistance in excess of $200,000, but no contract exceeds $100,000, the section 3 preference requirements only apply to the recipient.
                (b) Applicability of section 3 to entire project or activity funded with section 3 assistance. The requirements of this part apply to the entire project or activity that is funded with section 3 covered assistance, regardless of whether the section 3 activity is fully or partially funded with section 3 covered assistance.
                (c) Applicability to Indian housing authorities and Indian tribes. Indian housing authorities and tribes that receive HUD assistance described in paragraph (a) of this section shall comply with the procedures and requirements of this part to the maximum extent consistent with, but not in derogation of, compliance with section 7(b) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450e(b)). (See 24 CFR part 905.)
                (d) Other HUD assistance and other Federal assistance. Recipients, contractors and subcontractors that receive HUD assistance, not listed in paragraph (a) of this section, or other Federal assistance, are encouraged to provide, to the greatest extent feasible, training, employment, and contracting opportunities generated by the expenditure of this assistance to low- and very low-income persons, and business concerns owned by low- and very low-income persons, or which employ low- and very low-income persons.
              
              
                § 135.5
                Definitions.
                The terms Department, HUD, Indian housing authority (IHA), Public housing agency (PHA), and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
                
                  Annual Contributions Contract (ACC) means the contract under the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (1937 Act) between HUD and the PHA, or between HUD and the IHA, that contains the terms and conditions under which HUD assists the PHA or the IHA in providing decent, safe, and sanitary housing for low income families. The ACC must be in a form prescribed by HUD under which HUD agrees to provide assistance in the development, modernization and/or operation of a low income housing project under the 1937 Act, and the PHA or IHA agrees to develop, modernize and operate the project in compliance with all provisions of the ACC and the 1937 Act, and all HUD regulations and implementing requirements and procedures. (The ACC is not a form of procurement contract.)
                
                  Applicant means any entity which makes an application for section 3 covered assistance, and includes, but is not limited to, any State, unit of local government, public housing agency, Indian housing authority, Indian tribe, or other public body, public or private nonprofit organization, private agency or institution, mortgagor, developer, limited dividend sponsor, builder, property manager, community housing development organization (CHDO), resident management corporation, resident council, or cooperative association.
                
                  Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
                
                  Business concern means a business entity formed in accordance with State law, and which is licensed under State, county or municipal law to engage in the type of business activity for which it was formed.
                
                  Business concern that provides economic opportunities for low- and very low-income persons. See definition of “section 3 business concern” in this section.
                
                  Contract. See the definition of “section 3 covered contract” in this section.
                
                  Contractor means any entity which contracts to perform work generated by the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance, or for work in connection with a section 3 covered project.
                
                  Employment opportunities generated by section 3 covered assistance means all employment opportunities generated by the expenditure of section 3 covered public and Indian housing assistance (i.e., operating assistance, development assistance and modernization assistance, as described in § 135.3(a)(1)). With respect to section 3 covered housing and community development assistance, this term means all employment opportunities arising in connection with section 3 covered projects (as described in § 135.3(a)(2)), including management and administrative jobs connected with the section 3 covered project. Management and administrative jobs include architectural, engineering or related professional services required to prepare plans, drawings, specifications, or work write-ups; and jobs directly related to administrative support of these activities, e.g., construction manager, relocation specialist, payroll clerk, etc.
                
                  Housing authority (HA) means, collectively, public housing agency and Indian housing authority.
                
                  Housing and community development assistance means any financial assistance provided or otherwise made available through a HUD housing or community development program through any grant, loan, loan guarantee, cooperative agreement, or contract, and includes community development funds in the form of community development block grants, and loans guaranteed under section 108 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended. Housing and community development assistance does not include financial assistance provided through a contract of insurance or guaranty.
                
                  Housing development means low-income housing owned, developed, or operated by public housing agencies or Indian housing authorities in accordance with HUD's public and Indian housing program regulations codified in 24 CFR Chapter IX.
                
                  HUD Youthbuild programs mean programs that receive assistance under subtitle D of Title IV of the National Affordable Housing Act, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 12899), and provide disadvantaged youth with opportunities for employment, education, leadership development, and training in the construction or rehabilitation of housing for homeless individuals and members of low- and very low-income families.
                
                  Indian tribes shall have the meaning given this term in 24 CFR part 571.
                
                  JTPA means the Job Training Partnership Act (29 U.S.C. 1579(a)).
                
                  Low-income person. See the definition of “section 3 resident” in this section.
                
                  Metropolitan area means a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), as established by the Office of Management and Budget.
                
                  Neighborhood area means:
                
                (1) For HUD housing programs, a geographical location within the jurisdiction of a unit of general local government (but not the entire jurisdiction) designated in ordinances, or other local documents as a neighborhood, village, or similar geographical designation.
                (2) For HUD community development programs, see the definition, if provided, in the regulations for the applicable community development program, or the definition for this term in 24 CFR 570.204(c)(1).
                
                  New hires mean full-time employees for permanent, temporary or seasonal employment opportunities.
                
                  Nonmetropolitan county means any county outside of a metropolitan area.
                
                  Other HUD programs means HUD programs, other than HUD public and Indian housing programs, that provide housing and community development assistance for “section 3 covered projects,” as defined in this section.
                
                  Public housing resident has the meaning given this term in 24 CFR part 963.
                
                  Recipient means any entity which receives section 3 covered assistance, directly from HUD or from another recipient and includes, but is not limited to, any State, unit of local government, PHA, IHA, Indian tribe, or other public body, public or private nonprofit organization, private agency or institution, mortgagor, developer, limited dividend sponsor, builder, property manager, community housing development organization, resident management corporation, resident council, or cooperative association. Recipient also includes any successor, assignee or transferee of any such entity, but does not include any ultimate beneficiary under the HUD program to which section 3 applies and does not include contractors.
                
                  Section 3 means section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u).
                
                  Section 3 business concern means a business concern, as defined in this section—
                (1) That is 51 percent or more owned by section 3 residents; or
                (2) Whose permanent, full-time employees include persons, at least 30 percent of whom are currently section 3 residents, or within three years of the date of first employment with the business concern were section 3 residents; or
                (3) That provides evidence of a commitment to subcontract in excess of 25 percent of the dollar award of all subcontracts to be awarded to business concerns that meet the qualifications set forth in paragraphs (1) or (2) in this definition of “section 3 business concern.”
                
                  Section 3 clause means the contract provisions set forth in § 135.38.
                
                  Section 3 covered activity means any activity which is funded by section 3 covered assistance public and Indian housing assistance.
                
                  Section 3 covered assistance means: (1) Public and Indian housing development assistance provided pursuant to section 5 of the 1937 Act;
                (2) Public and Indian housing operating assistance provided pursuant to section 9 of the 1937 Act;
                (3) Public and Indian housing modernization assistance provided pursuant to section 14 of the 1937 Act;
                (4) Assistance provided under any HUD housing or community development program that is expended for work arising in connection with:
                (i) Housing rehabilitation (including reduction and abatement of lead-based paint hazards, but excluding routine maintenance, repair and replacement);
                (ii) Housing construction; or
                (iii) Other public construction project (which includes other buildings or improvements, regardless of ownership).
                
                  Section 3 covered contract means a contract or subcontract (including a professional service contract) awarded by a recipient or contractor for work generated by the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance, or for work arising in connection with a section 3 covered project. “Section 3 covered contracts” do not include contracts awarded under HUD's procurement program, which are governed by the Federal Acquisition Regulation System (see 48 CFR, Chapter 1). “Section 3 covered contracts” also do not include contracts for the purchase of supplies and materials. However, whenever a contract for materials includes the installation of the materials, the contract constitutes a section 3 covered contract. For example, a contract for the purchase and installation of a furnace would be a section 3 covered contract because the contract is for work (i.e., the installation of the furnace) and thus is covered by section 3.
                
                  Section 3 covered project means the construction, reconstruction, conversion or rehabilitation of housing (including reduction and abatement of lead-based paint hazards), other public construction which includes buildings or improvements (regardless of ownership) assisted with housing or community development assistance.
                
                  Section 3 joint venture. See § 135.40. Section 3 resident means: (1) A public housing resident; or
                (2) An individual who resides in the metropolitan area or nonmetropolitan county in which the section 3 covered assistance is expended, and who is:
                (i) A low-income person, as this term is defined in section 3(b)(2) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(2)). Section 3(b)(2) of the 1937 Act defines this term to mean families (including single persons) whose incomes do not exceed 80 per centum of the median income for the area, as determined by the Secretary, with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that the Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 per centum of the median for the area on the basis of the Secretary's findings that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or unusually high or low-income families; or
                (ii) A very low-income person, as this term is defined in section 3(b)(2) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(2)). Section 3(b)(2) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(2)) defines this term to mean families (including single persons) whose incomes do not exceed 50 per centum of the median family income for the area, as determined by the Secretary with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that the Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 50 per centum of the median for the area on the basis of the Secretary's findings that such variations are necessary because of unusually high or low family incomes.
                (3) A person seeking the training and employment preference provided by section 3 bears the responsibility of providing evidence (if requested) that the person is eligible for the preference.
                
                  Section 8 assistance means assistance provided under section 8 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437f) pursuant to 24 CFR part 882, subpart G.
                
                  Service area means the geographical area in which the persons benefitting from the section 3 covered project reside. The service area shall not extend beyond the unit of general local government in which the section 3 covered assistance is expended. In HUD's Indian housing programs, the service area, for IHAs established by an Indian tribe as a result of the exercise of the tribe's sovereign power, is limited to the area of tribal jurisdiction.
                
                  Subcontractor means any entity (other than a person who is an employee of the contractor) which has a contract with a contractor to undertake a portion of the contractor's obligation for the performance of work generated by the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance, or arising in connection with a section 3 covered project.
                
                  Very low-income person. See the definition of “section 3 resident” in this section.
                
                  Youthbuild programs. See the definition of “HUD Youthbuild programs” in this section.
                [59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 5206, Feb. 9, 1996]
              
              
                § 135.7
                Delegation of authority.

                Except as may be otherwise provided in this part, the functions and responsibilities of the Secretary under section 3, and described in this part, are delegated to the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity. The Assistant Secretary is further authorized to redelegate functions and responsibilities to other employees of HUD; provided however, that the authority to issue rules and regulations under this part, which authority is delegated to the Assistant Secretary, may not be redelegated by the Assistant Secretary.
              
              
                
                § 135.9
                Requirements applicable to HUD NOFAs for section 3 covered programs.
                (a) Certification of compliance with part 135. All notices of funding availability (NOFAs) issued by HUD that announce the availability of funding covered by section 3 shall include a provision in the NOFA that notifies applicants that section 3 and the regulations in part 135 are applicable to funding awards made under the NOFA. Additionally the NOFA shall require as an application submission requirement (which may be specified in the NOFA or application kit) a certification by the applicant that the applicant will comply with the regulations in part 135. (For PHAs, this requirement will be met where a PHA Resolution in Support of the Application is submitted.) With respect to application evaluation, HUD will accept an applicant's certification unless there is evidence substantially challenging the certification.
                (b) Statement of purpose in NOFAs. (1) For competitively awarded assistance in which the grants are for activities administered by an HA, and those activities are anticipated to generate significant training, employment or contracting opportunities, the NOFA must include a statement that one of the purposes of the assistance is to give to the greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing Federal, State and local laws and regulations, job training, employment, contracting and other economic opportunities to section 3 residents and section 3 business concerns.
                (2) For competitively awarded assistance involving housing rehabilitation, construction or other public construction, where the amount awarded to the applicant may exceed $200,000, the NOFA must include a statement that one of the purposes of the assistance is to give, to the greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing Federal, State and local laws and regulations, job training, employment, contracting and other economic opportunities to section 3 residents and section 3 business concerns.
                (c) Section 3 as NOFA evaluation criteria. Where not otherwise precluded by statute, in the evaluation of applications for the award of assistance, consideration shall be given to the extent to which an applicant has demonstrated that it will train and employ section 3 residents and contract with section 3 business concerns for economic opportunities generated in connection with the assisted project or activity. The evaluation criteria to be utilized, and the rating points to be assigned, will be specified in the NOFA.
              
              
                § 135.11
                Other laws governing training, employment, and contracting.
                Other laws and requirements that are applicable or may be applicable to the economic opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance include, but are not necessarily limited to those listed in this section.
                (a) Procurement standards for States and local governments 2 CFR part 200, subpart D—(1) General. Nothing in this part 135 prescribes specific methods of procurement. However, neither section 3 nor the requirements of this part 135 supersede the general requirement of 2 CFR 200.319 that all procurement transactions be conducted in a competitive manner. Consistent with 2 CFR 200.319, section 3 is a Federal statute that expressly encourages, to the maximum extent feasible, a geographic preference in the evaluation of bids or proposals.
                (2) Flexible Subsidy Program. Multifamily project mortgagors in the Flexible Subsidy Program are not required to utilize the methods of procurement in 2 CFR 200.320, and are not permitted to utilize methods of procurement that would result in their award of a contract to a business concern that submits a bid higher than the lowest responsive bid. A multifamily project mortgagor, however, must ensure that, to the greatest extent feasible, the procurement practices it selects provide preference to section 3 business concerns.
                (b) Procurement standards for other recipients (2 CFR part 200, subpart D). Nothing in this part prescribes specific methods of procurement for grants and other agreements with institutions of higher education, hospitals, and other nonprofit organizations. Consistent with the requirements set forth in 2 CFR part 200, subpart D, section 3 is a Federal statute that expressly encourages a geographic preference in the evaluation of bids or proposals.
                (c) Federal labor standards provisions. Certain construction contracts are subject to compliance with the requirement to pay prevailing wages determined under Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a—276a-7) and implementing U.S. Department of Labor regulations in 29 CFR part 5. Additionally, certain HUD-assisted rehabilitation and maintenance activities on public and Indian housing developments are subject to compliance with the requirement to pay prevailing wage rates, as determined or adopted by HUD, to laborers and mechanics employed in this work. Apprentices and trainees may be utilized on this work only to the extent permitted under either Department of Labor regulations at 29 CFR part 5 or for work subject to HUD-determined prevailing wage rates, HUD policies and guidelines. These requirements include adherence to the wage rates and ratios of apprentices or trainees to journeymen set out in “approved apprenticeship and training programs,” as described in paragraph (d) of this section.
                (d) Approved apprenticeship and trainee programs. Certain apprenticeship and trainee programs have been approved by various Federal agencies. Approved apprenticeship and trainee programs include: an apprenticeship program approved by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training of the Department of Labor, or a State Apprenticeship Agency, or an on-the-job training program approved by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, in accordance with the regulations at 29 CFR part 5; or a training program approved by HUD in accordance with HUD policies and guidelines, as applicable. Participation in an approved apprenticeship program does not, in and of itself, demonstrate compliance with the regulations of this part.
                (e) Compliance with Executive Order 11246. Certain contractors covered by this part are subject to compliance with Executive Order 11246, as amended by Executive Order 12086, and the Department of Labor regulations issued pursuant thereto (41 CFR chapter 60) which provide that no person shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin in all phases of employment during the performance of Federal or Federally assisted construction contracts.
                [59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, as amended at 80 FR 75935, Dec. 7, 2015]
              
            
            
              Subpart B—Economic Opportunities for Section 3 Residents and Section 3 Business Concerns
              
                § 135.30
                Numerical goals for meeting the greatest extent feasible requirement.
                (a) General. (1) Recipients and covered contractors may demonstrate compliance with the “greatest extent feasible” requirement of section 3 by meeting the numerical goals set forth in this section for providing training, employment, and contracting opportunities to section 3 residents and section 3 business concerns.
                (2) The goals established in this section apply to the entire amount of section 3 covered assistance awarded to a recipient in any Federal Fiscal Year (FY), commencing with the first FY following the effective date of this rule.
                (3) For recipients that do not engage in training, or hiring, but award contracts to contractors that will engage in training, hiring, and subcontracting, recipients must ensure that, to the greatest extent feasible, contractors will provide training, employment, and contracting opportunities to section 3 residents and section 3 business concerns.
                (4) The numerical goals established in this section represent minimum numerical targets.
                (b) Training and employment. The numerical goals set forth in paragraph (b) of this section apply to new hires. The numerical goals reflect the aggregate hires. Efforts to employ section 3 residents, to the greatest extent feasible, should be made at all job levels.
                (1) Numerical goals for section 3 covered public and Indian housing programs. Recipients of section 3 covered public and Indian housing assistance (as described in § 135.5) and their contractors and subcontractors may demonstrate compliance with this part by committing to employ section 3 residents as:
                (i) 10 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year period beginning in FY 1995;
                (ii) 20 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one period beginning in FY 1996;
                (iii) 30 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for one year period beginning in FY 1997 and continuing thereafter.
                (2) Numerical goals for other HUD programs covered by section 3. (i) Recipients of section 3 covered housing assistance provided under other HUD programs, and their contractors and subcontractors (unless the contract or subcontract awards do not meet the threshold specified in § 135.3(a)(3)) may demonstrate compliance with this part by committing to employ section 3 residents as 10 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for each year over the duration of the section 3 project;
                (ii) Where a managing general partner or management agent is affiliated, in a given metropolitan area, with recipients of section 3 covered housing assistance, for an aggregate of 500 or more units in any fiscal year, the managing partner or management agent may demonstrate compliance with this part by committing to employ section 3 residents as:
                (A) 10 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year period beginning in FY 1995;
                (B) 20 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year period beginning in FY 1996;
                (C) 30 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year period beginning in FY 1997, and continuing thereafter.
                (3) Recipients of section 3 covered community development assistance, and their contractors and subcontractors (unless the contract or subcontract awards do not meet the threshold specified in § 135.3(a)(3)) may demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this part by committing to employ section 3 residents as:
                (i) 10 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year period beginning in FY 1995;
                (ii) 20 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year period beginning in FY 1996; and
                (iii) 30 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year period beginning in FY 1997 and continuing thereafter.
                (c) Contracts. Numerical goals set forth in paragraph (c) of this section apply to contracts awarded in connection with all section 3 covered projects and section 3 covered activities. Each recipient and contractor and subcontractor (unless the contract or subcontract awards do not meet the threshold specified in § 135.3(a)(3)) may demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this part by committing to award to section 3 business concerns:
                (1) At least 10 percent of the total dollar amount of all section 3 covered contracts for building trades work for maintenance, repair, modernization or development of public or Indian housing, or for building trades work arising in connection with housing rehabilitation, housing construction and other public construction; and
                (2) At least three (3) percent of the total dollar amount of all other section 3 covered contracts.
                (d) Safe harbor and compliance determinations. (1) In the absence of evidence to the contrary, a recipient that meets the minimum numerical goals set forth in this section will be considered to have complied with the section 3 preference requirements.
                (2) In evaluating compliance under subpart D of this part, a recipient that has not met the numerical goals set forth in this section has the burden of demonstrating why it was not feasible to meet the numerical goals set forth in this section. Such justification may include impediments encountered despite actions taken. A recipient or contractor also can indicate other economic opportunities, such as those listed in § 135.40, which were provided in its efforts to comply with section 3 and the requirements of this part.
              
              
                § 135.32
                Responsibilities of the recipient.

                Each recipient has the responsibility to comply with section 3 in its own operations, and ensure compliance in the operations of its contractors and subcontractors. This responsibility includes but may not be necessarily limited to:
                (a) Implementing procedures designed to notify section 3 residents about training and employment opportunities generated by section 3 covered assistance and section 3 business concerns about contracting opportunities generated by section 3 covered assistance;
                (b) Notifying potential contractors for section 3 covered projects of the requirements of this part, and incorporating the section 3 clause set forth in § 135.38 in all solicitations and contracts.
                (c) Facilitating the training and employment of section 3 residents and the award of contracts to section 3 business concerns by undertaking activities such as described in the Appendix to this part, as appropriate, to reach the goals set forth in § 135.30. Recipients, at their own discretion, may establish reasonable numerical goals for the training and employment of section 3 residents and contract award to section 3 business concerns that exceed those specified in § 135.30;
                (d) Assisting and actively cooperating with the Assistant Secretary in obtaining the compliance of contractors and subcontractors with the requirements of this part, and refraining from entering into any contract with any contractor where the recipient has notice or knowledge that the contractor has been found in violation of the regulations in 24 CFR part 135.
                (e) Documenting actions taken to comply with the requirements of this part, the results of actions taken and impediments, if any.
                (f) A State or county which distributes funds for section 3 covered assistance to units of local governments, to the greatest extent feasible, must attempt to reach the numerical goals set forth in 135.30 regardless of the number of local governments receiving funds from the section 3 covered assistance which meet the thresholds for applicability set forth at 135.3. The State or county must inform units of local government to whom funds are distributed of the requirements of this part; assist local governments and their contractors in meeting the requirements and objectives of this part; and monitor the performance of local governments with respect to the objectives and requirements of this part.
              
              
                § 135.34
                Preference for section 3 residents in training and employment opportunities.
                (a) Order of providing preference. Recipients, contractors and subcontractors shall direct their efforts to provide, to the greatest extent feasible, training and employment opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance to section 3 residents in the order of priority provided in paragraph (a) of this section.
                (1) Public and Indian housing programs. In public and Indian housing programs, efforts shall be directed to provide training and employment opportunities to section 3 residents in the following order of priority:
                (i) Residents of the housing development or developments for which the section 3 covered assistance is expended (category 1 residents);
                (ii) Residents of other housing developments managed by the HA that is expending the section 3 covered housing assistance (category 2 residents);
                (iii) Participants in HUD Youthbuild programs being carried out in the metropolitan area (or nonmetropolitan county) in which the section 3 covered assistance is expended (category 3 residents);
                (iv) Other section 3 residents.
                (2) Housing and community development programs. In housing and community development programs, priority consideration shall be given, where feasible, to:
                (i) Section 3 residents residing in the service area or neighborhood in which the section 3 covered project is located (collectively, referred to as category 1 residents); and
                (ii) Participants in HUD Youthbuild programs (category 2 residents).

                (iii) Where the section 3 project is assisted under the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11301 et seq.), homeless persons residing in the service area or neighborhood in which the section 3 covered project is located shall be given the highest priority;
                
                (iv) Other section 3 residents.
                (3) Recipients of housing assistance programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for Housing may, at their own discretion, provide preference to residents of the housing development receiving the section 3 covered assistance within the service area or neighborhood where the section 3 covered project is located.
                (4) Recipients of community development programs may, at their own discretion, provide priority to recipients of government assistance for housing, including recipients of certificates or vouchers under the Section 8 housing assistance program, within the service area or neighborhood where the section 3 covered project is located.
                (b) Eligibility for preference. A section 3 resident seeking the preference in training and employment provided by this part shall certify, or submit evidence to the recipient contractor or subcontractor, if requested, that the person is a section 3 resident, as defined in § 135.5. (An example of evidence of eligibility for the preference is evidence of receipt of public assistance, or evidence of participation in a public assistance program.)
                (c) Eligibility for employment. Nothing in this part shall be construed to require the employment of a section 3 resident who does not meet the qualifications of the position to be filled.
              
              
                § 135.36
                Preference for section 3 business concerns in contracting opportunities.
                (a) Order of providing preference. Recipients, contractors and subcontractors shall direct their efforts to award section 3 covered contracts, to the greatest extent feasible, to section 3 business concerns in the order of priority provided in paragraph (a) of this section.
                (1) Public and Indian housing programs. In public and Indian housing programs, efforts shall be directed to award contracts to section 3 business concerns in the following order of priority:
                (i) Business concerns that are 51 percent or more owned by residents of the housing development or developments for which the section 3 covered assistance is expended, or whose full-time, permanent workforce includes 30 percent of these persons as employees (category 1 businesses);
                (ii) Business concerns that are 51 percent or more owned by residents of other housing developments or developments managed by the HA that is expending the section 3 covered assistance, or whose full-time, permanent workforce includes 30 percent of these persons as employees (category 2 businesses); or
                (iii) HUD Youthbuild programs being carried out in the metropolitan area (or nonmetropolitan county) in which the section 3 covered assistance is expended (category 3 businesses).
                (iv) Business concerns that are 51 percent or more owned by section 3 residents, or whose permanent, full-time workforce includes no less than 30 percent section 3 residents (category 4 businesses), or that subcontract in excess of 25 percent of the total amount of subcontracts to business concerns identified in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii) of this section.
                (2) Housing and community development programs. In housing and community development programs, priority consideration shall be given, where feasible, to:
                (i) Section 3 business concerns that provide economic opportunities for section 3 residents in the service area or neighborhood in which the section 3 covered project is located (category 1 businesses); and
                (ii) Applicants (as this term is defined in 42 U.S.C. 12899) selected to carry out HUD Youthbuild programs (category 2 businesses);
                (iii) Other section 3 business concerns.
                (b) Eligibility for preference. A business concern seeking to qualify for a section 3 contracting preference shall certify or submit evidence, if requested, that the business concern is a section 3 business concern as defined in § 135.5.
                (c) Ability to complete contract. A section 3 business concern seeking a contract or a subcontract shall submit evidence to the recipient, contractor, or subcontractor (as applicable), if requested, sufficient to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the party awarding the contract that the business concern is responsible and has the ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of the proposed contract. (The ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of the proposed contract is required of all contractors and subcontractors subject to the procurement standards of 24 CFR 85.36 (2 CFR 200.318(h).) This regulation requires consideration of, among other factors, the potential contractor's record in complying with public policy requirements. Section 3 compliance is a matter properly considered as part of this determination.
                [59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, as amended at 80 FR 75936, Dec. 7, 2015]
              
              
                § 135.38
                Section 3 clause.

                All section 3 covered contracts shall include the following clause (referred to as the section 3 clause):
                
                
                  A. The work to be performed under this contract is subject to the requirements of section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. 1701u (section 3). The purpose of section 3 is to ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated by HUD assistance or HUD-assisted projects covered by section 3, shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be directed to low- and very low-income persons, particularly persons who are recipients of HUD assistance for housing.
                  B. The parties to this contract agree to comply with HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 135, which implement section 3. As evidenced by their execution of this contract, the parties to this contract certify that they are under no contractual or other impediment that would prevent them from complying with the part 135 regulations.
                  C. The contractor agrees to send to each labor organization or representative of workers with which the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement or other understanding, if any, a notice advising the labor organization or workers' representative of the contractor's commitments under this section 3 clause, and will post copies of the notice in conspicuous places at the work site where both employees and applicants for training and employment positions can see the notice. The notice shall describe the section 3 preference, shall set forth minimum number and job titles subject to hire, availability of apprenticeship and training positions, the qualifications for each; and the name and location of the person(s) taking applications for each of the positions; and the anticipated date the work shall begin.
                  D. The contractor agrees to include this section 3 clause in every subcontract subject to compliance with regulations in 24 CFR part 135, and agrees to take appropriate action, as provided in an applicable provision of the subcontract or in this section 3 clause, upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of the regulations in 24 CFR part 135. The contractor will not subcontract with any subcontractor where the contractor has notice or knowledge that the subcontractor has been found in violation of the regulations in 24 CFR part 135.
                  E. The contractor will certify that any vacant employment positions, including training positions, that are filled (1) after the contractor is selected but before the contract is executed, and (2) with persons other than those to whom the regulations of 24 CFR part 135 require employment opportunities to be directed, were not filled to circumvent the contractor's obligations under 24 CFR part 135.
                  F. Noncompliance with HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 135 may result in sanctions, termination of this contract for default, and debarment or suspension from future HUD assisted contracts.
                  G. With respect to work performed in connection with section 3 covered Indian housing assistance, section 7(b) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450e) also applies to the work to be performed under this contract. Section 7(b) requires that to the greatest extent feasible (i) preference and opportunities for training and employment shall be given to Indians, and (ii) preference in the award of contracts and subcontracts shall be given to Indian organizations and Indian-owned Economic Enterprises. Parties to this contract that are subject to the provisions of section 3 and section 7(b) agree to comply with section 3 to the maximum extent feasible, but not in derogation of compliance with section 7(b).
                
              
              
                § 135.40
                Providing other economic opportunities.
                (a) General. In accordance with the findings of the Congress, as stated in section 3, that other economic opportunities offer an effective means of empowering low-income persons, a recipient is encouraged to undertake efforts to provide to low-income persons economic opportunities other than training, employment, and contract awards, in connection with section 3 covered assistance.
                (b) Other training and employment related opportunities. Other economic opportunities to train and employ section 3 residents include, but need not be limited to, use of “upward mobility”, “bridge” and trainee positions to fill vacancies; hiring section 3 residents in management and maintenance positions within other housing developments; and hiring section 3 residents in part-time positions.
                (c) Other business related economic opportunities. (l) A recipient or contractor may provide economic opportunities to establish, stabilize or expand section 3 business concerns, including micro-enterprises. Such opportunities include, but are not limited to the formation of section 3 joint ventures, financial support for affiliating with franchise development, use of labor only contracts for building trades, purchase of supplies and materials from housing authority resident-owned businesses, purchase of materials and supplies from PHA resident-owned businesses and use of procedures under 24 CFR part 963 regarding HA contracts to HA resident-owned businesses. A recipient or contractor may employ these methods directly or may provide incentives to non-section 3 businesses to utilize such methods to provide other economic opportunities to low-income persons.
                (2) A section 3 joint venture means an association of business concerns, one of which qualifies as a section 3 business concern, formed by written joint venture agreement to engage in and carry out a specific business venture for which purpose the business concerns combine their efforts, resources, and skills for joint profit, but not necessarily on a continuing or permanent basis for conducting business generally, and for which the section 3 business concern:
                (i) Is responsible for a clearly defined portion of the work to be performed and holds management responsibilities in the joint venture; and
                (ii) Performs at least 25 percent of the work and is contractually entitled to compensation proportionate to its work.
              
            
            
              Subpart C [Reserved]
            
            
              Subpart D—Complaint and Compliance Review
              
                § 135.70
                General.
                (a) Purpose. The purpose of this subpart is to establish the procedures for handling complaints alleging noncompliance with the regulations of this part, and the procedures governing the Assistant Secretary's review of a recipient's or contractor's compliance with the regulations in this part.
                (b) Definitions. For purposes of this subpart:
                (1) Complaint means an allegation of noncompliance with regulations of this part made in the form described in § 135.76(d).
                (2) Complainant means the party which files a complaint with the Assistant Secretary alleging that a recipient or contractor has failed or refused to comply with the regulations in this part.
                (3) Noncompliance with section 3 means failure by a recipient or contractor to comply with the requirements of this part.
                (4) Respondent means the recipient or contractor against which a complaint of noncompliance has been filed. The term “recipient” shall have the meaning set forth in § 135.7, which includes PHA and IHA.
              
              
                § 135.72
                Cooperation in achieving compliance.
                (a) The Assistant Secretary recognizes that the success of ensuring that section 3 residents and section 3 business concerns have the opportunity to apply for jobs and to bid for contracts generated by covered HUD financial assistance depends upon the cooperation and assistance of HUD recipients and their contractors and subcontractors. All recipients shall cooperate fully and promptly with the Assistant Secretary in section 3 compliance reviews, in investigations of allegations of noncompliance made under § 135.76, and with the distribution and collection of data and information that the Assistant Secretary may require in connection with achieving the economic objectives of section 3.

                (b) The recipient shall refrain from entering into a contract with any contractor after notification to the recipient by HUD that the contractor has been found in violation of the regulations in this part. The provisions of 2 CFR part 2424 apply to the employment, engagement of services, awarding of contracts, or funding of any contractors or subcontractors during any period of debarment, suspension, or otherwise ineligible status.
                [59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, as amended at 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007]
              
              
                § 135.74
                Section 3 compliance review procedures.
                (a) Compliance reviews by Assistant Secretary. The Assistant Secretary shall periodically conduct section 3 compliance reviews of selected recipients and contractors to determine whether these recipients are in compliance with the regulations in this part.
                (b) Form of compliance review. A section 3 compliance review shall consist of a comprehensive analysis and evaluation of the recipient's or contractor's compliance with the requirements and obligations imposed by the regulations of this part, including an analysis of the extent to which section 3 residents have been hired and section 3 business concerns have been awarded contracts as a result of the methods undertaken by the recipient to achieve the employment, contracting and other economic objectives of section 3.
                (c) Where compliance review reveals noncompliance with section 3 by recipient or contractor. Where the section 3 compliance review reveals that a recipient or contractor has not complied with section 3, the Assistant Secretary shall notify the recipient or contractor of its specific deficiencies in compliance with the regulations of this part, and shall advise the recipient or contractor of the means by which these deficiencies may be corrected. HUD shall conduct a follow-up review with the recipient or contractor to ensure that action is being taken to correct the deficiencies.
                (d) Continuing noncompliance by recipient or contractor. A continuing failure or refusal by the recipient or contractor to comply with the regulations in this part may result in the application of sanctions specified in the contract through which HUD assistance is provided, or the application of sanctions specified in the regulations governing the HUD program under which HUD financial assistance is provided. HUD will notify the recipient of any continuing failure or refusal by the contractor to comply with the regulations in this part for possible action under any procurement contract between the recipient and the contractor. Where appropriate, debarment, suspension, and limited denial of participation may be applied to the recipient or the contractor, pursuant to HUD's regulations at 2 CFR part 2424.
                (e) Conducting compliance review before the award of assistance. Section 3 compliance reviews may be conducted before the award of contracts, and especially where the Assistant Secretary has reasonable grounds to believe that the recipient or contractor will be unable or unwilling to comply with the regulations in this part.
                (f) Consideration of complaints during compliance review. Complaints alleging noncompliance with section 3, as provided in § 135.76, may also be considered during any compliance review conducted to determine the recipient's conformance with regulations in this part.
                [59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, as amended at 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007]
              
              
                § 135.76
                Filing and processing complaints.
                (a) Who may file a complaint. The following individuals and business concerns may, personally or through an authorized representative, file with the Assistant Secretary a complaint alleging noncompliance with section 3:
                (1) Any section 3 resident on behalf of himself or herself, or as a representative of persons similarly situated, seeking employment, training or other economic opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance with a recipient or contractor, or by a representative who is not a section 3 resident but who represents one or more section 3 residents;
                (2) Any section 3 business concern on behalf of itself, or as a representative of other section 3 business concerns similarly situated, seeking contract opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance from a recipient or contractor, or by an individual representative of section 3 business concerns.
                (b) Where to file a complaint. A complaint must be filed with the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC, 20410.
                
                (c) Time of filing. (1) A complaint must be received not later than 180 days from the date of the action or omission upon which the complaint is based, unless the time for filing is extended by the Assistant Secretary for good cause shown.
                (2) Where a complaint alleges noncompliance with section 3 and the regulations of this part that is continuing, as manifested in a number of incidents of noncompliance, the complaint will be timely if filed within 180 days of the last alleged occurrence of noncompliance.
                (3) Where a complaint contains incomplete information, the Assistant Secretary shall request the needed information from the complainant. In the event this information is not furnished to the Assistant Secretary within sixty (60) days of the date of the request, the complaint may be closed.
                (d) Contents of complaint—(1) Written complaints. Each complaint must be in writing, signed by the complainant, and include:
                (i) The complainant's name and address;
                (ii) The name and address of the respondent;
                (iii) A description of the acts or omissions by the respondent that is sufficient to inform the Assistant Secretary of the nature and date of the alleged noncompliance.
                (iv) A complainant may provide information to be contained in a complaint by telephone to HUD or any HUD Field Office, and HUD will reduce the information provided by telephone to writing on the prescribed complaint form and send the form to the complainant for signature.
                (2) Amendment of complaint. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. Such amendments may include, but are not limited to, amendments to cure, technical defects or omissions, including failure to sign or affirm a complaint, to clarify or amplify the allegations in a complaint, or to join additional or substitute respondents. Except for the purposes of notifying respondents, amended complaints will be considered as having been made as of the original filing date.
                (e) Resolution of complaint by recipient. (1) Within ten (10) days of timely filing of a complaint that contains complete information (in accordance with paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section), the Assistant Secretary shall determine whether the complainant alleges an action or omission by a recipient or the recipient's contractor that if proven qualifies as noncompliance with section 3. If a determination is made that there is an allegation of noncompliance with section 3, the complaint shall be sent to the recipient for resolution.
                (2) If the recipient believes that the complaint lacks merit, the recipient must notify the Assistant Secretary in writing of this recommendation with supporting reasons, within 30 days of the date of receipt of the complaint. The determination that a complaint lacks merit is reserved to the Assistant Secretary.
                (3) If the recipient determines that there is merit to the complaint, the recipient will have sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the complaint to resolve the matter with the complainant. At the expiration of the 60-day period, the recipient must notify the Assistant Secretary in writing whether a resolution of the complaint has been reached. If resolution has been reached, the notification must be signed by both the recipient and the complainant, and must summarize the terms of the resolution reached between the two parties.
                (4) Any request for an extension of the 60-day period by the recipient must be submitted in writing to the Assistant Secretary, and must include a statement explaining the need for the extension.
                (5) If the recipient is unable to resolve the complaint within the 60-day period (or more if extended by the Assistant Secretary), the complaint shall be referred to the Assistant Secretary for handling.
                (f) Informal resolution of complaint by Assistant Secretary—(1) Dismissal of complaint. Upon receipt of the recipient's written recommendation that there is no merit to the complaint, or upon failure of the recipient and complainant to reach resolution, the Assistant Secretary shall review the complaint to determine whether it presents a valid allegation of noncompliance with section 3. The Assistant Secretary may conduct further investigation if deemed necessary. Where the complaint fails to present a valid allegation of noncompliance with section 3, the Assistant Secretary will dismiss the complaint without further action. The Assistant Secretary shall notify the complainant of the dismissal of the complaint and the reasons for the dismissal.
                (2) Informal resolution. Where the allegations in a complaint on their face, or as amplified by the statements of the complainant, present a valid allegation of noncompliance with section 3, the Assistant Secretary will attempt, through informal methods, to obtain a voluntary and just resolution of the complaint. Where attempts to resolve the complaint informally fail, the Assistant Secretary will impose a resolution on the recipient and complainant. Any resolution imposed by the Assistant Secretary will be in accordance with requirements and procedures concerning the imposition of sanctions or resolutions as set forth in the regulations governing the HUD program under which the section 3 covered assistance was provided.
                (3) Effective date of informal resolution. The imposed resolution will become effective and binding at the expiration of 15 days following notification to recipient and complainant by certified mail of the imposed resolution, unless either party appeals the resolution before the expiration of the 15 days. Any appeal shall be in writing to the Secretary and shall include the basis for the appeal.
                (g) Sanctions. Sanctions that may be imposed on recipients that fail to comply with the regulations of this part include debarment, suspension and limited denial of participation in HUD programs.
                (h) Investigation of complaint. The Assistant Secretary reserves the right to investigate a complaint directly when, in the Assistant Secretary's discretion, the investigation would further the purposes of section 3 and this part.
                (i) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any person or business because the person or business has made a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of complainants shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any investigation, hearing or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.
                (j) Judicial relief. Nothing in this subpart D precludes a section 3 resident or section 3 business concerning from exercising the right, which may otherwise be available, to seek redress directly through judicial procedures.
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0043)
              
            
            
              Subpart E—Reporting and Recordkeeping
              
                § 135.90
                Reporting.
                Each recipient which receives directly from HUD financial assistance that is subject to the requirements of this part shall submit to the Assistant Secretary an annual report in such form and with such information as the Assistant Secretary may request, for the purpose of determining the effectiveness of section 3. Where the program providing the section 3 covered assistance requires submission of an annual performance report, the section 3 report will be submitted with that annual performance report. If the program providing the section 3 covered assistance does not require an annual performance report, the section 3 report is to be submitted by January 10 of each year or within 10 days of project completion, whichever is earlier. All reports submitted to HUD in accordance with the requirements of this part will be made available to the public.
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0043)
              
              
                § 135.92
                Recordkeeping and access to records.

                HUD shall have access to all records, reports, and other documents or items of the recipient that are maintained to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this part, or that are maintained in accordance with the regulations governing the specific HUD program under which section 3 covered assistance is provided or otherwise made available to the recipient or contractor.
              
              
                Pt. 135, App.
                Appendix to Part 135
                I. Examples of Efforts To Offer Training and Employment Opportunities to Section 3 Residents
                (1) Entering into “first source” hiring agreements with organizations representing Section 3 residents.
                (2) Sponsoring a HUD-certified “Step-Up” employment and training program for section 3 residents.
                (3) Establishing training programs, which are consistent with the requirements of the Department of Labor, for public and Indian housing residents and other section 3 residents in the building trades.
                (4) Advertising the training and employment positions by distributing flyers (which identify the positions to be filled, the qualifications required, and where to obtain additional information about the application process) to every occupied dwelling unit in the housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 persons (as these terms are defined in § 135.34) reside.
                (5) Advertising the training and employment positions by posting flyers (which identify the positions to be filled, the qualifications required, and where to obtain additional information about the application process) in the common areas or other prominent areas of the housing development or developments. For HAs, post such advertising in the housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 persons reside; for all other recipients, post such advertising in the housing development or developments and transitional housing in the neighborhood or service area of the section 3 covered project.
                (6) Contacting resident councils, resident management corporations, or other resident organizations, where they exist, in the housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 persons reside, and community organizations in HUD-assisted neighborhoods, to request the assistance of these organizations in notifying residents of the training and employment positions to be filled.
                (7) Sponsoring (scheduling, advertising, financing or providing in-kind services) a job informational meeting to be conducted by an HA or contractor representative or representatives at a location in the housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 persons reside or in the neighborhood or service area of the section 3 covered project.
                (8) Arranging assistance in conducting job interviews and completing job applications for residents of the housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 persons reside and in the neighborhood or service area in which a section 3 project is located.
                (9) Arranging for a location in the housing development or developments where category 1 persons reside, or the neighborhood or service area of the project, where job applications may be delivered to and collected by a recipient or contractor representative or representatives.
                (10) Conducting job interviews at the housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 persons reside, or at a location within the neighborhood or service area of the section 3 covered project.
                (11) Contacting agencies administering HUD Youthbuild programs, and requesting their assistance in recruiting HUD Youthbuild program participants for the HA's or contractor's training and employment positions.
                (12) Consulting with State and local agencies administering training programs funded through JTPA or JOBS, probation and parole agencies, unemployment compensation programs, community organizations and other officials or organizations to assist with recruiting Section 3 residents for the HA's or contractor's training and employment positions.
                (13) Advertising the jobs to be filled through the local media, such as community television networks, newspapers of general circulation, and radio advertising.
                (14) Employing a job coordinator, or contracting with a business concern that is licensed in the field of job placement (preferably one of the section 3 business concerns identified in part 135), that will undertake, on behalf of the HA, other recipient or contractor, the efforts to match eligible and qualified section 3 residents with the training and employment positions that the HA or contractor intends to fill.
                (15) For an HA, employing section 3 residents directly on either a permanent or a temporary basis to perform work generated by section 3 assistance. (This type of employment is referred to as “force account labor” in HUD's Indian housing regulations. See 24 CFR 905.102, and § 905.201(a)(6).)
                (16) Where there are more qualified section 3 residents than there are positions to be filled, maintaining a file of eligible qualified section 3 residents for future employment positions.
                (17) Undertaking job counseling, education and related programs in association with local educational institutions.

                (18) Undertaking such continued job training efforts as may be necessary to ensure the continued employment of section 3 residents previously hired for employment opportunities.
                (19) After selection of bidders but prior to execution of contracts, incorporating into the contract a negotiated provision for a specific number of public housing or other section 3 residents to be trained or employed on the section 3 covered assistance.
                (20) Coordinating plans and implementation of economic development (e.g., job training and preparation, business development assistance for residents) with the planning for housing and community development.
                II. Examples of Efforts To Award Contracts to Section 3 Business Concerns
                (1) Utilizing procurement procedures for section 3 business concerns similar to those provided in 24 CFR part 905 for business concerns owned by Native Americans (see section III of this Appendix).
                (2) In determining the responsibility of potential contractors, consider their record of section 3 compliance as evidenced by past actions and their current plans for the pending contract.
                (3) Contacting business assistance agencies, minority contractors associations and community organizations to inform them of contracting opportunities and requesting their assistance in identifying section 3 businesses which may solicit bids or proposals for contracts for work in connection with section 3 covered assistance.
                (4) Advertising contracting opportunities by posting notices, which provide general information about the work to be contracted and where to obtain additional information, in the common areas or other prominent areas of the housing development or developments owned and managed by the HA.
                (5) For HAs, contacting resident councils, resident management corporations, or other resident organizations, where they exist, and requesting their assistance in identifying category 1 and category 2 business concerns.
                (6) Providing written notice to all known section 3 business concerns of the contracting opportunities. This notice should be in sufficient time to allow the section 3 business concerns to respond to the bid invitations or request for proposals.
                (7) Following up with section 3 business concerns that have expressed interest in the contracting opportunities by contacting them to provide additional information on the contracting opportunities.
                (8) Coordinating pre-bid meetings at which section 3 business concerns could be informed of upcoming contracting and subcontracting opportunities.
                (9) Carrying out workshops on contracting procedures and specific contract opportunities in a timely manner so that section 3 business concerns can take advantage of upcoming contracting opportunities, with such information being made available in languages other than English where appropriate.
                (10) Advising section 3 business concerns as to where they may seek assistance to overcome limitations such as inability to obtain bonding, lines of credit, financing, or insurance.
                (11) Arranging solicitations, times for the presentation of bids, quantities, specifications, and delivery schedules in ways to facilitate the participation of section 3 business concerns.
                (12) Where appropriate, breaking out contract work items into economically feasible units to facilitate participation by section 3 business concerns.
                (13) Contacting agencies administering HUD Youthbuild programs, and notifying these agencies of the contracting opportunities.
                (14) Advertising the contracting opportunities through trade association papers and newsletters, and through the local media, such as community television networks, newspapers of general circulation, and radio advertising.
                (15) Developing a list of eligible section 3 business concerns.
                (16) For HAs, participating in the “Contracting with Resident-Owned Businesses” program provided under 24 CFR part 963.
                (17) Establishing or sponsoring programs designed to assist residents of public or Indian housing in the creation and development of resident-owned businesses.
                (18) Establishing numerical goals (number of awards and dollar amount of contracts) for award of contracts to section 3 business concerns.
                (19) Supporting businesses which provide economic opportunities to low income persons by linking them to the support services available through the Small Business Administration (SBA), the Department of Commerce and comparable agencies at the State and local levels.
                (20) Encouraging financial institutions, in carrying out their responsibilities under the Community Reinvestment Act, to provide no or low interest loans for providing working capital and other financial business needs.
                (21) Actively supporting joint ventures with section 3 business concerns.
                (22) Actively supporting the development or maintenance of business incubators which assist Section 3 business concerns.
                III. Examples of Procurement Procedures That Provide for Preference for Section 3 Business Concerns

                This Section III provides specific procedures that may be followed by recipients and contractors (collectively, referred to as the “contracting party”) for implementing the section 3 contracting preference for each of the competitive procurement methods authorized in 2 CFR 200.320.
                (1) Small Purchase Procedures. For section 3 covered contracts aggregating no more than $25,000, the methods set forth in this paragraph (1) or the more formal procedures set forth in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this Section III may be utilized.
                (i) Solicitation. (A) Quotations may be solicited by telephone, letter or other informal procedure provided that the manner of solicitation provides for participation by a reasonable number of competitive sources. At the time of solicitation, the parties must be informed of:
                —the section 3 covered contract to be awarded with sufficient specificity;
                —the time within which quotations must be submitted; and
                —the information that must be submitted with each quotation.
                
                (B) If the method described in paragraph (i)(A) is utilized, there must be an attempt to obtain quotations from a minimum of three qualified sources in order to promote competition. Fewer than three quotations are acceptable when the contracting party has attempted, but has been unable, to obtain a sufficient number of competitive quotations. In unusual circumstances, the contracting party may accept the sole quotation received in response to a solicitation provided the price is reasonable. In all cases, the contracting party shall document the circumstances when it has been unable to obtain at least three quotations.
                (ii) Award. (A) Where the section 3 covered contract is to be awarded based upon the lowest price, the contract shall be awarded to the qualified section 3 business concern with the lowest responsive quotation, if it is reasonable and no more than 10 percent higher than the quotation of the lowest responsive quotation from any qualified source. If no responsive quotation by a qualified section 3 business concern is within 10 percent of the lowest responsive quotation from any qualified source, the award shall be made to the source with the lowest quotation.
                (B) Where the section 3 covered contract is to be awarded based on factors other than price, a request for quotations shall be issued by developing the particulars of the solicitation, including a rating system for the assignment of points to evaluate the merits of each quotation. The solicitation shall identify all factors to be considered, including price or cost. The rating system shall provide for a range of 15 to 25 percent of the total number of available rating points to be set aside for the provision of preference for section 3 business concerns. The purchase order shall be awarded to the responsible firm whose quotation is the most advantageous, considering price and all other factors specified in the rating system.
                (2) Procurement by sealed bids (Invitations for Bids). Preference in the award of section 3 covered contracts that are awarded under a sealed bid (IFB) process may be provided as follows:
                (i) Bids shall be solicited from all businesses (section 3 business concerns, and non-section 3 business concerns). An award shall be made to the qualified section 3 business concern with the highest priority ranking and with the lowest responsive bid if that bid—
                (A) is within the maximum total contract price established in the contracting party's budget for the specific project for which bids are being taken, and
                (B) is not more than “X” higher than the total bid price of the lowest responsive bid from any responsible bidder. “X” is determined as follows:
                
                  
                     
                    x = lesser of:
                  
                  
                    When the lowest responsive bid is less than $100,000
                    10% of that bid or $9,000.
                  
                  
                    When the lowest responsive bid is:
                  
                  
                    At least $100,000, but less than $200,000
                    9% of that bid, or $16,000.
                  
                  
                    At least $200,000, but less than $300,000
                    8% of that bid, or $21,000.
                  
                  
                    At least $300,000, but less than $400,000
                    7% of that bid, or $24,000.
                  
                  
                    At least $400,000, but less than $500,000
                    6% of that bid, or $25,000.
                  
                  
                    At least $500,000, but less than $1 million
                    5% of that bid, or $40,000.
                  
                  
                    At least $1 million, but less than $2 million
                    4% of that bid, or $60,000.
                  
                  
                    At least $2 million, but less than $4 million
                    3% of that bid, or $80,000.
                  
                  
                    At least $4 million, but less than $7 million
                    2% of that bid, or $105,000.
                  
                  
                    $7 million or more
                    11/2% of the lowest responsive bid, with no dollar limit.
                  
                
                (ii) If no responsive bid by a section 3 business concern meets the requirements of paragraph (2)(i) of this section, the contract shall be awarded to a responsible bidder with the lowest responsive bid.
                (3) Procurement under the competitive proposals method of procurement (Request for Proposals (RFP)). (i) For contracts and subcontracts awarded under the competitive proposals method of procurement (2 CFR 200.320), a Request for Proposals (RFP) shall identify all evaluation factors (and their relative importance) to be used to rate proposals.
                
                (ii) One of the evaluation factors shall address both the preference for section 3 business concerns and the acceptability of the strategy for meeting the greatest extent feasible requirement (section 3 strategy), as disclosed in proposals submitted by all business concerns (section 3 and non-section 3 business concerns). This factor shall provide for a range of 15 to 25 percent of the total number of available points to be set aside for the evaluation of these two components.
                (iii) The component of this evaluation factor designed to address the preference for section 3 business concerns must establish a preference for these business concerns in the order of priority ranking as described in 24 CFR 135.36.
                (iv) With respect to the second component (the acceptability of the section 3 strategy), the RFP shall require the disclosure of the contractor's section 3 strategy to comply with the section 3 training and employment preference, or contracting preference, or both, if applicable. A determination of the contractor's responsibility will include the submission of an acceptable section 3 strategy. The contract award shall be made to the responsible firm (either section 3 or non-section 3 business concern) whose proposal is determined most advantageous, considering price and all other factors specified in the RFP.
                [59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, as amended at 80 FR 75936, Dec. 7, 2015]
              
            
          
          
            Pt. 146
            PART 146—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF AGE IN HUD PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
            
              
                Subpart A—General
                Sec.
                146.1
                Purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
                146.3
                Purpose of HUD's age discrimination regulation.
                146.5
                Applicability of part.
                146.7
                Definitions.
              
              
                Subpart B—Standards for Determining Age Discrimination
                146.11
                Scope of subpart.
                146.13
                Rules against age discrimination.
              
              
                Subpart C—Duties of HUD Recipients
                146.21
                General responsibilities.
                146.23
                Notice of subrecipients.
                146.25
                Assurance of compliance and recipient assessment of age distinctions.
                146.27
                Information requirements.
              
              
                Subpart D—Investigation, Settlement, and Enforcement Procedures
                146.31
                Compliance reviews.
                146.33
                Complaints.
                146.35
                Mediation.
                146.37
                Investigation.
                146.39
                Enforcement procedures.
                146.41
                Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
                146.43
                Hearings, decisions, post-termination proceedings.
                146.45
                Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
                146.47
                Remedial and affirmative action by recipients.
                146.49
                Alternate funds disbursal procedure.
              
            
            
              Authority:
              42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 6103.
            
            
              Source:
              51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              Subpart A—General
              
                § 146.1
                Purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
                The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (the Act) prohibits discrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance. The Act, however, permits federally assisted programs and activities and recipients of Federal funds to continue to use certain age distinctions and factors other than age which meet the requirements of the Act and this part.
              
              
                § 146.3
                Purpose of HUD's age discrimination regulation.
                The purpose of this part is to state HUD's policies and procedures under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, consistent with the government-wide age discrimination regulation contained at 45 CFR part 90.
              
              
                § 146.5
                Applicability of part.
                This part applies to each program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance provided by HUD.
              
              
                § 146.7
                Definitions.
                The terms HUD and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
                
                  Act means the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6101-07.
                
                  Action means any act, activity, policy, rule, standard, or method of administration or the use of any policy, rule, standard, or method of administration.
                
                  Age means how old a person is, or the number of elapsed years from the date of a person's birth.
                
                  Age distinction means any action using age or an age-related term.
                
                  Age-related term means a word or words which necessarily imply a particular age or range of ages (for example, children, adult, older persons, but not student).
                
                  Federal financial assistance means any grant, entitlement, loan, cooperative agreement, contract (other than a procurement contract or a contract of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by which HUD provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
                (a) Funds;
                (b) Service of Federal personnel; or
                (c) Real or personal property or any interest in or use of property, including:
                (1) Transfers or leases of property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
                (2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal government.
                
                  Recipient means any State or its political subdivisions; any instrumentality of a State or its political subdivisions; any public or private agency; any Indian tribe or Alaskan Native Village, institution, organization, or other entity; or any person to which Federal financial assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient. Recipient includes any successor, assignee, or transferee, but does not include the ultimate beneficiary of the assistance.
                
                  Subrecipient means any of the entities in the definition of recipient to which a recipient extends or passes on Federal financial assistance. A subrecipient is regarded as a recipient of Federal financial assistance and has all the duties of a recipient set out in this part.
                
                  United States means the several States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Northern Marianas, and the territories and possessions of the United States.
                [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 61 FR 5206, Feb. 9, 1996]
              
            
            
              Subpart B—Standards for Determining Age Discrimination
              
                § 146.11
                Scope of subpart.
                This subpart contains the standards that HUD will use to determine whether an age distinction, or a factor other than age that may have a disproportionate effect on persons of different ages, is prohibited.
              
              
                § 146.13
                Rules against age discrimination.
                (a) The rules stated in this paragraph are limited by the exceptions contained in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
                (1) General rule. No person in the United States shall, on the basis of age, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
                (2) Specific rules. A recipient may not, in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, directly or through contracting, licensing, or other arrangements, use age distinctions or take any other actions that have the effect, on the basis of age, of:
                (i) Excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under, a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance; or
                (ii) Denying or limiting individuals in their opportunity to participate in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
                (3) The specific forms of age discrimination listed in paragraph (a)(2) of this section do not necessarily constitute a complete list.
                (b) Exceptions for normal operation or statutory objective of any program or activity. A recipient is permitted to take an action otherwise prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section if the action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity. An action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity, if:
                (1) Age is used as a measure or approximation of one or more other characteristics; and
                (2) The other characteristics must be measured or approximated in order for the normal operation of the program or activity to continue, or to achieve any statutory objective of the program or activity; and
                (3) The other characteristics can be reasonably measured or approximated by the use of age; and
                (4) The other characteristics are impractical to measure directly on an individual basis.
                (c) Exceptions for reasonable factors other than age. A recipient is permitted to take action otherwise prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section if the action is based on a factor other than age, even though that action may have a disproportionate effect on persons of different ages. An action may be based on a factor other than age only if the factor bears a direct and substantial relationship to the normal operation of the program or activity or the achievement of a statutory objective.
                (d) Burden of proof. The burden of proving that an age distinction or other action falls within an exception described in paragraph (b) or (c) of this section is on the recipient of Federal financial assistance.
                (e) For the purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c), normal operation means the operation of a program or activity without significant changes that would impair its ability to meet its statutory objectives. Statutory objectives means any purpose of a program or activity expressly stated in any Federal, State, or local statute adopted by an elected, general purpose legislative body.
                (f) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this section, if a recipient operating a program provides special benefits to the elderly or to children, such use of age distinctions shall be presumed to be necessary to the normal operation of the program.
              
            
            
              Subpart C—Duties of HUD Recipients
              
                § 146.21
                General responsibilities.
                Each recipient has primary responsibility to ensure that its programs and activities that receive Federal financial assistance from HUD comply with the provisions of the Act, the government-wide regulation, and this part, and shall take steps to eliminate violations of the Act. A recipient also has responsibility to maintain records, provide information, and to afford HUD access to its records to the extent HUD finds necessary to determine whether a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD is in compliance with the Act and this part.
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
                [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]
              
              
                § 146.23
                Notice of subrecipients.
                Whenever a recipient passes Federal financial assistance from HUD to subrecipients, the recipient shall provide the subrecipient with written notice of its obligations under this part and the recipient will remain responsible for the subrecipient's compliance with respect to programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD.
              
              
                § 146.25
                Assurance of compliance and recipient assessment of age distinctions.
                (a) Each recipient of Federal financial assistance from HUD shall sign a written assurance as specified by HUD that it will comply with the Act and this part with respect to programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD.

                (b) As part of a compliance review under § 146.31 or an investigation under § 146.37, HUD may require a recipient employing the equivalent of 15 or more employees to complete, in a manner specified by the Secretary or Secretary's designee, a written self-evaluation of any age distinction imposed in its program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD, so that HUD may have to assess the recipient's compliance with the Act. Whenever an assessment indicates a violation of the Act or this part, the recipient shall take corrective action to remedy the violation.
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
                [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]
              
              
                § 146.27
                Information requirements.
                In order to make it possible for HUD to determine whether recipients are in compliance with the Act and this part, each recipient shall:
                (a) Keep records in a form and containing information that HUD determines is necessary;
                (b) Make information available to HUD upon request;
                (c) Permit reasonable access by HUD to the books, records, accounts and other recipient facilities and sources of information.
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
                [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]
              
            
            
              Subpart D—Investigation, Settlement, and Enforcement Procedures
              
                § 146.31
                Compliance reviews.
                (a) HUD may conduct pre-award reviews to determine whether programs or activities submitted for HUD assistance are consistent with the age distinctions set forth at § 146.13(b).
                (b) If a pre-award review indicates that the proposed programs or activities are not consistent with the age distinctions set forth at § 146.13(b), the application will be returned to the applicant for additional information or clarification or for correction consistent with this part.
                (c) HUD may conduct compliance reviews of recipients that will enable it to investigate and correct violations of this part. HUD may conduct these reviews even in the absence of a complaint against a recipient. The review may be as comprehensive as necessary for HUD to determine whether a violation has occurred.
                (d) If a compliance review indicates a violation, HUD will attempt to achieve voluntary compliance. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, HUD may begin enforcement procedures as provided in § 146.39.
              
              
                § 146.33
                Complaints.
                (a) Any person, individually or as a member of a class or on behalf of others, may file a complaint with HUD alleging discrimination prohibited by the Act. A complainant shall file a complaint within 180 days from the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged act of discrimination. However, for good cause, HUD may extend this time limit. The filing date for a complaint will be the date upon which the complaint is deemed sufficient to be processed.
                (b) HUD shall facilitate the filing of complaints and shall take the following measures:
                (1) Accept as a sufficient complaint any written legible statement which is signed by the complainant and which identifies the parties involved, the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged violation, and describes generally the alleged prohibited action or practice;
                (2) Freely permit a complainant to add information to the complaint to meet the requirements of a sufficient complaint;
                (3) Widely disseminate information regarding the obligations of recipients under the Act and this part;
                (4) Notify the complainant and the recipient of their rights under the complaint process, including the right to have a representative at all stages of the complaint process; and
                (5) Notify the complainant and the recipient of their right to contact HUD for information and assistance regarding the complaint resolution process.
                (c) HUD will return to the complainant any complaint determined to be outside the coverage of this part, and shall state the reasons why it is outside the coverage.
                (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
                [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]
              
              
                
                § 146.35
                Mediation.
                (a) HUD shall refer to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, a mediation agency designated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, all complaints that:
                (1) Fall within the coverage of this part, unless the age distinction complained of is clearly with an exception; and
                (2) Contain all information necessary for further processing.
                (b) Both the complainant and the recipient shall participate in the mediation process to the extent necessary to reach an agreement or make an informal judgment that an agreement is not possible. There should be at least one meeting by each party with the mediator during the mediation process. However, the recipient and the complainant need not meet with the mediator at the same time.
                (c) If the complainant and the recipient reach an agreement, the mediator shall prepare a written statement of the agreement and have the complainant and recipient sign it. The mediator shall send a copy of the agreement to HUD. HUD will take no further action on the complaint unless the complainant or the recipient fails to comply with the agreement.
                (d) The mediator shall protect the confidentiality of information obtained in the course of the mediation process. No mediator shall testify in any adjudicative proceeding, produce any document, or otherwise disclose any information obtained in the course of the mediation process without the prior approval of the head of the mediation agency.
                (e) HUD shall use the mediation process for a maximum of 60 days after receiving a complaint. Mediation ends if:
                (1) 60 days elapse from the time HUD receives the complaint; or
                (2) Before the end of the 60-day period, an agreement is reached; or
                (3) Before the end of the 60-day period, the mediator determines that an agreement cannot be reached.
                This 60-day period may be extended by the mediator, with the concurrence of HUD, for not more than an additional 30 days if the mediator determines that it is likely that an agreement will be reached during such extended period.
              
              
                § 146.37
                Investigation.
                (a) Investigation and settlement following mediation. (1) HUD shall investigate complaints that are unresolved after mediation or are reopened because of an alleged violation of a mediation agreement.
                (2) In the investigation of complaints filed under this part, HUD will establish facts through such methods as discussion with the complainant and recipient and the review of documents in the possession of either party. HUD may also seek the assistance of any applicable State agency. Where possible, HUD will settle the complaint on terms that are mutually agreeable to the parties.
                (3) Settlements shall be in writing and signed by the parties and by an authorized HUD official.
                (4) A settlement shall not affect the initiation or continuation of any other enforcement effort of HUD, including compliance reviews or investigation of other complaints involving the recipient.
                (5) A settlement reached under this paragraph (a) of this section is an agreement to resolve an alleged violation of the Act to the satisfaction of the parties involved, and does not constitute a finding of discrimination against the recipient.
                (b) Failure of settlement. If HUD cannot resolve the complaint through settlement, it may make a formal determination that the Act or this part has been violated and begin enforcement procedures, as provided in § 146.39. HUD shall inform the recipient and complainant in writing that the matter cannot be resolved through settlement.
              
              
                § 146.39
                Enforcement procedures.
                (a) HUD may enforce the Act this regulation by:

                (1) Termination of a recipient's financial assistance from HUD under the program or activity involved, if the recipient has violated the Act or this part. The determination of the recipient's violation may be made only after a recipient has had an opportunity for a hearing on the record before an Administrative Law Judge. If the financial assistance consists of a Community Development Block Grant, the requirements of section 109(b) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5309, must also be satisfied before the termination of financial assistance. Cases settled in mediation or before hearing will not involve termination of a recipient's Federal financial assistance from HUD.
                (2) Any other means authorized by law, including, but not limited to:
                (i) Referral to the Department of Justice for proceedings to enforce any rights of the United States or obligations of the recipient created by the Act or this part;
                (ii) Use of any requirement of, or referral to, any Federal, State or local government agency that will have the effect of correcting a violation of the Act or this part.
                (b) Whenever the Secretary determines that a State or unit of general local government which is a recipient of Federal financial assistance under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301-5317, has failed to comply with requirements of the Age Discrimination Act or this part with respect to a program or activity funded in whole or in part with such assistance, he or she shall notify the Governor of such State or the chief executive officer of such unit of general local government of the noncompliance and shall request the Governor or chief executive officer to secure compliance. If within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days, the Governor or chief executive officer fails or refuses to secure compliance, the Secretary is authorized to take the action specified in (a) of this section, exercise the powers and functions provided for in section 111(a) of the Housing and Community Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5311(a), or take such other action as may be provided by law.
                (c) HUD shall limit any termination under § 146.35 to the particular recipient and particular program or activity HUD finds to be in violation of this part. HUD shall not base any part of a termination on a finding with respect to any program or activity of the recipient which does not receive Federal financial assistance from HUD.
                (d) HUD shall take no action under paragraph (a) of this section until:
                (1) The Secretary has advised the recipient of its failure to comply with the Act or this part and has determined that voluntary compliance cannot be achieved.
                (2) Thirty days have elapsed after the Secretary has submitted a written report of the circumstances and grounds of the action to the committees of the Congress having legislative jurisdiction over the Federal program or activity involved. A report shall be filed whenever any action is taken under paragraph (a) of this section.
                (e)(1) The Secretary may defer the provision of new Federal financial assistance to a recipient when termination proceedings under this section are initiated.
                (2) New financial assistance from HUD includes all assistance for which HUD requires an application, approval, or submissions under the Community Development Block Grant program including renewal or continuation of existing activities, or authorization of new activities, during the deferral period. New financial assistance from HUD does not include increases in funding as a result of changed computation for formula awards or assistance approved before the beginning of a hearing under this section.
                (3) HUD shall not impose a deferral until the recipient has received a notice of an opportunity for a hearing under this section. HUD shall not continue a deferral for more than 60 days unless a hearing has begun within that time or the time for beginning the hearing has been extended by mutual consent of the recipient and the Secretary. HUD shall not continue a deferral for more than 30 days after the close of the hearing, unless the hearing results in a finding that the recipient has violated that Act or this part.
              
              
                § 146.41
                Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
                A recipient may not engage in acts of intimidation or retaliation against any person who:
                (a) Attempts to assert a right protected by this part; or
                (b) Cooperates in any mediation, investigation, hearing, or other part of HUD's investigation, settlement, and enforcement process.
              
              
                
                § 146.43
                Hearings, decisions, post-termination proceedings.
                The provisions of 24 CFR part 180 apply to HUD enforcement of this part.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]
              
              
                § 146.45
                Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
                (a) A complainant may file a civil action following the exhaustion of administrative remedies under the Act. Administrative remedies are exhausted if:
                (1) 180 days have elapsed since the complainant filed the complaint and HUD had made no finding with regard to the complaint; or
                (2) HUD issues any finding in favor of the recipient.
                (b) If HUD fails to make a finding within 180 days or issues a finding in favor of the recipient, HUD shall:
                (1) Promptly advise the complainant of this fact;
                (2) Advise the complainant of his or her right to bring a civil action for injunctive relief; and
                (3) Inform the complainant:
                (i) That he or she may bring a civil action only in a United States District Court for the district in which the recipient is located or transacts business;
                (ii) That a complainant prevailing in a civil action has the right to be awarded the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney's fees, but that the complainant must demand these costs in the complaint;
                (iii) That before commencing the action, the complainant must give 30 days' notice by registered mail to the Secretary of HUD, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Attorney General of the United States, and the recipient;
                (iv) That the notice must state: the alleged violation of the Act, the relief requested, the court in which the complainant is bringing the action, and whether or not attorney's fees are demanded in the event the complainant prevails; and
                (v) That the complainant may not bring an action if the same alleged violation of the Act by the same recipient is the subject of a pending action in any court of the United States.
              
              
                § 146.47
                Remedial and affirmative action by recipients.
                (a) Where the Secretary finds that a recipient has unlawfully discriminated on the basis of age, the recipient shall take any action that the Secretary may require to overcome the effects of the discrimination. If another recipient exercises control over a subrecipient that has unlawfully discriminated, the Secretary may require both recipients to take remedial action.
                (b) Even in the absence of a finding of discrimination, a recipient may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in the recipient's program or activity on the basis of age.
                (c) If a recipient operating a program which serves the elderly or children in addition to persons of other ages provides special benefits to the elderly or children, the provision of those benefits shall be presumed to be voluntary affirmative action, provided that it does not have the effect of excluding otherwise eligible persons from participation in the program.
              
              
                § 146.49
                Alternate funds disbursal procedure.
                (a) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph and to the extent authorized by law, the Secretary may redisburse funds withheld or terminated under this part directly to an alternate recipient, including any public or non-profit private organization or agency, State or political subdivision of the State. Under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301, funds withheld because of a reduction or withdrawal of a recipient's Community Development Block Grant must be reallocated in the succeeding fiscal year, in accordance with the applicable regulations governing that program.
                (b) The Secretary shall require the alternate recipient to demonstrate:
                (1) The ability to comply with the regulations; and

                (2) The ability to achieve the goals of the Federal statute authorizing the program or activity.
                
              
            
          
          
            Pt. 180
            PART 180—CONSOLIDATED HUD HEARING PROCEDURES FOR CIVIL RIGHTS MATTERS
            
              
                Subpart A—General Information
                Sec.
                180.100
                 Definitions.
                180.105
                 Scope of rules.
              
              
                Subpart B—Administrative Law Judge
                180.200
                 Designation.
                180.205
                 Authority.
                180.210
                 Withdrawal or disqualification of ALJ.
                180.215
                 Ex parte communications.
                180.220
                 Separation of functions.
              
              
                Subpart C—Parties
                180.300
                 Rights of parties.
                180.305
                 Representation.
                180.310
                 Parties.
                180.315
                 Standards of conduct.
              
              
                Subpart D—Proceedings Prior to Hearing
                180.400
                Service and filing.
                180.405
                Time computations.
                180.410
                Charges under the Fair Housing Act.
                180.415
                Notice of proposed adverse action regarding Federal financial assistance in non-Fair Housing Act matters.
                180.420
                Answer.
                180.425
                Amendments to pleadings.
                180.430
                Motions.
                180.435
                Prehearing statements.
                180.440
                Prehearing conferences.
                180.445
                Settlement negotiations before a settlement judge.
                180.450
                Resolution of charge or notice of proposed adverse action.
              
              
                Subpart E—Discovery
                180.500
                Discovery.
                180.505
                Supplementation of responses.
                180.510
                Interrogatories.
                180.515
                Depositions.
                180.520
                Use of deposition at hearings.
                180.525
                Requests for production of documents or things for inspection or other purposes, including physical and mental examinations.
                180.530
                Requests for admissions.
                180.535
                Protective orders.
                180.540
                Motion to compel discovery.
                180.545
                Subpoenas.
              
              
                Subpart F—Procedures at Hearing
                180.600
                Date and place of hearing.
                180.605
                Conduct of hearings.
                180.610
                Waiver of right to appear.
                180.615
                Failure of party to appear.
                180.620
                Evidence.
                180.625
                Record of hearing.
                180.630
                Stipulations.
                180.635
                Written testimony.
                180.640
                In camera and protective orders.
                180.645
                Exhibits.
                180.650
                Public document items.
                180.655
                Witnesses.
                180.660
                Closing of record.
                180.665
                Arguments and briefs.
                180.670
                Initial decision of ALJ.
                180.671
                Assessing civil penalties for Fair Housing Act cases.
                180.675
                Petitions for review.
                180.680
                Final decisions.
              
              
                Subpart G—Post-Final Decision in Fair Housing Cases
                180.700
                Action upon issuance of a final decision in Fair Housing Act cases.
                180.705
                Attorney's fees and costs.
                180.710
                Judicial review of final decision.
                180.715
                Enforcement of final decision.
              
              
                Subpart H—Post-Final Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act Matters
                180.800
                Post-termination proceedings.
                180.805
                Judicial review of final decision.
              
            
            
              Authority:
              28 U.S.C. 1 note; 29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, 3535(d), 3601-3619, 5301-5320, and 6103.
            
            
              Source:
              61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, unless otherwise noted.
            
            
              Subpart A—General Information
              
                § 180.100
                Definitions.
                As used in this part:
                (a) The terms ALJ, Department, Fair Housing Act, General Counsel, and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A.
                (b) The terms Aggrieved Person, Assistant Secretary, Attorney General, Discriminatory Housing Practice, Person, and State are defined in 24 CFR part 103, subpart A.
                (c) Other terms used in this part are defined as follows:
                
                  Agency has the same meaning as HUD.
                
                
                  Applicant and Application have the meanings provided in 24 CFR 1.2 or 24 CFR 8.3, as applicable.
                
                  Charge means the statement of facts issued under 24 CFR 103.405 upon which HUD has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur.
                
                
                  Complaint means a complaint filed under the statutes covered by this part.
                
                  Complainant means the person (including the Assistant Secretary) who filed a complaint under the statutes covered by this part.
                
                  Docket Clerk is the docket clerk for HUD's Office of Hearings and Appeals, 451 7th Street, SW., Room B-133, Washington, DC 20410. The telephone number is 202-254-0000 and the facsimile number is 202-619-7304.
                
                  Fair Housing Act matters refers to proceedings under this part pursuant to the Fair Housing Act and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR parts 100 and 103.
                
                  Federal financial assistance has the meaning provided in 24 CFR 1.2, 6.3, 8.3, or 146.7, as applicable.
                
                  Hearing means a trial-type proceeding that involves the submission of evidence, either by oral presentation or written submission, and briefs and oral arguments on the evidence and applicable law.
                
                  Intervenor is a person entitled by law or permitted by the ALJ to participate as a party.
                
                  Non-Fair Housing Act matters refers to proceedings under this part pursuant to:
                (1) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;
                (2) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, (29 U.S.C. 794) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;
                (3) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 6103) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; or
                (4) Section 109 of Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 6.
                
                  Notice of Proposed Adverse Action is the statement of facts issued pursuant to a non-Fair Housing Act matter upon which HUD has found reason to terminate or refuse to grant or continue Federal financial assistance.
                
                  Party is a person who has full participation rights in a proceeding under this part.
                
                  Prevailing party has the same meaning as the term has in section 722 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1988).
                
                  Recipient has the meaning provided in 24 CFR 1.2, 6.3, 8.3, or 146.7, as applicable.
                
                  Respondent means the person accused of violating one of the statutes covered by this part, including a recipient.
                
                  Secretary means the Secretary of HUD, or to the extent of any delegation of authority by the Secretary to act under any of the statutory authorities listed in § 180.105(a), any other HUD official to whom the Secretary may hereafter delegate such authority.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999; 72 FR 53879, Sept. 20, 2007; 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
              
                § 180.105
                Scope of rules.
                (a) This part contains the rules of practice and procedure applicable to administrative proceedings before an ALJ under the following authorities:
                (1) The Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR parts 100 and 103, where no election to proceed in federal district court has been made;
                (2) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;
                (3) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 794), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;
                (4) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6103), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; and
                (5) Section 109 of title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 6.
                (b) In the absence of a specific provision, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall serve as a general guide.
                (c) Hearings under this part shall be conducted as expeditiously and inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs and rights of the parties to obtain a fair hearing and a complete record.

                (d) Except to the extent that a waiver would otherwise be contrary to law, the ALJ may, after adequate notice to all interested persons, modify or waive any of the rules in this part upon a determination that no person will be prejudiced and that the ends of justice will be served.
                (e) All pleadings, correspondence, exhibits, transcripts of testimony, exceptions, briefs, decisions, and other documents filed in any proceeding may be inspected in the Docket Clerk's office during regular business hours.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999; 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
            
            
              Subpart B—Administrative Law Judge
              
                § 180.200
                Designation.
                Proceedings under this part shall be presided over by an ALJ appointed under 5 U.S.C. 3105.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008]
              
              
                § 180.205
                Authority.
                The ALJ shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair, expeditious and impartial hearings, including the power to:
                (a) Administer oaths and affirmations and examine witnesses;
                (b) Rule on offers of proof and receive evidence;
                (c) Take depositions or have depositions taken when the ends of justice would be served;
                (d) Regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of persons at the hearing;
                (e) Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by consent of the parties;
                (f) Rule on motions, procedural requests, and similar matters;
                (g) Make and issue initial decisions;
                (h) Impose appropriate sanctions against any person failing to obey an order, refusing to adhere to reasonable standards of orderly and ethical conduct, or refusing to act in good faith;
                (i) Issue subpoenas if authorized by law; and
                (j) Exercise any other powers necessary and appropriate for the purpose and conduct of the proceeding as authorized by the rules in this part or in conformance with statute, including 5 U.S.C. 551-59.
              
              
                § 180.210
                Withdrawal or disqualification of ALJ.
                (a) Disqualification. If an ALJ finds that there is a basis for his/her disqualification in a proceeding, the ALJ shall withdraw from the proceeding. Withdrawal is accomplished by entering a notice in the record and providing a copy of the notice to the Director of the Office of Hearings and Appeals.
                (b) Motion for recusal. If a party believes that the presiding ALJ should be disqualified for any reason, the party may file a motion to recuse with the ALJ. The motion shall be supported by an affidavit setting forth the alleged grounds for disqualification. The ALJ shall rule on the motion, stating the grounds therefor.
                (c) Redesignation of ALJ. If an ALJ is disqualified, another ALJ shall be designated to preside over further proceedings.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008]
              
              
                § 180.215
                Ex parte communications.
                (a) An ex parte communication is any direct or indirect communication concerning the merits of a pending proceeding, made by a party in the absence of any other party, to the presiding ALJ, and which was neither on the record nor on reasonable prior notice to all parties. Ex parte communications do not include communications made for the sole purpose of scheduling hearings, requesting extensions of time, or requesting information on the status of cases.
                (b) Ex parte communications are prohibited.

                (c) If the ALJ receives an ex parte communication that the ALJ knows or has reason to believe is prohibited, the ALJ shall promptly place the communication, or a written statement of the substance of the communication, in the record and shall furnish copies to all parties. Unauthorized communications shall not be taken into consideration in deciding any matter in issue. Any party making a prohibited ex parte communication may be subject to sanctions including, but not limited to, exclusion from the proceeding and an adverse ruling on the issue that is the subject of the prohibited communication.
              
              
                § 180.220
                Separation of functions.
                No officer, employee, or agent of the Federal Government engaged in the performance of investigative, conciliatory, or prosecutorial functions in connection with the proceeding shall, in that proceeding or any factually related proceeding under this part, participate or advise in the decision of the ALJ, except as a witness or counsel during the proceedings or in its appellate review.
              
            
            
              Subpart C—Parties
              
                § 180.300
                Rights of parties.
                Each party may appear in person, be represented by counsel, examine or cross-examine witnesses, introduce documentary or other relevant evidence into the record and, in Fair Housing Act matters, request the issuance of subpoenas.
              
              
                § 180.305
                Representation.
                (a) HUD is represented by the General Counsel.
                (b) Any party may appear on his/her/its own behalf or by an attorney. Each party or attorney shall file a notice of appearance. The notice must identify the matter before the ALJ, the party on whose behalf the appearance is made, and the mailing address and telephone number of the person appearing. Similar notice shall also be given for any withdrawal of appearance.
                (c) An attorney must be admitted to practice before a Federal Court or the highest court in any State. The attorney's representation that he/she is in good standing before any of these courts is sufficient evidence of the attorney's qualifications under this section, unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ.
              
              
                § 180.310
                Parties.
                (a) Parties to proceedings under this part are HUD, the respondent(s), and any intervenors. Respondents include persons named as such in a charge issued under 24 CFR part 103 and Recipients/applicants named as respondents in hearing notices issued under 24 CFR parts 1, 6, 8 or 146 and notices of proposed adverse action under this part.
                (b) An aggrieved person is not a party but may file a motion to intervene. Requests for intervention shall be filed within 50 days after the filing of the charge; however, the ALJ may allow intervention beyond that time. An intervenor's right to participate as a party may be restricted by order of the ALJ pursuant to statute, the rules in this part or other applicable law. Intervention shall be permitted if the person requesting intervention is
                (1) The aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge is issued; or
                (2) An aggrieved person who claims an interest in the property or transaction that is the subject of the charge and the disposition of the charge may, as a practical matter, impair or impede this person's ability to protect that interest, unless the aggrieved person is adequately represented by the existing parties.
                (c) A complainant in a non-Fair Housing Act matter is not a party but may file a motion to become an amicus curiae.
                (d) Any person may file a petition to participate in a proceeding under this part as an amicus curiae. An amicus curiae is not a party to the proceeding and may not introduce evidence at the hearing.
                (1) A petition to participate as amicus curiae shall be filed before the commencement of the hearing, unless the petitioner shows good cause for filing the petition later. The petition may be granted if the ALJ finds that the petitioner has a legitimate interest in the proceedings, and that such participation will not unduly delay the outcome and may contribute materially to the proper disposition thereof.
                (2) The amicus curiae may submit briefs within time limits set by the ALJ or by the Secretary in the event of an appeal to the Secretary.

                (3) When all parties have completed their initial examination of a witness, the amicus curiae may request the ALJ to propound specific questions to the witness. Any such request may be granted if the ALJ believes the proposed additional testimony may assist materially in elucidating factual matters at issue between the parties and will not expand the issues.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999]
              
              
                § 180.315
                Standards of conduct.
                (a) All persons appearing in proceedings under this part shall act with integrity and in an ethical manner.
                (b) The ALJ may exclude parties or their representatives for refusal to comply with directions, continued use of dilatory tactics, refusal to adhere to reasonable standards of orderly and ethical conduct, failure to act in good faith, or violations of the prohibitions against ex parte communications. An attorney who is suspended or barred from participation may appeal to another ALJ designated by the Director of the Office of Hearings and Appeals. The proceeding will not be delayed or suspended pending disposition on the appeal, except that the ALJ shall suspend the proceeding for a reasonable time to enable the party to obtain another attorney.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008]
              
            
            
              Subpart D—Proceedings Prior to Hearing
              
                § 180.400
                Service and filing.
                (a) Service—(1) Service by the Office of ALJs. The Office of ALJs shall serve all notices, orders, decisions and other such documents by mail to each party and amicus curiae at the last known address.
                (2) Service by others. A copy of each filed document shall be served on each party and each amicus curiae. Service shall be made upon counsel if a party is represented by counsel. Service on counsel shall constitute service on the party. Service may be made to the last known address by first-class mail or other more expeditious means, such as:
                (i) Hand delivery to the person to be served or a person of suitable age and discretion at the place of business, residence, or usual place of abode of the person to be served;
                (ii) Overnight delivery; or
                (iii) Facsimile transmission or electronic means. The ALJ may place appropriate limits on service by facsimile transmission or electronic means.
                (3) Certificate of service. Every document served shall be accompanied by a certificate of service containing a statement as to the date of service, the method of service, the parties served and the address at which they were served, which is signed and dated by the person making service.
                (b) Filing—(1) Method. All documents shall be filed with the Docket Clerk. Filing may be by first class mail, delivery, facsimile transmission, or electronic means; however, the ALJ may place appropriate limits on filing by facsimile transmission or electronic means.
                (2) Form. Every pleading, motion, brief, or other document shall contain a caption setting forth the title of the proceeding, the docket number assigned by the Office of ALJs, and the designation of the type of document (e.g., charge, motion).
                (3) Signature. Every document filed by a party shall be signed by the party or the party's attorney and must include the signer's address and telephone number. The signature constitutes a certification that: the signer has read the document; to the best of the signer's knowledge, information and belief, the statements made therein are true; and the document is not interposed for delay.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
              
                § 180.405
                Time computations.
                (a) In computing time under this part, the time period begins the day following the act, event, or default and includes the last day of the period, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday observed by the Federal Government, in which case the time period includes the next business day.
                (b) Modification of time periods. Except for time periods required by statute, the ALJ may enlarge or reduce any time period required under this part where necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest or the rights of the parties. Requests for extension of time should set forth the reasons for the request.
                
                (c) Entry of orders. In computing any time period involving the date of the ALJ's issuance of an order or decision, the date of issuance is the date of service by the Docket Clerk.
                (d) Computation of time for delivery by mail. When documents are filed by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed time period for filing any responsive pleading. Documents are not filed until received by the Docket Clerk.
                (e) Untimely filing. The ALJ may refuse to consider any motion or other document that is not filed in a timely fashion.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
              
                § 180.410
                Charges under the Fair Housing Act.
                (a) Filing and service. Within 3 days after the issuance of a charge, the General Counsel shall file the charge with the Docket Clerk and serve copies (with the additional information required under paragraph (b) of this section) on all respondents and aggrieved persons.
                (b) Contents. The charge shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which reasonable cause has been found to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur. A notification shall be served with the charge containing the following information:
                (1) Any complainant, respondent, or aggrieved person may elect to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under 42 U.S.C. 3612(o), in lieu of an administrative proceeding under this part.
                (2) Such election must be made not later than 20 days after receipt of service of the charge by serving written notice of such on the Docket Clerk, each respondent, each aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was issued, the Assistant Secretary, and the General Counsel.
                (3) If no person timely elects to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under 42 U.S.C. 3612(o), an administrative proceeding will be conducted under this part.
                (4) If an administrative hearing is conducted:
                (i) The hearing will be held at a date and place specified.
                (ii) The respondent will have an opportunity to file an answer to the charge within 30 days after service of the charge.
                (iii) The aggrieved person may participate as a party to the administrative proceeding by filing a request for intervention within 50 days after service of the charge.
                (iv) All discovery must be concluded 15 days before the date set for hearing.
                (v) The rules in this part will govern the proceeding.
                (5) If, at any time following service of the charge on the respondent, the respondent intends to enter into a contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease with any person regarding the property that is the subject of the charge, the respondent must provide a copy of the charge to such person before the respondent and the person enter into the contract, sale, encumbrance or lease.
                (c) Election of judicial determination. If the complainant, the respondent, or the aggrieved person on whose behalf a complaint was filed makes a timely election to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under 42 U.S.C. 3612(o), the administrative proceeding shall be dismissed.
                (d) Effect of a civil action on administrative proceeding. An ALJ may not continue an administrative proceeding under the Fair Housing Act after the beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved person under an act of Congress or a State law seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory housing practice. If such a trial is commenced, the ALJ shall dismiss the administrative proceeding. The commencement and maintenance of a civil action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief under 42 U.S.C. 3610(e) or 42 U.S.C. 3613 does not affect administrative proceedings under this part.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008; 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
              
                
                § 180.415
                Notice of proposed adverse action regarding Federal financial assistance in non-Fair Housing Act matters.
                (a) Filing and service. Within 10 days after a recipient/applicant has requested a hearing, as provided for in 24 CFR parts 1, 6, 8, or 146, the General Counsel shall file a notice of proposed adverse action with the Docket Clerk and serve copies (with the additional information required under paragraph (b) of this section) on all respondents and complainants.
                (b) Contents. The notice of proposed adverse action shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts and legal authority upon which the proposed action is based. A notification shall be served with the notice containing the following information:
                (1) That an administrative hearing will be held at a date and place specified.
                (2) That the respondent will have an opportunity to file an answer to the notice of adverse action within 30 days after its service.
                (3) That the complainant may participate as an amicus curiae by filing a timely request to do so.
                (4) That discovery must be concluded by a date specified.
                (5) That the rules specified in this part shall govern the proceeding.
                (c) Consolidation. The ALJ may provide for non-Fair Housing Act proceedings at HUD to be joined or consolidated for hearing with proceedings in other Federal departments or agencies, by agreement with such other departments or agencies. All parties to any proceeding consolidated subsequent to service of the notice of proposed adverse action shall be promptly served with notice of such consolidation.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3802, Jan. 25, 1999; 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]
              
              
                § 180.420
                Answer.
                (a) Within 30 days after service of the charge or notice of proposed adverse action, a respondent may file an answer. The answer shall include:
                (1) A statement that the respondent admits, denies, or does not have and is unable to obtain sufficient information to admit or deny, each allegation made. A statement of lack of information shall have the effect of a denial. Any allegation that is not denied shall be deemed to be admitted.
                (2) A statement of each affirmative defense and a statement of facts supporting each affirmative defense.
                (b) Failure to file an answer within the 30-day period following service of the charge or notice of proposed adverse action shall be deemed an admission of all matters of fact recited therein and may result in the entry of a default decision.
              
              
                § 180.425
                Amendments to pleadings.
                (a) By right. HUD may amend the charge or notice of proposed adverse action once as a matter of right prior to the filing of the answer.
                (b) By leave. Upon such conditions as are necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest and the rights of the parties, the ALJ may allow amendments to pleadings upon a motion of a party.
                (c) Conformance to the evidence. When issues not raised by the pleadings are reasonably within the scope of the original charge or notice of proposed adverse action and have been tried by the express or implied consent of the parties, the issues shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings, and amendments may be made as necessary to make the pleading conform to evidence.
                (d) Supplemental pleadings. The ALJ may, upon reasonable notice, permit supplemental pleadings concerning transactions, occurrences or events that have happened or been discovered since the date of the pleadings and which are relevant to any of the issues involved.
              
              
                § 180.430
                Motions.
                (a) Motions. Any application for an order or other request shall be made by a motion which, unless made during an appearance before the ALJ, shall be in writing and shall state the specific relief requested and the basis therefor. Motions made during an appearance before the ALJ shall be stated orally and made a part of the transcript. All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to written or oral motions or requests.
                
                (b) Responses to written motions. Within seven calendar days after a written motion is served, any party to the proceeding may file a response in support of, or in opposition to, the motion. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, no further responsive documents may be filed. Failure to file a response within the response period constitutes a waiver of any objection to the granting of the motion.
                (c) Oral argument. The ALJ may order oral argument on any motion.
              
              
                § 180.435
                Prehearing statements.
                (a) Before the commencement of the hearing, the ALJ may direct the parties to file prehearing statements.
                (b) The prehearing statement must state the name of the party presenting the statement and, unless otherwise directed by the ALJ, briefly set forth the following:
                (1) The issues involved in the proceeding;
                (2) The facts stipulated by the parties and a statement that the parties have made a good faith effort to stipulate to the greatest extent possible;
                (3) The facts in dispute;
                (4) The witnesses (together with a summary of the testimony expected) and exhibits to be presented at the hearing;
                (5) A brief statement of applicable law;
                (6) Conclusions to be drawn;
                (7) Estimated time required for presentation of the party's case; and
                (8) Such other information as may assist in the disposition of the proceeding.
              
              
                § 180.440
                Prehearing conferences.
                (a) Before the commencement of or during the course of the hearing, the ALJ may direct the parties to participate in a conference to expedite the hearing. Failure to attend a conference may constitute a waiver of all objections to the agreements reached at the conference and to any order with respect thereto.
                (b) During the conference, the ALJ may dispose of any procedural matters on which he/she is authorized to rule. At the conference, the following matters may be considered:
                (1) Pre-trial motions;
                (2) Identification, simplification and clarification of the issues;
                (3) Necessary amendments to the pleadings;
                (4) Stipulations of fact and of the authenticity, accuracy, and admissibility of documents;
                (5) Limitations on the number of witnesses;
                (6) Negotiation, compromise, or settlement of issues;
                (7) The exchange of proposed exhibits and witness lists;
                (8) Matters of which official notice will be requested;
                (9) Scheduling actions discussed at the conference; and
                (10) Such other matters as may assist in the disposition of the proceeding.
                (c) Conferences may be conducted by telephone or in person, but generally shall be conducted by telephone, unless the ALJ determines that this method is inappropriate. The ALJ shall give reasonable notice of the time, place and manner of the conference.
                (d) Record of conference. Unless otherwise directed by the ALJ, the conference will not be stenographically recorded. The ALJ will reduce the actions taken at the conference to a written order or, if the conference takes place less than seven days before the beginning of the hearing, may make a statement at the hearing and on the record summarizing the actions taken at the conference.
              
              
                § 180.445
                Settlement negotiations before a settlement judge.
                (a) Appointment of settlement judge. The ALJ, upon the motion of a party or upon his or her own motion, may request the Director of the Office of Hearings and Appeals to appoint another ALJ to conduct settlement negotiations. The order shall direct the settlement judge to report to the presiding ALJ within specified time periods.
                (b) Duties of settlement judge. (1) The settlement judge shall convene and preside over conferences and settlement negotiations between the parties and assess the practicalities of a potential settlement.

                (2) The settlement judge shall report to the presiding ALJ describing the status of the settlement negotiations, evaluating settlement prospects, and recommending the termination or continuation of the settlement negotiations.
                (c) Termination of settlement negotiations. Settlement negotiations shall terminate upon the order of the presiding ALJ issued after consultation with the settlement judge. The conduct of settlement negotiations shall not unduly delay the commencement of the hearing.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008]
              
              
                § 180.450
                Resolution of charge or notice of proposed adverse action.
                At any time before a final decision is issued, the parties may submit to the ALJ an agreement resolving the charge or notice of proposed adverse action. A charge under the Fair Housing Act can only be resolved with the agreement of the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was issued. If the agreement is in the public interest, the ALJ shall accept it by issuing an initial decision and consent order based on the agreement.
              
            
            
              Subpart E—Discovery
              
                § 180.500
                Discovery.
                (a) In general. This subpart governs discovery in aid of administrative proceedings under this part. Discovery in Fair Housing Act matters shall be completed 15 days before the date scheduled for hearing or at such time as the ALJ shall direct. Discovery in non-Fair Housing Act matters shall be completed as the ALJ directs.
                (b) Scope. The parties are encouraged to engage in voluntary discovery procedures. Discovery shall be conducted as expeditiously and inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs of all parties to obtain relevant evidence. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, the parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, that is relevant to the subject matter involved in the proceeding, including the existence, description, nature, custody, condition, and location of documents or persons having knowledge of any discoverable matter. It is not grounds for objection that information sought will be inadmissible if the information appears reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.
                (c) Methods. Parties may obtain discovery by one or more of the following methods:
                (1) Deposition upon oral examination or written questions.
                (2) Written interrogatories.
                (3) Requests for the production of documents or other evidence for inspection and other purposes.
                (4) Requests for admissions.
                (5) Upon motion of a party, the presiding ALJ may issue an order requiring a physical or mental examination of a party or of a person in the custody or under the legal control of a party.
                (d) Frequency and sequence. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ or restricted by this subpart, the frequency or sequence of these methods is not limited.
                (e) Non-intervening aggrieved person. For purposes of obtaining discovery from a non-intervening aggrieved person, the term party as used in this subpart includes the aggrieved person.
              
              
                § 180.505
                Supplementation of responses.
                A party is under a duty, in a timely fashion, to:
                (a) Supplement a response with respect to any question directly addressed to:
                (1) The identity and location of persons having knowledge of discoverable matters; and
                (2) The identity of each person expected to be called as an expert witness, the subject matter on which the expert witness is expected to testify, and the substance of the testimony.
                (b) Amend a response if the party later obtains information upon the basis of which:
                (1) The party knows the response was incorrect when made, or
                (2) The party knows the response, though correct when made, is no longer true, and the circumstances are such that a failure to amend the response is, in substance, a knowing concealment.
                (c) Supplement other responses, as imposed by order of the ALJ or by agreement of the parties.
              
              
                
                § 180.510
                Interrogatories.
                (a) Any party may serve on any other party written interrogatories to be answered by the party served. If the party served is a public or private corporation, a partnership, an association, or a governmental agency, the interrogatories may be answered by any authorized officer or agent who shall furnish such information as may be available to the party. A party may serve not more than 30 written interrogatories on another party without an order of the ALJ.
                (b) Each interrogatory shall be answered separately and fully in writing under oath or affirmation, unless it is objected to, in which event, the reasons for the objection shall be stated in lieu of an answer. The answers shall be signed by the person making them, and the objections may be signed by the attorney or other representative making them. The answers and objections shall be served within 15 days after service of the interrogatories.
                (c) It is a sufficient answer to an interrogatory to specify the records from which the answer may be derived or ascertained if:
                (1) The answer to the interrogatory may be derived or ascertained from the records of the party on whom the interrogatory has been served or from an examination, audit or inspection of such records, or from a compilation, abstract or summary based thereon, and
                (2) The burden of deriving or ascertaining the answer is substantially the same for the party serving the interrogatory as the party served. The party serving the interrogatory shall be afforded reasonable opportunity to examine, audit or inspect such records and to make copies, compilations, abstracts or summaries. The specification shall include sufficient detail to permit the interrogating party to locate and identify the individual records from which the answer may be ascertained.
                (d) Objections to the form of written interrogatories are waived unless served in writing upon the party propounding the interrogatories.
              
              
                § 180.515
                Depositions.
                (a) Notice. Upon written notice to the witness and to all other parties, a party may take the testimony of a witness by deposition and may request the production of specified documents or materials by the witness at the deposition. Notice of the taking of a deposition shall be given not less than five days before the deposition is scheduled. The notice shall state:
                (1) The purpose and general scope of the deposition;
                (2) The time and place of the deposition;
                (3) The name and address of the person before whom the deposition is to be taken;
                (4) The name and address of the witness; and
                (5) A specification of the documents and materials that the witness is requested to produce.
                (b) Deposition of an organization. If the deposition of a public or private corporation, partnership, association, or governmental agency is sought, the organization so named shall designate one or more officers, directors or agents to testify on its behalf, and may set forth, for each person designated, the matters on which he/she will testify.
                (c) Procedure at deposition. Depositions may be taken before any disinterested person having power to administer oaths in the location where the deposition is to be taken. Each deponent shall be placed under oath or affirmation, and the other parties will have the right to cross-examine. The deponent may have counsel present during the deposition. The questions propounded and all answers and objections thereto shall be reduced to writing, read by or to and subscribed by the witness, and certified by the person before whom the deposition was taken. Non-intervening aggrieved persons may be present at depositions in which they are not the deponent.
                (d) Motion to terminate or limit examination. During the taking of a deposition, a party or the witness may request suspension of the deposition on the grounds of bad faith in the conduct of the examination, oppression of the witness or party, or improper questioning or conduct. Upon request for suspension, the deposition will be adjourned. The objecting party or witness must immediately move the ALJ for a ruling on the objection. The ALJ may then limit the scope or manner of taking the deposition.
                (e) Waiver of deposing officer's disqualification. Objection to taking a deposition because of the disqualification of the officer before whom it is taken is waived unless made before the taking of the deposition begins or as soon thereafter as the disqualification becomes known or could have been discovered with reasonable diligence.
                (f) Payment of costs of deposition. The party requesting the deposition shall bear all costs of the deposition.
              
              
                § 180.520
                Use of deposition at hearings.
                (a) In general. At the hearing, any part or all of a deposition, so far as admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence, may be used against any party who was present or represented at the taking of the deposition or who had due notice of the taking of the deposition, in accordance with the following provisions:
                (1) Any deposition may be used by any party for the purpose of contradicting or impeaching the testimony of the deponent as a witness.
                (2) The deposition of an expert witness may be used by any party for any purpose, unless the ALJ rules that such use is unfair or in violation of due process.
                (3) The deposition of a party, or of anyone who at the time of the taking of the deposition was an officer, director, or duly authorized agent of a public or private corporation, partnership, or association that is a party, may be used by any other party for any purpose.
                (4) The deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, may be used by any party for any purpose if the ALJ finds:
                (i) That the witness is dead;
                (ii) That the witness is out of the United States or more than 100 miles from the place of hearing, unless it appears that the absence of the witness was procured by the party offering the deposition;
                (iii) That the witness is unable to attend to testify because of age, sickness, infirmity, or imprisonment;
                (iv) That the party offering the deposition has been unable to procure the attendance of the witness by subpoena; or
                (v) Whenever exceptional circumstances exist as to make it desirable, in the interest of justice and with due regard to the importance of presenting the testimony of witnesses orally in open hearing, to allow the deposition to be used.
                (5) If a part of a deposition is offered in evidence by a party, any other party may require the party to introduce all of the deposition that is relevant to the part introduced. Any party may introduce any other part of the deposition.
                (6) Substitution of parties does not affect the right to use depositions previously taken. If a proceeding has been dismissed and another proceeding involving the same subject matter is later brought between the same parties or their representatives or successors in interest, all depositions lawfully taken in the former proceeding may be used in the latter proceeding.
                (b) Objections to admissibility. Except as provided in this paragraph, objection may be made at the hearing to receiving in evidence any deposition or part of a deposition for any reason that would require the exclusion of the evidence if the witness were present and testifying.
                (1) Objections to the competency of a witness or to the competency, relevancy, or materiality of testimony are not waived by failure to make them before or during the taking of the deposition, unless the basis of the objection is one which might have been obviated or removed if presented at that time.
                (2) Errors and irregularities occurring at the oral examination in the manner of taking the deposition, in the form of the questions or answers, in the oath or affirmation, or in the conduct of parties, and errors of any kind which might be obviated, removed or cured if promptly presented, are waived unless reasonable objection is made at the taking of the deposition.
              
              
                § 180.525
                Requests for production of documents or things for inspection or other purposes, including physical and mental examinations.

                (a) Any party may serve on any other party a request to:
                
                (1) Produce and/or permit the party, or a person acting on the party's behalf, to inspect and copy any designated documents, or to inspect and copy, test, or sample any tangible things that contain or may lead to relevant information and that are in the possession, custody, or control of the party upon whom the request is served.
                (2) Permit entry upon designated land or other property in the possession or control of the party upon whom the request is served for the purpose of inspection and measuring, photographing, testing, or other purposes stated in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
                (b) Each request shall set forth with reasonable particularity the items or categories to be inspected and shall specify a reasonable time, place and manner for making the inspection and performing the related acts.
                (c) Within 15 days after service of the request, the party upon whom the request is served shall serve a written response on the party submitting the request. The response shall state, with regard to each item or category, that inspection and related activities will be permitted as requested, unless there are objections, in which case the reasons for the objection shall be stated.
                (d) Upon motion of any party, when the mental or physical condition (including the blood group) of a party or of a person in the custody or under the legal control of a party, is in controversy, the presiding ALJ may order the party to submit to a physical or mental examination by a suitably licensed or certified examiner or to produce for examination the person in the party's custody or legal control. The order may be made only on motion for good cause shown and upon notice to the person to be examined and to all parties and shall specify the time, place, manner, conditions, and scope of the examination and the person or persons by whom it is to be made. A report of the examiner shall be made in accordance with Rule 35(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
              
              
                § 180.530
                Requests for admissions.
                (a) Any party may serve on any other party a written request for the admission of the truth of any matters relevant to the adjudication set forth in the request that relate to statements or opinions of fact or of application of law to fact, including the genuineness and authenticity of any documents described in or attached to the request.
                (b) Each matter for which an admission is requested is admitted unless, within 15 days after service of the request, or within such time as the ALJ allows, the party to whom the request is directed serves on the requesting party a sworn written answer which:
                (1) Specifically denies, in whole or in part, the matter for which an admission is requested;
                (2) Sets forth in detail why the party cannot truthfully admit or deny the matter; or
                (3) States an objection that the matter is privileged, irrelevant or otherwise improper in whole or in part.
                (c) An answering party may not give lack of information or knowledge as a reason for failure to admit or deny, unless he/she/it states that he/she/it has made a reasonable inquiry and that the information known to, or readily obtainable by, him/her/it is insufficient to enable the party to admit or deny.
                (d) The party requesting admissions may move for a determination of the sufficiency of the answers or objections. Unless the ALJ determines that an objection is justified, the ALJ shall order that an answer be served. If the ALJ determines that an answer does not comply with the requirements of this section, the ALJ may order either that the matter is admitted or that an amended answer be served.
                (e) Any matter admitted under this section is conclusively established unless, upon the motion of a party, the ALJ permits the withdrawal or amendment of the admission. Any admission made under this section is made for the purposes of the pending proceeding only, is not an admission by the party for any other purpose, and may not be used against the party in any other proceeding.
              
              
                § 180.535
                Protective orders.

                (a) Upon motion of a party or a person from whom discovery is sought or in accordance with § 180.540(c), and for good cause shown, the ALJ may make appropriate orders to protect a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense as a result of the requested discovery request. The order may direct that:
                (1) The discovery may not be had;
                (2) The discovery may be had only on specified terms and conditions, including at a designated time and place;
                (3) The discovery may be had by a method of discovery other than that selected by the party seeking discovery;
                (4) Certain matters may not be the subject of discovery, or the scope of discovery may be limited to certain matters;
                (5) Discovery may be conducted with no one present other than persons designated by the ALJ;
                (6) A trade secret or other confidential research, development or commercial information may not be disclosed, or may be disclosed only in a designated way; or
                (7) The party or other person from whom discovery is sought may file specified documents or information under seal to be opened as directed by the ALJ.
                (b) The ALJ may permit a party or other person from whom discovery is sought, who is seeking a protective order, to make all or part of the showing of good cause in camera. If such a showing is made, upon motion of the party or other person from whom discovery is sought, an in camera record of the proceedings may be made. If the ALJ enters a protective order, any in camera record of such showing shall be sealed and preserved and made available to the ALJ or, in the event of appeal, to the Secretary or a court.
              
              
                § 180.540
                Motion to compel discovery.
                (a) If a deponent fails to answer a question propounded, or a party upon whom a discovery request has been made fails to respond adequately, objects to a request, or fails to produce documents or other inspection as requested, the discovering party may move the ALJ for an order compelling discovery in accordance with the request. The motion shall:
                (1) State the nature of the request;
                (2) Set forth the response or objection of the deponent or party upon whom the request was served;
                (3) Present arguments supporting the motion; and
                (4) Attach copies of all relevant discovery requests and responses.
                (b) For the purposes of this section, an evasive or incomplete answer or response will be treated as a failure to answer or respond.
                (c) In ruling on a motion under this section, the ALJ may enter an order compelling a response in accordance with the request, may issue sanctions under paragraph (d) of this section, or may enter a protective order under § 180.535.
                (d) Sanctions. If a party fails to provide or permit discovery, the ALJ may take such action as is just, including but not limited to the following:
                (1) Inferring that the admission, testimony, document, or other evidence would have been adverse to the party;
                (2) Ordering that, for purposes of the adjudication, the matters regarding which the order was made or any other designated facts shall be taken to be established in accordance with the claim of the party obtaining the order;
                (3) Prohibiting the party failing to comply with the order from introducing evidence concerning, or otherwise relying upon, documents or other evidence withheld;
                (4) Ordering that the party withholding discovery not introduce into evidence, or otherwise use in the hearing, information obtained in discovery;
                (5) Permitting the requesting party to introduce secondary evidence concerning the information sought;
                (6) Striking any appropriate part of the pleadings or other submissions of the party failing to comply with such order; or
                (7) Taking such other action as may be appropriate.
              
              
                § 180.545
                Subpoenas.

                (a) This section governs the issuance of subpoenas in administrative proceedings under the Fair Housing Act. Except for time periods stated in the rules in this section, to the extent that this section conflicts with procedures for the issuance of subpoenas in civil actions in the United States District Court for the District in which the investigation of the discriminatory housing practice took place, the rules of the United States District Court apply.
                (b) Issuance of subpoena. Upon the written request of a party, the presiding ALJ or other designated ALJ may issue a subpoena requiring the attendance of a witness for the purpose of giving testimony at a deposition or hearing and requiring the production of relevant books, papers, documents or tangible things.
                (c) Time of request. Requests for subpoenas in aid of discovery must be submitted in time to permit the conclusion of discovery 15 days before the date scheduled for the hearing. If a request for subpoenas of a witness for testimony at a hearing is submitted three days or less before the hearing, the subpoena shall be issued at the discretion of the presiding ALJ, or other designated ALJ as appropriate.
                (d) Service. A subpoena may be served by any person who is not a party and is not less than 18 years of age. Service on a person shall be made by delivering a copy of the subpoena to the person and by tendering witness fees and mileage to that person. When the subpoena is issued on behalf of HUD, witness fees and mileage need not be tendered with the subpoena.
                (e) Amount of witness fees and mileage. A witness summoned by a subpoena issued under this part is entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as a witness in proceedings in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena shall be paid by the party requesting the issuance of the subpoena, or where the ALJ determines that a party is unable to pay the fees, the fees shall be paid by HUD.
                (f) Motion to quash or limit subpoena. Upon a motion by the person served with a subpoena or by a party, made within five days after service of the subpoena (but in any event not less than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance), the ALJ may:
                (1) Quash or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable and oppressive or for other good cause shown; or
                (2) Condition denial of the motion upon the advancement, by the party on whose behalf the subpoena was issued, of the reasonable cost of producing subpoenaed books, papers or documents. Where circumstances require, the ALJ may act upon such a motion at any time after a copy of the motion has been served upon the party on whose behalf the subpoena was issued.
                (g) Failure to comply with subpoena. If a person fails to comply with a subpoena issued under this section, the party requesting the subpoena may refer the matter to the Attorney General for enforcement in appropriate proceedings under 42 U.S.C. 3614(c).
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008]
              
            
            
              Subpart F—Procedures at Hearing
              
                § 180.600
                Date and place of hearing.
                (a) For Fair Housing Act Cases—(1) Time. The hearing shall commence not later than 120 days after the issuance of the charge, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the hearing cannot be commenced within this time period, the ALJ shall notify in writing all parties, aggrieved persons, amici, and the Assistant Secretary of the reasons for the delay.
                (2) Place. The hearing will be conducted at a place in the vicinity in which the discriminatory housing practice is alleged to have occurred or to be about to occur.
                (b) For Non-Fair Housing Matters. Hearings shall be held in Washington, DC, unless the ALJ determines that the convenience of the respondent or HUD requires that another place be selected.
                (c) The ALJ may change the time, date or place of the hearing, or may temporarily adjourn or continue a hearing for good cause shown.
              
              
                § 180.605
                Conduct of hearings.
                The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 551-559).
              
              
                § 180.610
                Waiver of right to appear.

                If all parties waive their right to appear before the ALJ, the ALJ need not conduct an oral hearing. Such waivers shall be in writing and filed with the ALJ. The ALJ shall make a record of the pleadings and relevant written evidence submitted by the parties. These documents may constitute the evidence in the proceeding, and the decision may be based upon this evidence.
              
              
                § 180.615
                Failure of party to appear.
                A default decision may be entered against a party failing to appear at a hearing unless such party shows good cause for such failure.
              
              
                § 180.620
                Evidence.
                The Federal Rules of Evidence apply to the presentation of evidence in hearings under this part.
              
              
                § 180.625
                Record of hearing.
                (a) All oral hearings shall be recorded and transcribed by a reporter designated and supervised by the ALJ. The original transcript shall be a part of the record and shall constitute the sole official transcript. All exhibits introduced as evidence shall be incorporated into the record. The parties and the public may obtain transcripts from the official reporter at rates not to exceed the applicable rates fixed by the contract with the reporter.
                (b) Corrections to the official transcript will be permitted upon motion of a party. Motions for correction must be submitted within five days after receipt of the transcript. Corrections of the official transcript will be permitted only where errors of substance are involved and upon the ALJ's approval.
              
              
                § 180.630
                Stipulations.
                The parties may stipulate to any pertinent facts by oral agreement at the hearing or by written agreement at any time. Stipulations may be submitted into evidence at any time before the end of the hearing. Once received into evidence, a stipulation is binding on the parties.
              
              
                § 180.635
                Written testimony.
                The ALJ may accept and enter into the record direct testimony of witnesses made by verified written statement rather than by oral presentation at the hearing. Unless the ALJ fixes other time periods, affidavits shall be filed and served on the parties not later than 14 days prior to the hearing. Witnesses whose testimony is presented by affidavit shall be available for cross-examination as may be required.
              
              
                § 180.640
                In camera and protective orders.
                The ALJ may limit discovery or the introduction of evidence, or may issue such protective or other orders necessary to protect privileged communications. If the ALJ determines that information in documents containing privileged matters should be made available to a party, the ALJ may order the preparation of a summary or extract of the nonprivileged matter contained in the original.
              
              
                § 180.645
                Exhibits.
                (a) Identification. All exhibits offered into evidence shall be numbered sequentially and marked with a designation identifying the sponsor. The original of each exhibit offered in evidence or marked for identification shall be filed and retained in the docket of the proceeding, unless the ALJ permits the substitution of a copy for the original.
                (b) Exchange of exhibits. One copy of each exhibit offered into evidence must be furnished to each of the parties and to the ALJ. If the ALJ does not fix a time for the exchange of exhibits, the parties shall exchange copies of proposed exhibits at the earliest practicable time before the commencement of the hearing. Exhibits submitted as rebuttal evidence are not required to be exchanged before the commencement of the hearing if the submission of such evidence could not reasonably be anticipated at that time.
                (c) Authenticity. The authenticity of all documents submitted or exchanged as proposed exhibits prior to the hearing shall be admitted unless written objection is filed before the commencement of the hearing, or unless good cause is shown for failing to file such a written objection.
                (d) The parties are encouraged to stipulate as to the admissibility of exhibits.
              
              
                § 180.650
                Public document items.

                Whenever a public document, such as an official report, decision, opinion, or published scientific or economic statistical data issued by any of the executive departments (or their subdivisions), legislative agencies or committees, or administrative agencies of the Federal Government (including Government-owned corporations), or a similar document issued by a State or its agencies is offered (in whole or in part), and such document (or part thereof) has been shown by the offeror to be reasonably available to the public, such document need not be produced or marked for identification, but may be offered for official notice, as a public document item by specifying the document or relevant part thereof.
              
              
                § 180.655
                Witnesses.
                (a) Witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
                (b) If a witness fails or refuses to testify, the failure or refusal to answer any question found by the ALJ to be proper may be grounds for striking all or part of the testimony that may have been given by the witness, or for any other action deemed appropriate by the ALJ.
              
              
                § 180.660
                Closing of record.
                (a) Oral hearings. Where there is an oral hearing, the hearing ends on the day of the adjournment of the oral hearing or, where written briefs are permitted, on the date that the written briefs are due.
                (b) Hearing on written record. Where the parties have waived an oral hearing, the hearing ends on the date set by the ALJ as the final date for the receipt of submissions by the parties.
                (c) Receipt of evidence following hearing. Following the end of the hearing, no additional evidence may be accepted into the record, except with the permission of the ALJ. The ALJ may receive additional evidence upon a determination that new and material evidence was not readily available before the end of the hearing, the evidence has been timely submitted, and its acceptance will not unduly prejudice the rights of the parties.
              
              
                § 180.665
                Arguments and briefs.
                (a) Following the submission of evidence at an oral hearing, the parties may file a brief, proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, or both, or, in the ALJ's discretion, make oral arguments.
                (b) Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, briefs and proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be filed simultaneously by all parties. In Fair Housing Act cases, such filings shall be due not later than 45 days after the adjournment of the oral hearing. In other cases, they shall be due as the ALJ orders.
              
              
                § 180.670
                Initial decision of ALJ.
                (a) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision including findings of fact and conclusions of law upon each material issue of fact or law presented on the record. The initial decision of the ALJ shall be based on the whole record of the proceeding. A copy of the initial decision shall be served upon all parties, aggrieved persons, the Assistant Secretary, the Secretary, and amici, if any.
                (b) Initial decision in Fair Housing Act cases. (1) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision within 60 days after the end of the hearing, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the ALJ is unable to issue the initial decision within this time period (or within any succeeding 60-day period following the initial 60-day period), the ALJ shall notify in writing all parties, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was filed, and the Assistant Secretary, of the reasons for the delay.
                (2) The initial decision shall state that it will become the final agency decision 30 days after the date of issuance of the initial decision.
                (3) Findings against respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent has engaged, or is about to engage, in a discriminatory housing practice, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision against the respondent and order such relief as may be appropriate. Relief may include, but is not limited to:
                (i) Ordering the respondent to pay damages to the aggrieved person (including damages caused by humiliation and embarrassment).

                (ii) Ordering injunctive or such other equitable relief as may be appropriate. No such order may affect any contract, sale, encumbrance or lease consummated before the issuance of the initial decision that involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant without actual knowledge of the charge.
                (iii) Assessing a civil penalty against any respondent to vindicate the public interest in accordance with § 180.671.
                (4) Findings in favor of respondents. If the ALJ finds that the charging party has not established that a respondent has engaged in a discriminatory housing practice, the ALJ shall make an initial decision dismissing the charge as against that respondent.
                (c) Initial Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act matters. The ALJ shall issue the initial decision as soon as possible after the end of the hearing.
                (1) Findings against Respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent has failed to comply substantially with the statutory and regulatory requirements that gave rise to the notice of proposed adverse action, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision against the respondent.
                (i) The initial decision shall provide for suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance, in whole or in part, to the involved program or activity.
                (ii) The initial decision may contain such terms, conditions, and other provisions as are consistent with and will effectuate the purposes of the applicable statute and regulations, including provisions designed to assure that no Federal financial assistance will be extended for the program or activity unless and until the respondent corrects its noncompliance and satisfies the Secretary that it will fully comply with the relevant statute and regulations.
                (iii) The initial decision shall state that it will become final only upon the Secretary's approval.
                (2) Findings in favor of respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent has not failed to comply substantially with the statutory and regulatory requirements that gave rise to the notice of proposed adverse action, the ALJ shall make an initial decision dismissing the notice of proposed adverse action. The initial decision shall state that it will become the final agency decision 30 days after the date of issuance.
                [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 6754, Feb. 10, 1999; 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007]
              
              
                § 180.671
                Assessing civil penalties for Fair Housing Act cases.
                (a) Amounts. The ALJ may assess a civil penalty against any respondent under § 180.670(b)(3) for each separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice (as defined in paragraph (b) of this section) that the respondent committed, each civil penalty in an amount not to exceed:
                (1) $20,521, if the respondent has not been adjudged in any administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act or any state or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a federal, state, or local governmental agency, to have committed any prior discriminatory housing practice.
                (2) $51,302, if the respondent has been adjudged in any administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act, or under any state or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a federal, state, or local government agency, to have committed one other discriminatory housing practice and the adjudication was made during the 5-year period preceding the date of filing of the charge.
                (3) $102,606, if the respondent has been adjudged in any administrative hearings or civil actions permitted under the Fair Housing Act, or under any state or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a federal, state, or local government agency, to have committed two or more discriminatory housing practices and the adjudications were made during the 7-year period preceding the date of filing of the charge.
                (b) Definition of separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice. A separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice is a single, continuous uninterrupted transaction or occurrence that violates section 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing Act. Even if such a transaction or occurrence violates more than one provision of the Fair Housing Act, violates a provision more than once, or violates the fair housing rights of more than one person, it constitutes only one separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice.
                (c) Factors for consideration by ALJ. (1) In determining the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed against any respondent for each separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice the respondent committed, the ALJ shall consider the following six (6) factors:
                (i) Whether that respondent has previously been adjudged to have committed unlawful housing discrimination;
                (ii) That respondent's financial resources;
                (iii) The nature and circumstances of the violation;
                (iv) The degree of that respondent's culpability;
                (v) The goal of deterrence; and
                (vi) Other matters as justice may require.
                (2)(i) Where the ALJ finds any respondent to have committed a housing-related hate act, the ALJ shall take this fact into account in favor of imposing a maximum civil penalty under the factors listed in paragraphs (c)(1)(iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) of this section.
                (ii) For purposes of this section, the term housing-related hate act means any act that constitutes a discriminatory housing practice under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act and which constitutes or is accompanied or characterized by actual violence, assault, bodily harm, and/or harm to property; intimidation or coercion that has such elements; or the threat or commission of any action intended to assist or be a part of any such act.
                (iii) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require an ALJ to assess any amount less than a maximum civil penalty in a non-hate act case, where the ALJ finds that the factors listed in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through (vi) of this section warrant the assessment of a maximum civil penalty.
                (d) Persons previously adjudged to have committed a discriminatory housing practice. If the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice that is the subject of the charge were committed by the same natural person who has previously been adjudged, in any administrative proceeding or civil action, to have committed acts constituting a discriminatory housing practice, the time periods in paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this section do not apply.
                (e) Multiple discriminatory housing practices committed by the same respondent; multiple respondents. (1) In a proceeding where a respondent has been determined to have engaged in, or is about to engage in, more than one separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice, a separate civil penalty may be assessed against the respondent for each separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice.
                (2) In a proceeding involving two or more respondents who have been determined to have engaged in, or are about to engage in, one or more discriminatory housing practices, one or more civil penalties, as provided under this section, may be assessed against each respondent.
                [64 FR 6754, Feb. 10, 1999, as amended at 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 78 FR 4060, Jan. 18, 2013; 82 FR 24525, May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018]
                
                  Effective Date Note:
                  At 84 FR 9454, Mar. 15, 2019, § 180.671 was amended by revising paragraphs (a)(1) through (3), effective Apr. 15, 2019. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
                  
                    
                      § 180.671
                      Assessing civil penalties for Fair Housing Act cases.
                      (a) * * *
                      (1) $21,039, if the respondent has not been adjudged in any administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act or any state or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a federal, state, or local governmental agency, to have committed any prior discriminatory housing practice.
                      (2) $52,596, if the respondent has been adjudged in any administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act, or under any state or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a federal, state, or local government agency, to have committed one other discriminatory housing practice and the adjudication was made during the 5-year period preceding the date of filing of the charge.

                      (3) $105,194, if the respondent has been adjudged in any administrative hearings or civil actions permitted under the Fair Housing Act, or under any state or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a federal, state, or local government agency, to have committed two or more discriminatory housing practices and the adjudications were made during the 7-year period preceding the date of filing of the charge.
                      
                    
                  
                
              
              
                § 180.675
                Petitions for review.
                (a) The Secretary may affirm, modify or set aside, in whole or in part, the initial decision, or remand the initial decision for further proceedings.
                (b) Any party adversely affected by the ALJ's initial decision may file a motion with the Secretary explaining how and why the initial decision should be modified, set aside, in whole or in part, or remanded for further proceedings. Such petition shall be based only on the following grounds:
                (1) A finding of material fact is not supported by substantial evidence;
                (2) A necessary legal conclusion is erroneous;
                (3) The decision is contrary to law, duly promulgated rules of HUD, or legal precedent; or
                (4) A prejudicial error of procedure was committed.
                (c) Each issue shall be plainly and concisely stated and shall be supported by citations to the record when assignments of error are based on the record, statutes, regulations, cases, or other authorities relied upon. Except for good cause shown, no assignment of error by any party shall rely on any question of fact or law not presented to the ALJ.
                (d) Such petitions must be received by the Secretary within 15 days after issuance of the initial decision.
                (e) A statement in opposition to the petition for review may be filed. Such opposition must be received by the Secretary within 22 days after issuance of the initial decision.
                (f) A petition not granted within 30 days after the issuance of the initial decision is deemed denied.
                (g) If the Secretary remands the decision for further proceedings, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision on remand within 60 days after the date of issuance of the Secretary's decision, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the ALJ is unable to issue the initial decision within this time period (or within any succeeding 60-day period following the initial 60-day period), the ALJ shall notify in writing the parties, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was filed, any amicus curiae and the Assistant Secretary, of the reasons for the delay.
              
              
                § 180.680
                Final decisions.
                (a) Public disclosure. HUD shall make public disclosure of each final decision.
                (b) Where initial decision does not provide for suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance—(1) Issuance of final decision by Secretary. The Secretary may review any finding of fact, conclusion of law, or order contained in the initial decision of the ALJ and issue a final decision in the proceeding. The Secretary shall serve the final decision on all parties no later than 30 days after the date of issuance of the initial decision.
                (2) No final decision by Secretary. If the Secretary does not serve a final decision within the time period described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the initial decision of the ALJ will become the final agency decision. For the purposes of this part, such a final decision will be considered to have been issued 30 days after the date of issuance of the initial decision.
                (c) Where initial decision provides for suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance. When the initial decision provides for the suspension or termination of, or the refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance, or the imposition of any other sanction, such decision shall not constitute an order or final agency action until approved by the Secretary. Further, in the case of proceedings under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, no order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective until the requirements of 24 CFR 1.8(c) have been met.
              
            
            
              
              Subpart G—Post-Final Decision in Fair Housing Cases
              
                § 180.700
                Action upon issuance of a final decision in Fair Housing Act cases.
                (a) Licensed or regulated businesses. (1) If a final decision includes a finding that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice in the course of a business that is subject to licensing or regulation by a Federal, State or local governmental agency, the Assistant Secretary will notify the governmental agency of the decision by:
                (i) Sending copies of the findings of fact, conclusions of law and final decision to the governmental agency by certified mail; and
                (ii) Recommending appropriate disciplinary action to the governmental agency, including, where appropriate, the suspension or revocation of the respondent's license.
                (2) The Assistant Secretary will notify the appropriate governmental agencies within 30 days after the date of issuance of the final decision, unless a petition for judicial review of the final decision as described in § 180.710 of this part has been filed before the issuance of the notification of the agency. If such a petition has been filed, the Assistant Secretary will provide the notification to the governmental agency within 30 days after the date that the final decision is affirmed upon review. If a petition for judicial review is timely filed following the notification of the governmental agency, the Assistant Secretary will promptly notify the governmental agency of the petition and withdraw his or her recommendation.
                (b) Notification to the Attorney General. If a final decision includes a finding that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice and another final decision including such a finding was issued under this part within the five years preceding the date of issuance of the final decision, the General Counsel will notify the Attorney General of the decisions by sending a copy of each final decision.
              
              
                § 180.705
                Attorney's fees and costs.
                Following the issuance of the final decision, any prevailing party, except HUD, may apply for attorney's fees and costs. The ALJ will issue an initial decision awarding or denying such fees and costs. The initial decision will become HUD's final decision unless the Secretary reviews the initial decision and issues a final decision on fees and costs within 30 days. The recovery of reasonable attorney's fees and costs will be permitted as follows:
                (a) If the respondent is the prevailing party, HUD will be liable for reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the extent provided under the Equal Access to Justice Act (5 U.S.C. 504) and HUD's regulations at 24 CFR part 14, and an intervenor will be liable for reasonable attorney's fees and costs only to the extent that the intervenor's participation in the administrative proceeding was frivolous or vexatious, or was for the purpose of harassment.
                (b) To the extent that an intervenor is a prevailing party, the respondent will be liable for reasonable attorney's fees unless special circumstances make the recovery of such fees and costs unjust.
              
              
                § 180.710
                Judicial review of final decision.
                (a) Any party adversely affected by a final decision may file a petition in the appropriate United States Court of Appeals for review of the decision under 42 U.S.C. 3612(i). The petition must be filed within 30 days after the date of issuance of the final decision.
                (b) If no petition for review is filed under paragraph (a) of this section within 45 days after the date of issuance of the final decision, the findings of facts and final decision shall be conclusive in connection with any petition for enforcement.
              
              
                § 180.715
                Enforcement of final decision.
                (a) Enforcement by HUD. Following the issuance of a final decision, the General Counsel may petition the appropriate United States Court of Appeals for the enforcement of the final decision and for appropriate temporary relief or restraining order in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 3612(j).
                
                (b) Enforcement by others. If no petition for review has been filed within 60 days after the date of issuance, and the General Counsel has not sought enforcement of the final decision as described in paragraph (a) of this section, any person entitled to relief under the final decision may petition the appropriate United States Court of Appeals for the enforcement of the final decision in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 3612(m).
              
            
            
              Subpart H—Post-Final Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act Matters
              
                § 180.800
                Post-termination proceedings.
                (a) A respondent adversely affected by the order terminating, discontinuing, or refusing Federal financial assistance in consequence of proceedings pursuant to this title may request the Secretary for an order authorizing payment, or permitting resumption, of Federal financial assistance. Such request shall:
                (1) Be in writing;
                (2) Affirmatively show that, since entry of the order, the respondent has brought its program or activity into compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements; and
                (3) Set forth specifically, and in detail, the steps taken to achieve such compliance.
                (b) If the Secretary denies such request, the respondent may request an expeditious hearing. The request for such a hearing shall be addressed to the Secretary within 30 days after the respondent is informed that the Secretary has refused to authorize payment or permit resumption of Federal financial assistance and shall specify why the Secretary erred in denying the request.
                (c) The procedures established by this part shall be applicable to any hearing.
              
              
                § 180.805
                Judicial review of final decision.
                A termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance is subject to judicial review as provided in the applicable statute.
              
            
          
          
            PARTS 181-199 [RESERVED]
          
        
      
    
  
  
    
      
      FINDING AIDS
      A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations which is published separately and revised annually.
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
      List of CFR Sections Affected
    
    
      Chap.
      
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
      (Revised as of April 1, 2019)
      
        Title 1—General Provisions
        I
        Administrative Committee of the Federal Register (Parts 1—49)
        II
        Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50—299)
        III
        Administrative Conference of the United States (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400—599)
        VI
        National Capital Planning Commission (Parts 600—699)
      
      
        Title 2—Grants and Agreements
        Subtitle A—Office of Management and Budget Guidance for Grants and Agreements
        I
        Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 2—199)
        II
        Office of Management and Budget Guidance (Parts 200—299)
        Subtitle B—Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and Agreements
        III
        Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Department of Agriculture (Parts 400—499)
        VI
        Department of State (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Agency for International Development (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Department of Energy (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        Department of Defense (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        Department of Transportation (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII
        Department of Commerce (Parts 1300—1399)
        XIV
        Department of the Interior (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVIII
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 1800—1899)
        XX
        United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000—2099)
        XXII
        Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 2200—2299)
        XXIII
        Social Security Administration (Parts 2300—2399)
        XXIV
        Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400—2499)
        XXV
        National Science Foundation (Parts 2500—2599)
        XXVI

        National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2600—2699)
        
        XXVII
        Small Business Administration (Parts 2700—2799)
        XXVIII
        Department of Justice (Parts 2800—2899)
        XXIX
        Department of Labor (Parts 2900—2999)
        XXX
        Department of Homeland Security (Parts 3000—3099)
        XXXI
        Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 3100—3199)
        XXXII
        National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200—3299)
        XXXIII
        National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300—3399)
        XXXIV
        Department of Education (Parts 3400—3499)
        XXXV
        Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500—3599)
        XXXVI
        Office of National Drug Control Policy, Executive Office of the President (Parts 3600—3699)
        XXXVII
        Peace Corps (Parts 3700—3799)
        LVIII
        Election Assistance Commission (Parts 5800—5899)
        LIX
        Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council (Parts 5900—5999)
      
      
        Title 3—The President
        I
        Executive Office of the President (Parts 100—199)
      
      
        Title 4—Accounts
        I
        Government Accountability Office (Parts 1—199)
      
      
        Title 5—Administrative Personnel
        I
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1—1199)
        II
        Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200—1299)
        III
        Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300—1399)
        IV
        Office of Personnel Management and Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 1400—1499)
        V
        The International Organizations Employees Loyalty Board (Parts 1500—1599)
        VI
        Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 1600—1699)
        VIII
        Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800—1899)
        IX
        Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900—1999)
        XI
        Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100—2199)
        XIV
        Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400—2499)
        XVI
        Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600—2699)
        XXI
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100—3199)
        XXII
        Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200—3299)
        XXIII
        Department of Energy (Parts 3300—3399)
        XXIV
        Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400—3499)
        XXV
        Department of the Interior (Parts 3500—3599)
        XXVI
        Department of Defense (Parts 3600—3699)
        
        XXVIII
        Department of Justice (Parts 3800—3899)
        XXIX
        Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900—3999)
        XXX
        Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000—4099)
        XXXI
        Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100—4199)
        XXXIII
        Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 4300—4399)
        XXXIV
        Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 4400—4499)
        XXXV
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500—4599)
        XXXVI
        Department of Homeland Security (Parts 4600—4699)
        XXXVII
        Federal Election Commission (Parts 4700—4799)
        XL
        Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000—5099)
        XLI
        Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100—5199)
        XLII
        Department of Labor (Parts 5200—5299)
        XLIII
        National Science Foundation (Parts 5300—5399)
        XLV
        Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500—5599)
        XLVI
        Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600—5699)
        XLVII
        Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700—5799)
        XLVIII
        Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800—5899)
        XLIX
        Federal Labor Relations Authority (Parts 5900—5999)
        L
        Department of Transportation (Parts 6000—6099)
        LII
        Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200—6299)
        LIII
        Department of Education (Parts 6300—6399)
        LIV
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400—6499)
        LV
        National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500—6599)
        LVI
        National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600—6699)
        LVII
        General Services Administration (Parts 6700—6799)
        LVIII
        Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Parts 6800—6899)
        LIX
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 6900—6999)
        LX
        United States Postal Service (Parts 7000—7099)
        LXI
        National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100—7199)
        LXII
        Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200—7299)
        LXIII
        Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300—7399)
        LXIV
        Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400—7499)
        LXV
        Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 7500—7599)
        LXVI
        National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 7600—7699)
        LXVII
        Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700—7799)
        LXVIII
        Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 7800—7899)
        LXIX
        Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900—7999)
        LXX
        Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (Parts 8000—8099)
        LXXI
        Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100—8199)
        LXXIII
        Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300—8399)
        
        LXXIV
        Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Parts 8400—8499)
        LXXVI
        Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 8600—8699)
        LXXVII
        Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700—8799)
        LXXX
        Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 9000—9099)
        LXXXIII
        Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (Parts 9300—9399)
        LXXXIV
        Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 9400—9499)
        LXXXVI
        National Credit Union Administration (Parts 9600—9699)
        XCVII
        Department of Homeland Security Human Resources Management System (Department of Homeland Security—Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 9700—9799)
        XCVIII
        Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency (Parts 9800—9899)
        XCIX
        Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization Commission (Parts 9900—9999)
        C
        National Council on Disability (Parts 10000—10049)
        CI
        National Mediation Board (Part 10101)
      
      
        Title 6—Domestic Security
        I
        Department of Homeland Security, Office of the Secretary (Parts 1—199)
        X
        Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 7—Agriculture
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Agriculture (Parts 0—26)
        Subtitle B—Regulations of the Department of Agriculture
        I
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of Agriculture (Parts 27—209)
        II
        Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 210—299)
        III
        Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of Agriculture (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 700—799)
        VIII

        Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), Department of Agriculture (Parts 800—899)
        
        IX
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department of Agriculture (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture (Parts 1000—1199)
        XI
        Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department of Agriculture (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIV
        Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800—2099)
        XX
        Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200—2299)
        XXV
        Office of Advocacy and Outreach, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2500—2599)
        XXVI
        Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2600—2699)
        XXVII
        Office of Information Resources Management, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2700—2799)
        XXVIII
        Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2800—2899)
        XXIX
        Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of Agriculture (Parts 2900—2999)
        XXX
        Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3000—3099)
        XXXI
        Office of Environmental Quality, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3100—3199)
        XXXII
        Office of Procurement and Property Management, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200—3299)
        XXXIII
        Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3300—3399)
        XXXIV
        National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Parts 3400—3499)
        XXXV
        Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3500—3599)
        XXXVI
        National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3600—3699)
        XXXVII
        Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3700—3799)
        XXXVIII
        World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3800—3899)
        XLI
        [Reserved]
        XLII
        Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200—4299)
      
      
        
        Title 8—Aliens and Nationality
        I
        Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and Naturalization) (Parts 1—499)
        V
        Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of Justice (Parts 1000—1399)
      
      
        Title 9—Animals and Animal Products
        I
        Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), Department of Agriculture (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300—599)
      
      
        Title 10—Energy
        I
        Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0—199)
        II
        Department of Energy (Parts 200—699)
        III
        Department of Energy (Parts 700—999)
        X
        Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 1000—1099)
        XIII
        Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1300—1399)
        XVII
        Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste Commission (Parts 1800—1899)
      
      
        Title 11—Federal Elections
        I
        Federal Election Commission (Parts 1—9099)
        II
        Election Assistance Commission (Parts 9400—9499)
      
      
        Title 12—Banks and Banking
        I
        Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Federal Reserve System (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400—499)
        V
        (Parts 500—599) [Reserved]
        VI
        Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII

        Financial Stability Oversight Council (Parts 1300—1399)
        
        XIV
        Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Office of Financial Research (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800—1899)
      
      
        Title 13—Business Credit and Assistance
        I
        Small Business Administration (Parts 1—199)
        III
        Economic Development Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 500—599)
      
      
        Title 14—Aeronautics and Space
        I
        Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200—399)
        III
        Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 400—1199)
        V
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 1200—1299)
        VI
        Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300—1399)
      
      
        Title 15—Commerce and Foreign Trade
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 0—29)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Commerce and Foreign Trade
        I
        Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 30—199)
        II
        National Institute of Standards and Technology, Department of Commerce (Parts 200—299)
        III
        International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce (Parts 400—499)
        VII
        Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of Commerce (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 900—999)
        XI

        National Technical Information Service, Department of Commerce (Parts 1100—1199)
        
        XIII
        East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300—1399)
        XIV
        Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400—1499)
        Subtitle C—Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade Agreements
        XX
        Office of the United States Trade Representative (Parts 2000—2099)
        Subtitle D—Regulations Relating to Telecommunications and Information
        XXIII
        National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 2300—2399) [Reserved]
      
      
        Title 16—Commercial Practices
        I
        Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0—999)
        II
        Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000—1799)
      
      
        Title 17—Commodity and Securities Exchanges
        I
        Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200—399)
        IV
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 400—499)
      
      
        Title 18—Conservation of Power and Water Resources
        I
        Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of Energy (Parts 1—399)
        III
        Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400—499)
        VI
        Water Resources Council (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800—899)
        XIII
        Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300—1399)
      
      
        Title 19—Customs Duties
        I
        U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury (Parts 0—199)
        II
        United States International Trade Commission (Parts 200—299)
        III
        International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400—599) [Reserved]
      
      
        Title 20—Employees' Benefits
        I
        Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department of Labor (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200—399)
        III
        Social Security Administration (Parts 400—499)
        
        IV
        Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of Labor (Parts 500—599)
        V
        Employment and Training Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 600—699)
        VI
        Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department of Labor (Parts 700—799)
        VII
        Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 800—899)
        VIII
        Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 900—999)
        IX
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Department of Labor (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 21—Food and Drugs
        I
        Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1—1299)
        II
        Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice (Parts 1300—1399)
        III
        Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400—1499)
      
      
        Title 22—Foreign Relations
        I
        Department of State (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Agency for International Development (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Peace Corps (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        International Joint Commission, United States and Canada (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500—599)
        VII
        Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700—799)
        IX
        Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        United States International Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII
        Millennium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300—1399)
        XIV
        Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor Relations Authority; General Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400—1499)
        XV
        African Development Foundation (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700—1799)
      
      
        Title 23—Highways
        I

        Federal Highway Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1—999)
        
        II
        National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and Federal Highway Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1200—1299)
        III
        National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1300—1399)
      
      
        Title 24—Housing and Urban Development
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0—99)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
        I
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 100—199)
        II
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Government National Mortgage Association, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 600—699) [Reserved]
        VII
        Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With Disabilities Program) (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 900—1699)
        XII
        Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2000—2099)
        XV
        Emergency Mortgage Insurance and Loan Programs, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2700—2799) [Reserved]
        XX
        Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 3200—3899)
        XXIV
        Board of Directors of the HOPE for Homeowners Program (Parts 4000—4099) [Reserved]
        XXV
        Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100—4199)
      
      
        
        Title 25—Indians
        I
        Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior (Parts 1—299)
        II
        Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the Interior (Parts 300—399)
        III
        National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the Interior (Parts 500—599)
        IV
        Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 700—899)
        V
        Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, and Indian Health Service, Department of Health and Human Services (Part 900—999)
        VI
        Office of the Assistant Secretary, Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior (Parts 1000—1199)
        VII
        Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, Department of the Interior (Parts 1200—1299)
      
      
        Title 26—Internal Revenue
        I
        Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1—End)
      
      
        Title 27—Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms
        I
        Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1—399)
        II
        Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Department of Justice (Parts 400—699)
      
      
        Title 28—Judicial Administration
        I
        Department of Justice (Parts 0—299)
        III
        Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice (Parts 300—399)
        V
        Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council (Parts 900—999)
        XI
        Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 1100—1199)
      
      
        Title 29—Labor
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 0—99)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Labor
        I
        National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100—199)
        
        II
        Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of Labor (Parts 200—299)
        III
        National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of Labor (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 500—899)
        IX
        Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission (Parts 900—999)
        X
        National Mediation Board (Parts 1200—1299)
        XII
        Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 1400—1499)
        XIV
        Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 1900—1999)
        XX
        Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission (Parts 2200—2499)
        XXV
        Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 2500—2599)
        XXVII
        Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Parts 2700—2799)
        XL
        Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000—4999)
      
      
        Title 30—Mineral Resources
        I
        Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of Labor (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, Department of the Interior (Parts 200—299)
        IV
        Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Department of the Interior (Parts 500—599)
        VII
        Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior (Parts 700—999)
        XII
        Office of Natural Resources Revenue, Department of the Interior (Parts 1200—1299)
      
      
        Title 31—Money and Finance: Treasury
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of the Treasury (Parts 0—50)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
        I
        Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 51—199)
        II
        Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 200—399)
        IV
        Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the Treasury (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the Treasury (Parts 600—699)
        VII

        Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of the Treasury (Parts 700—799)
        
        VIII
        Office of Investment Security, Department of the Treasury (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the Treasury—Department of Justice) (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 32—National Defense
        Subtitle A—Department of Defense
        I
        Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1—399)
        V
        Department of the Army (Parts 400—699)
        VI
        Department of the Navy (Parts 700—799)
        VII
        Department of the Air Force (Parts 800—1099)
        Subtitle B—Other Regulations Relating to National Defense
        XII
        Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200—1299)
        XVI
        Selective Service System (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800—1899)
        XIX
        Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900—1999)
        XX
        Information Security Oversight Office, National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000—2099)
        XXI
        National Security Council (Parts 2100—2199)
        XXIV
        Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400—2499)
        XXVII
        Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 2700—2799)
        XXVIII
        Office of the Vice President of the United States (Parts 2800—2899)
      
      
        Title 33—Navigation and Navigable Waters
        I
        Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, Department of Defense (Parts 200—399)
        IV
        Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, Department of Transportation (Parts 400—499)
      
      
        Title 34—Education
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary, Department of Education (Parts 1—99)
        Subtitle B—Regulations of the Offices of the Department of Education
        I
        Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education (Parts 100—199)
        II
        Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, Department of Education (Parts 200—299)
        III

        Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Department of Education (Parts 300—399)
        
        IV
        Office of Career, Technical and Adult Education, Department of Education (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500—599) [Reserved]
        VI
        Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of Education (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Office of Educational Research and Improvement, Department of Education (Parts 700—799) [Reserved]
        Subtitle C—Regulations Relating to Education
        XI
        (Parts 1100—1199) [Reserved]
        XII
        National Council on Disability (Parts 1200—1299)
      
      
        Title 35 [Reserved]
      
      
        Title 36—Parks, Forests, and Public Property
        I
        National Park Service, Department of the Interior (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        [Reserved]
        VII
        Library of Congress (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Presidio Trust (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 1200—1299)
        XV
        Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500—1599)
        XVI
        Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600—1699)
      
      
        Title 37—Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights
        I
        United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce (Parts 1—199)
        II
        U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        National Institute of Standards and Technology, Department of Commerce (Parts 400—599)
      
      
        Title 38—Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief
        I
        Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0—199)
        II
        Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 200—299)
      
      
        
        Title 39—Postal Service
        I
        United States Postal Service (Parts 1—999)
        III
        Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000—3099)
      
      
        Title 40—Protection of Environment
        I
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1—1099)
        IV
        Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Justice (Parts 1400—1499)
        V
        Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500—1599)
        VI
        Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 1600—1699)
        VII
        Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700—1799)
        VIII
        Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council (Parts 1800—1899)
      
      
        Title 41—Public Contracts and Property Management
        Subtitle A—Federal Procurement Regulations System [Note]
        Subtitle B—Other Provisions Relating to Public Contracts
        50
        Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1—50-999)
        51
        Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1—51-99)
        60
        Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 60-1—60-999)
        61
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Department of Labor (Parts 61-1—61-999)
        62—100
        [Reserved]
        Subtitle C—Federal Property Management Regulations System
        101
        Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1—101-99)
        102
        Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1—102-299)
        103—104
        [Reserved]
        105
        General Services Administration (Parts 105-1—105-999)
        109
        Department of Energy Property Management Regulations (Parts 109-1—109-99)
        114
        Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1—114-99)
        115
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1—115-99)
        128
        Department of Justice (Parts 128-1—128-99)
        129—200
        [Reserved]
        Subtitle D—Other Provisions Relating to Property Management [Reserved]
        Subtitle E—Federal Information Resources Management Regulations System [Reserved]
        Subtitle F—Federal Travel Regulation System
        300
        General (Parts 300-1—300-99)
        301

        Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1—301-99)
        
        302
        Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1—302-99)
        303
        Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of Certain Employees (Part 303-1—303-99)
        304
        Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source (Parts 304-1—304-99)
      
      
        Title 42—Public Health
        I
        Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1—199)
        II—III
        [Reserved]
        IV
        Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 400—699)
        V
        Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1000—1099)
      
      
        Title 43—Public Lands: Interior
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of the Interior (Parts 1—199)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Public Lands
        I
        Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior (Parts 400—999)
        II
        Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior (Parts 1000—9999)
        III
        Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation Commission (Parts 10000—10099)
      
      
        Title 44—Emergency Management and Assistance
        I
        Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 0—399)
        IV
        Department of Commerce and Department of Transportation (Parts 400—499)
      
      
        Title 45—Public Welfare
        Subtitle A—Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1—199)
        Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II
        Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support Enforcement Program), Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300—399)
        IV

        Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 400—499)
        
        V
        Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States, Department of Justice (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        National Science Foundation (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800—899)
        IX
        Denali Commission (Parts 900—999)
        X
        Office of Community Services, Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1000—1099)
        XI
        National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities (Parts 1100—1199)
        XII
        Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 1200—1299)
        XIII
        Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 1300—1399)
        XVI
        Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600—1699)
        XVII
        National Commission on Libraries and Information Science (Parts 1700—1799)
        XVIII
        Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800—1899)
        XXI
        Commission of Fine Arts (Parts 2100—2199)
        XXIII
        Arctic Research Commission (Parts 2300—2399)
        XXIV
        James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 2400—2499)
        XXV
        Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 2500—2599)
      
      
        Title 46—Shipping
        I
        Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1—199)
        II
        Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 200—399)
        III
        Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400—499)
        IV
        Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500—599)
      
      
        Title 47—Telecommunication
        I
        Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0—199)
        II
        Office of Science and Technology Policy and National Security Council (Parts 200—299)
        III
        National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department of Commerce, and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 400—499)
        V
        The First Responder Network Authority (Parts 500—599)
      
      
        
        Title 48—Federal Acquisition Regulations System
        1
        Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1—99)
        2
        Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of Defense (Parts 200—299)
        3
        Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300—399)
        4
        Department of Agriculture (Parts 400—499)
        5
        General Services Administration (Parts 500—599)
        6
        Department of State (Parts 600—699)
        7
        Agency for International Development (Parts 700—799)
        8
        Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800—899)
        9
        Department of Energy (Parts 900—999)
        10
        Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000—1099)
        12
        Department of Transportation (Parts 1200—1299)
        13
        Department of Commerce (Parts 1300—1399)
        14
        Department of the Interior (Parts 1400—1499)
        15
        Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500—1599)
        16
        Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1600—1699)
        17
        Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700—1799)
        18
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 1800—1899)
        19
        Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900—1999)
        20
        Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000—2099)
        21
        Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 2100—2199)
        23
        Social Security Administration (Parts 2300—2399)
        24
        Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400—2499)
        25
        National Science Foundation (Parts 2500—2599)
        28
        Department of Justice (Parts 2800—2899)
        29
        Department of Labor (Parts 2900—2999)
        30
        Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000—3099)
        34
        Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 3400—3499)
        51
        Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 5100—5199)
        52
        Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 5200—5299)
        53
        Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300—5399) [Reserved]
        54
        Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 5400—5499)
        57
        African Development Foundation (Parts 5700—5799)
        61
        Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, General Services Administration (Parts 6100—6199)
        99
        Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal Procurement Policy, Office of Management and Budget (Parts 9900—9999)
      
      
        
        Title 49—Transportation
        Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of Transportation (Parts 1—99)
        Subtitle B—Other Regulations Relating to Transportation
        I
        Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 100—199)
        II
        Federal Railroad Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 200—299)
        III
        Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400—499)
        V
        National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Federal Transit Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 600—699)
        VII
        National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) (Parts 700—799)
        VIII
        National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800—999)
        X
        Surface Transportation Board (Parts 1000—1399)
        XI
        Research and Innovative Technology Administration, Department of Transportation (Parts 1400—1499) [Reserved]
        XII
        Transportation Security Administration, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1500—1699)
      
      
        Title 50—Wildlife and Fisheries
        I
        United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior (Parts 1—199)
        II
        National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 200—299)
        III
        International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 300—399)
        IV
        Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior and National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce); Endangered Species Committee Regulations (Parts 400—499)
        V
        Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500—599)
        VI
        Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 600—699)
      
    
    
      
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
      (Revised as of April 1, 2019)
      Agency
      CFR Title, Subtitle or Chapter
      Administrative Conference of the United States
      1, III
      Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
      36, VIII
      Advocacy and Outreach, Office of
      7, XXV
      Afghanistan Reconstruction, Special Inspector General for
      5, LXXXIII
      African Development Foundation
      22, XV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 57
      Agency for International Development
      2, VII; 22, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 7
      Agricultural Marketing Service
      7, I, IX, X, XI
      Agricultural Research Service
      7, V
      Agriculture, Department of
      2, IV; 5, LXXIII
      Advocacy and Outreach, Office of
      7, XXV
      Agricultural Marketing Service
      7, I, IX, X, XI
      Agricultural Research Service
      7, V
      Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
      7, III; 9, I
      Chief Financial Officer, Office of
      7, XXX
      Commodity Credit Corporation
      7, XIV
      Economic Research Service
      7, XXXVII
      Energy Policy and New Uses, Office of
      2, IX; 7, XXIX
      Environmental Quality, Office of
      7, XXXI
      Farm Service Agency
      7, VII, XVIII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 4
      Federal Crop Insurance Corporation
      7, IV
      Food and Nutrition Service
      7, II
      Food Safety and Inspection Service
      9, III
      Foreign Agricultural Service
      7, XV
      Forest Service
      36, II
      Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration
      7, VIII; 9, II
      Information Resources Management, Office of
      7, XXVII
      Inspector General, Office of
      7, XXVI
      National Agricultural Library
      7, XLI
      National Agricultural Statistics Service
      7, XXXVI
      National Institute of Food and Agriculture
      7, XXXIV
      Natural Resources Conservation Service
      7, VI
      Operations, Office of
      7, XXVIII
      Procurement and Property Management, Office of
      7, XXXII
      Rural Business-Cooperative Service
      7, XVIII, XLII
      Rural Development Administration
      7, XLII
      Rural Housing Service
      7, XVIII, XXXV
      Rural Telephone Bank
      7, XVI
      Rural Utilities Service
      7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
      Secretary of Agriculture, Office of
      7, Subtitle A
      Transportation, Office of
      7, XXXIII
      World Agricultural Outlook Board
      7, XXXVIII
      Air Force, Department of
      32, VII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement
      48, 53
      Air Transportation Stabilization Board
      14, VI
      Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
      27, I
      Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Bureau of
      27, II
      AMTRAK
      49, VII
      American Battle Monuments Commission
      36, IV
      American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee
      25, VII
      Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
      7, III; 9, I
      
      Appalachian Regional Commission
      5, IX
      Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board
      36, XI
      Arctic Research Commission
      45, XXIII
      Armed Forces Retirement Home
      5, XI
      Army, Department of
      32, V
      Engineers, Corps of
      33, II; 36, III
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 51
      Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs, Office of
      34, V
      Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for Purchase from People Who Are
      41, 51
      Broadcasting Board of Governors
      22, V
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 19
      Career, Technical, and Adult Education, Office of
      34, IV
      Census Bureau
      15, I
      Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
      42, IV
      Central Intelligence Agency
      32, XIX
      Chemical Safety and Hazardous Investigation Board
      40, VI
      Chief Financial Officer, Office of
      7, XXX
      Child Support Enforcement, Office of
      45, III
      Children and Families, Administration for
      45, II, III, IV, X, XIII
      Civil Rights, Commission on
      5, LXVIII; 45, VII
      Civil Rights, Office for
      34, I
      Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency
      5, XCVIII
      Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia
      5, LXX
      Coast Guard
      33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
      Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)
      46, III
      Commerce, Department of
      2, XIII; 44, IV; 50, VI
      Census Bureau
      15, I
      Economic Analysis, Bureau of
      15, VIII
      Economic Development Administration
      13, III
      Emergency Management and Assistance
      44, IV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 13
      Foreign-Trade Zones Board
      15, IV
      Industry and Security, Bureau of
      15, VII
      International Trade Administration
      15, III; 19, III
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      15, II; 37, IV
      National Marine Fisheries Service
      50, II, IV
      National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
      15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, VI
      National Technical Information Service
      15, XI
      National Telecommunications and Information Administration
      15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
      National Weather Service
      15, IX
      Patent and Trademark Office, United States
      37, I
      Secretary of Commerce, Office of
      15, Subtitle A
      Commercial Space Transportation
      14, III
      Commodity Credit Corporation
      7, XIV
      Commodity Futures Trading Commission
      5, XLI; 17, I
      Community Planning and Development, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, V, VI
      Community Services, Office of
      45, X
      Comptroller of the Currency
      12, I
      Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission
      29, IX
      Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
      5, LXXXIV; 12, X
      Consumer Product Safety Commission
      5, LXXI; 16, II
      Copyright Royalty Board
      37, III
      Corporation for National and Community Service
      2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
      Cost Accounting Standards Board
      48, 99
      Council on Environmental Quality
      40, V
      Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia
      5, LXX; 28, VIII
      Customs and Border Protection
      19, I
      Defense Contract Audit Agency
      32, I
      Defense, Department of
      2, XI; 5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 40, VII
      Advanced Research Projects Agency
      32, I
      Air Force Department
      32, VII
      
      Army Department
      32, V; 33, II; 36, III; 48, 51
      Defense Acquisition Regulations System
      48, 2
      Defense Intelligence Agency
      32, I
      Defense Logistics Agency
      32, I, XII; 48, 54
      Engineers, Corps of
      33, II; 36, III
      National Imagery and Mapping Agency
      32, I
      Navy Department
      32, VI; 48, 52
      Secretary of Defense, Office of
      2, XI; 32, I
      Defense Contract Audit Agency
      32, I
      Defense Intelligence Agency
      32, I
      Defense Logistics Agency
      32, XII; 48, 54
      Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board
      10, XVII
      Delaware River Basin Commission
      18, III
      Denali Commission
      45, IX
      Disability, National Council on
      5, C; 34, XII
      District of Columbia, Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the
      5, LXX; 28, VIII
      Drug Enforcement Administration
      21, II
      East-West Foreign Trade Board
      15, XIII
      Economic Analysis, Bureau of
      15, VIII
      Economic Development Administration
      13, III
      Economic Research Service
      7, XXXVII
      Education, Department of
      2, XXXIV; 5, LIII
      Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs, Office of
      34, V
      Career, Technical, and Adult Education, Office of
      34, IV
      Civil Rights, Office for
      34, I
      Educational Research and Improvement, Office of
      34, VII
      Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of
      34, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 34
      Postsecondary Education, Office of
      34, VI
      Secretary of Education, Office of
      34, Subtitle A
      Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Office of
      34, III
      Educational Research and Improvement, Office of
      34, VII
      Election Assistance Commission
      2, LVIII; 11, II
      Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of
      34, II
      Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board
      13, V
      Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board
      13, IV
      Employee Benefits Security Administration
      29, XXV
      Employees' Compensation Appeals Board
      20, IV
      Employees Loyalty Board
      5, V
      Employment and Training Administration
      20, V
      Employment Policy, National Commission for
      1, IV
      Employment Standards Administration
      20, VI
      Endangered Species Committee
      50, IV
      Energy, Department of
      2, IX; 5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 9
      Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
      5, XXIV; 18, I
      Property Management Regulations
      41, 109
      Energy, Office of
      7, XXIX
      Engineers, Corps of
      33, II; 36, III
      Engraving and Printing, Bureau of
      31, VI
      Environmental Protection Agency
      2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, VII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 15
      Property Management Regulations
      41, 115
      Environmental Quality, Office of
      7, XXXI
      Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
      5, LXII; 29, XIV
      Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, I
      Executive Office of the President
      3, I
      Environmental Quality, Council on
      40, V
      Management and Budget, Office of
      2, Subtitle A; 5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 48, 99
      National Drug Control Policy, Office of
      2, XXXVI; 21, III
      National Security Council
      32, XXI; 47, 2
      
      Presidential Documents
      3
      Science and Technology Policy, Office of
      32, XXIV; 47, II
      Trade Representative, Office of the United States
      15, XX
      Export-Import Bank of the United States
      2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
      Family Assistance, Office of
      45, II
      Farm Credit Administration
      5, XXXI; 12, VI
      Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation
      5, XXX; 12, XIV
      Farm Service Agency
      7, VII, XVIII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 1
      Federal Aviation Administration
      14, I
      Commercial Space Transportation
      14, III
      Federal Claims Collection Standards
      31, IX
      Federal Communications Commission
      5, XXIX; 47, I
      Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of
      41, 60
      Federal Crop Insurance Corporation
      7, IV
      Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
      5, XXII; 12, III
      Federal Election Commission
      5, XXXVII; 11, I
      Federal Emergency Management Agency
      44, I
      Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 21
      Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation
      48, 16
      Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
      5, XXIV; 18, I
      Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
      12, XI
      Federal Financing Bank
      12, VIII
      Federal Highway Administration
      23, I, II
      Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
      1, IV
      Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office
      12, XVII
      Federal Housing Finance Agency
      5, LXXX; 12, XII
      Federal Housing Finance Board
      12, IX
      Federal Labor Relations Authority
      5, XIV, XLIX; 22, XIV
      Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
      31, VII
      Federal Management Regulation
      41, 102
      Federal Maritime Commission
      46, IV
      Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service
      29, XII
      Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission
      5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
      Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
      49, III
      Federal Prison Industries, Inc.
      28, III
      Federal Procurement Policy Office
      48, 99
      Federal Property Management Regulations
      41, 101
      Federal Railroad Administration
      49, II
      Federal Register, Administrative Committee of
      1, I
      Federal Register, Office of
      1, II
      Federal Reserve System
      12, II
      Board of Governors
      5, LVIII
      Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board
      5, VI, LXXVI
      Federal Service Impasses Panel
      5, XIV
      Federal Trade Commission
      5, XLVII; 16, I
      Federal Transit Administration
      49, VI
      Federal Travel Regulation System
      41, Subtitle F
      Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
      31, X
      Financial Research Office
      12, XVI
      Financial Stability Oversight Council
      12, XIII
      Fine Arts, Commission of
      45, XXI
      Fiscal Service
      31, II
      Fish and Wildlife Service, United States
      50, I, IV
      Food and Drug Administration
      21, I
      Food and Nutrition Service
      7, II
      Food Safety and Inspection Service
      9, III
      Foreign Agricultural Service
      7, XV
      Foreign Assets Control, Office of
      31, V
      Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States
      45, V
      Foreign Service Grievance Board
      22, IX
      Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel
      22, XIV
      Foreign Service Labor Relations Board
      22, XIV
      Foreign-Trade Zones Board
      15, IV
      Forest Service
      36, II
      General Services Administration
      5, LVII; 41, 105
      
      Contract Appeals, Board of
      48, 61
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 5
      Federal Management Regulation
      41, 102
      Federal Property Management Regulations
      41, 101
      Federal Travel Regulation System
      41, Subtitle F
      General
      41, 300
      Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses
      41, 304
      Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of Certain Employees
      41, 303
      Relocation Allowances
      41, 302
      Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances
      41, 301
      Geological Survey
      30, IV
      Government Accountability Office
      4, I
      Government Ethics, Office of
      5, XVI
      Government National Mortgage Association
      24, III
      Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration
      7, VIII; 9, II
      Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council
      2, LIX; 40, VIII
      Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation
      45, XVIII
      Health and Human Services, Department of
      2, III; 5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
      Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
      42, IV
      Child Support Enforcement, Office of
      45, III
      Children and Families, Administration for
      45, II, III, IV, X, XIII
      Community Services, Office of
      45, X
      Family Assistance, Office of
      45, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 3
      Food and Drug Administration
      21, I
      Indian Health Service
      25, V
      Inspector General (Health Care), Office of
      42, V
      Public Health Service
      42, I
      Refugee Resettlement, Office of
      45, IV
      Homeland Security, Department of
      2, XXX; 5, XXXVI; 6, I; 8, I
      Coast Guard
      33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
      Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)
      46, III
      Customs and Border Protection
      19, I
      Federal Emergency Management Agency
      44, I
      Human Resources Management and Labor Relations Systems
      5, XCVII
      Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau
      19, IV
      Transportation Security Administration
      49, XII
      HOPE for Homeowners Program, Board of Directors of
      24, XXIV
      Housing and Urban Development, Department of
      2, XXIV; 5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
      Community Planning and Development, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, V, VI
      Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, I
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 24
      Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office of
      12, XVII
      Government National Mortgage Association
      24, III
      Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, II, VIII, X, XX
      Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring, Office of
      24, IV
      Inspector General, Office of
      24, XII
      Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, IX
      Secretary, Office of
      24, Subtitle A, VII
      Housing—Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, II, VIII, X, XX
      Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring,  Office of
      24, IV
      Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau
      19, IV
      Immigration Review, Executive Office for
      8, V
      Independent Counsel, Office of
      28, VII
      Independent Counsel, Offices of
      28, VI
      Indian Affairs, Bureau of
      25, I, V
      Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant Secretary
      25, VI
      
      Indian Arts and Crafts Board
      25, II
      Indian Health Service
      25, V
      Industry and Security, Bureau of
      15, VII
      Information Resources Management, Office of
      7, XXVII
      Information Security Oversight Office, National Archives and Records Administration
      32, XX
      Inspector General
      Agriculture Department
      7, XXVI
      Health and Human Services Department
      42, V
      Housing and Urban Development Department
      24, XII, XV
      Institute of Peace, United States
      22, XVII
      Inter-American Foundation
      5, LXIII; 22, X
      Interior, Department of
      2, XIV
      American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee
      25, VII
      Endangered Species Committee
      50, IV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 14
      Federal Property Management Regulations System
      41, 114
      Fish and Wildlife Service, United States
      50, I, IV
      Geological Survey
      30, IV
      Indian Affairs, Bureau of
      25, I, V
      Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant Secretary
      25, VI
      Indian Arts and Crafts Board
      25, II
      Land Management, Bureau of
      43, II
      National Indian Gaming Commission
      25, III
      National Park Service
      36, I
      Natural Resource Revenue, Office of
      30, XII
      Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of
      30, V
      Reclamation, Bureau of
      43, I
      Safety and Enforcement Bureau, Bureau of
      30, II
      Secretary of the Interior, Office of
      2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
      Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Office of
      30, VII
      Internal Revenue Service
      26, I
      International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico, United States Section
      22, XI
      International Development, United States Agency for
      22, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 7
      International Development Cooperation Agency, United States
      22, XII
      International Joint Commission, United States and Canada
      22, IV
      International Organizations Employees Loyalty Board
      5, V
      International Trade Administration
      15, III; 19, III
      International Trade Commission, United States
      19, II
      Interstate Commerce Commission
      5, XL
      Investment Security, Office of
      31, VIII
      James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation
      45, XXIV
      Japan-United States Friendship Commission
      22, XVI
      Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries
      20, VIII
      Justice, Department of
      2, XXVIII; 5, XXVIII; 28, I, XI; 40, IV
      Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Bureau of
      27, II
      Drug Enforcement Administration
      21, II
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 28
      Federal Claims Collection Standards
      31, IX
      Federal Prison Industries, Inc.
      28, III
      Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States
      45, V
      Immigration Review, Executive Office for
      8, V
      Independent Counsel, Offices of
      28, VI
      Prisons, Bureau of
      28, V
      Property Management Regulations
      41, 128
      Labor, Department of
      2, XXIX; 5, XLII
      Employee Benefits Security Administration
      29, XXV
      Employees' Compensation Appeals Board
      20, IV
      Employment and Training Administration
      20, V
      Employment Standards Administration
      20, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 29
      Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of
      41, 60
      
      Federal Procurement Regulations System
      41, 50
      Labor-Management Standards, Office of
      29, II, IV
      Mine Safety and Health Administration
      30, I
      Occupational Safety and Health Administration
      29, XVII
      Public Contracts
      41, 50
      Secretary of Labor, Office of
      29, Subtitle A
      Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
      41, 61; 20, IX
      Wage and Hour Division
      29, V
      Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of
      20, I, VII
      Labor-Management Standards, Office of
      29, II, IV
      Land Management, Bureau of
      43, II
      Legal Services Corporation
      45, XVI
      Libraries and Information Science, National Commission on
      45, XVII
      Library of Congress
      36, VII
      Copyright Royalty Board
      37, III
      U.S. Copyright Office
      37, II
      Local Television Loan Guarantee Board
      7, XX
      Management and Budget, Office of
      5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 48, 99
      Marine Mammal Commission
      50, V
      Maritime Administration
      46, II
      Merit Systems Protection Board
      5, II, LXIV
      Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for
      32, XXVII
      Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization Commission
      5, XCIX
      Millennium Challenge Corporation
      22, XIII
      Mine Safety and Health Administration
      30, I
      Minority Business Development Agency
      15, XIV
      Miscellaneous Agencies
      1, IV
      Monetary Offices
      31, I
      Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation
      36, XVI
      Museum and Library Services, Institute of
      2, XXXI
      National Aeronautics and Space Administration
      2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 18
      National Agricultural Library
      7, XLI
      National Agricultural Statistics Service
      7, XXXVI
      National and Community Service, Corporation for
      2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
      National Archives and Records Administration
      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
      Information Security Oversight Office
      32, XX
      National Capital Planning Commission
      1, IV, VI
      National Counterintelligence Center
      32, XVIII
      National Credit Union Administration
      5, LXXXVI; 12, VII
      National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council
      28, IX
      National Drug Control Policy, Office of
      2, XXXVI; 21, III
      National Endowment for the Arts
      2, XXXII
      National Endowment for the Humanities
      2, XXXIII
      National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities
      45, XI
      National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
      32, I
      National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
      23, II, III; 47, VI; 49, V
      National Imagery and Mapping Agency
      32, I
      National Indian Gaming Commission
      25, III
      National Institute of Food and Agriculture
      7, XXXIV
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      15, II; 37, IV
      National Intelligence, Office of Director of
      5, IV; 32, XVII
      National Labor Relations Board
      5, LXI; 29, I
      National Marine Fisheries Service
      50, II, IV
      National Mediation Board
      5, CI; 29, X
      National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
      15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, VI
      National Park Service
      36, I
      National Railroad Adjustment Board
      29, III
      National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)
      49, VII
      National Science Foundation
      2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 25
      National Security Council
      32, XXI
      
      National Security Council and Office of Science and Technology Policy
      47, II
      National Technical Information Service
      15, XI
      National Telecommunications and Information Administration
      15, XXIII; 47, III, IV, V
      National Transportation Safety Board
      49, VIII
      Natural Resources Conservation Service
      7, VI
      Natural Resource Revenue, Office of
      30, XII
      Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of
      25, IV
      Navy, Department of
      32, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 52
      Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation
      24, XXV
      Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste Commission
      10, XVIII
      Nuclear Regulatory Commission
      2, XX; 5, XLVIII; 10, I
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 20
      Occupational Safety and Health Administration
      29, XVII
      Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission
      29, XX
      Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of
      30, V
      Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust
      36, XV
      Operations Office
      7, XXVIII
      Overseas Private Investment Corporation
      5, XXXIII; 22, VII
      Patent and Trademark Office, United States
      37, I
      Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses
      41, 304
      Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of Certain Employees
      41, 303
      Peace Corps
      2, XXXVII; 22, III
      Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation
      36, IX
      Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
      29, XL
      Personnel Management, Office of
      5, I, XXXV; 5, IV; 45, VIII
      Human Resources Management and Labor Relations Systems, Department of Homeland Security
      5, XCVII
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 17
      Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 21
      Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation
      48, 16
      Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
      49, I
      Postal Regulatory Commission
      5, XLVI; 39, III
      Postal Service, United States
      5, LX; 39, I
      Postsecondary Education, Office of
      34, VI
      President's Commission on White House Fellowships
      1, IV
      Presidential Documents
      3
      Presidio Trust
      36, X
      Prisons, Bureau of
      28, V
      Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
      6, X
      Procurement and Property Management, Office of
      7, XXXII
      Public Contracts, Department of Labor
      41, 50
      Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant Secretary for
      24, IX
      Public Health Service
      42, I
      Railroad Retirement Board
      20, II
      Reclamation, Bureau of
      43, I
      Refugee Resettlement, Office of
      45, IV
      Relocation Allowances
      41, 302
      Research and Innovative Technology Administration
      49, XI
      Rural Business-Cooperative Service
      7, XVIII, XLII
      Rural Development Administration
      7, XLII
      Rural Housing Service
      7, XVIII, XXXV
      Rural Telephone Bank
      7, XVI
      Rural Utilities Service
      7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
      Safety and Environmental Enforcement, Bureau of
      30, II
      Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
      33, IV
      Science and Technology Policy, Office of
      32, XXIV
      Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and National Security Council
      47, II
      Secret Service
      31, IV
      Securities and Exchange Commission
      5, XXXIV; 17, II
      
      Selective Service System
      32, XVI
      Small Business Administration
      2, XXVII; 13, I
      Smithsonian Institution
      36, V
      Social Security Administration
      2, XXIII; 20, III; 48, 23
      Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States
      5, XI
      Special Counsel, Office of
      5, VIII
      Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Office of
      34, III
      State, Department of
      2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 6
      Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Office of
      30, VII
      Surface Transportation Board
      49, X
      Susquehanna River Basin Commission
      18, VIII
      Tennessee Valley Authority
      5, LXIX; 18, XIII
      Trade Representative, United States, Office of
      15, XX
      Transportation, Department of
      2, XII; 5, L
      Commercial Space Transportation
      14, III
      Emergency Management and Assistance
      44, IV
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 12
      Federal Aviation Administration
      14, I
      Federal Highway Administration
      23, I, II
      Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
      49, III
      Federal Railroad Administration
      49, II
      Federal Transit Administration
      49, VI
      Maritime Administration
      46, II
      National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
      23, II, III; 47, IV; 49, V
      Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
      49, I
      Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
      33, IV
      Secretary of Transportation, Office of
      14, II; 49, Subtitle A
      Transportation Statistics Bureau
      49, XI
      Transportation, Office of
      7, XXXIII
      Transportation Security Administration
      49, XII
      Transportation Statistics Bureau
      49, XI
      Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)
      41, 301
      Treasury, Department of the
      2, X;5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 31, IX
      Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
      27, I
      Community Development Financial Institutions Fund
      12, XVIII
      Comptroller of the Currency
      12, I
      Customs and Border Protection
      19, I
      Engraving and Printing, Bureau of
      31, VI
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 10
      Federal Claims Collection Standards
      31, IX
      Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
      31, VII
      Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
      31, X
      Fiscal Service
      31, II
      Foreign Assets Control, Office of
      31, V
      Internal Revenue Service
      26, I
      Investment Security, Office of
      31, VIII
      Monetary Offices
      31, I
      Secret Service
      31, IV
      Secretary of the Treasury, Office of
      31, Subtitle A
      Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation
      45, XVIII
      United States and Canada, International Joint Commission
      22, IV
      United States and Mexico, International Boundary and Water Commission, United States Section
      22, XI
      U.S. Copyright Office
      37, II
      Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation Commission
      43, III
      Veterans Affairs, Department of
      2, VIII; 38, I
      Federal Acquisition Regulation
      48, 8
      Veterans' Employment and Training Service, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
      41, 61; 20, IX
      Vice President of the United States, Office of
      32, XXVIII
      Wage and Hour Division
      29, V
      Water Resources Council
      18, VI
      Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of
      20, I, VII
      World Agricultural Outlook Board
      7, XXXVIII
    
    
      24 CFR (4-1-19 Edition)
      List of CFR Sections Affected
      
      List of CFR Sections Affected

      All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) that were made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 2014 are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. The user should consult the entries for chapters, parts and subparts as well as sections for revisions.

      For changes to this volume of the CFR prior to this listing, consult the annual edition of the monthly List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA). The LSA is available at www.govinfo.gov. For changes to this volume of the CFR prior to 2001, see the “List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000” published in 11 separate volumes. The “List of CFR Sections Affected 1986-2000” is available at www.govinfo.gov.
      
      
        2014
        24 CFR
        79 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        5 Policy statement
        35940, 54186, 59646
        5.609 (c)(14) revised
        36164
        5.801 (c)(4) introductory text revised; interim
        55362
        Regulation at 79 FR 55362 confirmed
        74613
        8 Policy statement
        29671
        30.65 (a) revised
        35042
        35.1330 (a)(4)(iii) revised
        35043
        50 Authority citation revised
        49228
        50.18 Existing text designated as (b); (a) added
        49228
        50.20 (a) introductory text revised
        49229
        50.31 (a) revised
        49229
        58 Authority citation revised
        49229
        58.38 Introductory text revised
        49229
        58.40 Introductory text and (e) revised
        49229
        84.1—84.5 (Subpart A) Heading removed; interim
        76078
        84.1 Revised; interim
        76078
        84.2 Removed; interim
        76078
        84.3 Removed; interim
        76078
        84.4 Removed; interim
        76078
        84.5 Removed; interim
        76078
        84.10—84.17 (Subpart B) Removed; interim
        76079
        84.20—84.62 (Subpart C) Removed; interim
        76079
        84.70—84.73 (Subpart D) Removed; interim
        76079
        84.80—84.87 (Subpart E) Removed; interim
        76079
        84 Appendix A removed; interim
        76079
        85.1—85.6 (Subpart A) Heading removed; interim
        76079
        85.1 Revised; interim
        76079
        85.2 Removed; interim
        76079
        85.3 Removed; interim
        76079
        85.4 Removed; interim
        76079
        85.5 Removed; interim
        76079
        85.6 Removed; interim
        76079
        85.10—85.12 (Subpart B) Removed; interim
        76079
        85.20—85.44 (Subpart C) Removed; interim
        76079
        85.50—85.52 (Subpart D) Removed; interim
        76079
        85 Subpart E removed; interim
        76079
      
      
        2015
        24 CFR
        80 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        4.5 (a) revised
        75934
        4.9 (a)(1)(iii) amended
        75934
        5.100—5.110 (Subpart A) Authority citation added
        42352
        5.107 Amended
        75934
        5.109 (g) amended
        75934
        
        5.150 Undesignated center heading and section added
        42352
        5.151 Added
        42352
        5.152 Added
        42352
        5.154 Added
        42352
        5.156 Added
        42352
        5.158 Added
        42352
        5.160 Added
        42352
        (a)(1)(i)(C) correctly revised
        46487
        5.162 Added
        42352
        5.164 Added
        42352
        5.166 Added
        42352
        5.168 Added
        42352
        5.801 (d)(1) amended
        75934
        5.1003 Amended
        75934
        5.1004 Heading revised; amended
        75934
        15.1—15.2 (Subpart A) Revised
        49144
        15.101—15.110 (Subpart B) Revised
        49145
        84 Technical correction
        18519
        85 Technical correction
        18519
        91 Policy statement
        25901
        91.2 (a)(3) and (4) amended; (a)(5) added; interim
        5219
        91.5 Introductory text revised
        42360
        91.10 (a) amended; interim
        5219
        91.100 (a)(1), (5) and (c) revised; (e) added
        42360
        91.105 (a)(1), (2)(i), (ii), (iii), (b), (c), (e)(1), (f) through (j) and (l) revised; (a)(4) added
        42360
        91.110 (a) revised
        42362
        91.115 (a)(1), (2), (b), (c), (f), (g) and (h) revised; (a)(4) added
        42363
        91.205 (b)(2) revised
        42364
        91.215 (b)(2) revised; interim
        5219
        (a)(5) added
        42364
        91.220 (l)(5) added; interim
        5219
        (k) revised
        42364
        (l)(1)(i) and (ii) revised; interim
        69869
        91.225 (a)(1) revised
        42365
        91.230 Revised
        42365
        91.235 (c)(1) and (4) revised
        42365
        91.305 (b)(2) revised
        42365
        91.315 (b)(2) revised; interim
        5220
        91.315 (a)(5) added
        42365
        91.320 (k)(5) revised; interim
        5220
        (j) revised
        42365
        Amended; (k)(1) revised; interim
        69869
        91.325 (a)(1) revised
        42365
        (b)(4)(ii) revised; interim
        69870
        91.415 Revised
        42365
        91.420 (b) revised
        42366
        91.425 (a)(1)(i) revised
        42366
        91.505 (d) added
        42366
        (a)(2) amended; interim
        69870
        91.520 (h) and (i) redesignated as (i) and (j); new (h) added; interim
        5220
        92.2 Amended
        75934
        92.64 (a)(2)(ii) amended
        75935
        92.104 Revised
        42366
        92.204 (a)(2)(ii) amended
        75935
        92.207 (e) amended
        75935
        92.214 (b)(2) amended
        75935
        92.220 (a)(1)(ii) amended
        75935
        92.257 (e) amended
        75935
        92.351 (b) amended
        75935
        92.356 (a) amended
        75935
        92.502 (c)(2) revised
        75935
        92.504 (c)(1)(x) and (2)(ix) amended
        75935
        92.505 Revised
        75935
        92.506 Amended
        75935
        92.507 Revised
        75935
        92.508 (a)(7)(i)(C) revised
        42366
        (a)(3)(ii), (5)(i) and (iv) amended
        75935
        92.551 (c)(2) amended
        75935
        93 Added; interim
        5220
        93 Policy statement
        25901
        Chapter I
        115.308 (e) revised
        75935
        125.104 (g) amended
        75935
        135.11 (a), (1), (2) and (b) amended
        75935
        135.36 (c) amended
        75936
        135 Appendix amended
        75936
      
      
        2016
        24 CFR
        81 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        Subtitle A Policy statement
        73030
        5 Authority citation revised
        19416, 80798, 90657
        Technical correction
        87812
        5.100 Amended
        64782, 90657, 92635
        5.105 (a)(2)(i) heading and (ii) removed; (a)(2)(i) redesignated as (a)(2)
        64782
        (a)(2) revised
        80993
        5.106 Added
        64782
        5.109 Heading, (a) through (d), (f), (g) and (h) revised; (e) redesignated as (i); new (e), (j) and (k) added
        19416
        5.111 Added
        90657
        
        5.216 Second paragraph of (g)(1)(ii) designated as (g)(1)(iii); (h)(1) revised; (h)(2) amended; (h)(3) added; eff. 4-7-16
        12369
        5.520 (c)(1) introductory text, (2) introductory text and (d) revised; (c)(1)(v), (2)(ii) introductory text and (iii) amended; (e) added; eff. 4-7-16
        12370
        5.603 (b) amended; eff. 4-7-16
        12370
        5.609 (b)(9) amended; eff. 4-7-16
        12370
        5.617 (a) and (c) revised; (b) amended; eff. 4-7-16
        12370
        5.657 (d) added; eff. 4-7-16
        12371
        5.2001—5.2011 (Subpart L) Revised
        80798
        7 Removed
        31504
        28 Authority citation revised
        38935
        28.10 (a)(1) introductory text and (b)(1) introductory text revised; (c) amended; interim
        38935
        30 Authority citation revised
        38935
        30.20 (b) revised; interim
        38935
        30.25 (b) revised; interim
        38935
        30.30 Removed; interim
        38935
        30.35 (c)(1) amended; interim
        38935
        30.36 (c) amended; interim
        38935
        30.40 (c) amended; interim
        38935
        30.45 (g) revised; interim
        38935
        30.50 (c) amended; interim
        38935
        30.55 Removed; interim
        38935
        30.60 (c) revised; interim
        38935
        30.65 (b) revised; interim
        38935
        30.68 (c) revised; interim
        38935
        30.69 Removed; interim
        38935
        87 Authority citation revised
        38935
        87.400 (a), (b) and (e) revised; interim
        38935
        91 Technical correction
        87812
        91.100 (a)(1) amended
        91011
        91.105 (a)(2)(ii) amended
        91011
        91.110 (a) introductory text amended
        91011
        91.115 (a)(2)(ii) amended
        91011
        91.200 (b)(3)(iv) redesignated as (b)(3)(vi); new (b)(3)(iv) and (v) added
        91011
        91.210 (a) revised
        91012
        91.220 (l)(2)(i) through (vii) redesignated as (l)(2)(ii) through (viii); new (l)(2)(i) added; interim
        86951
        Regulation at 81 FR 86951 eff. date corrected
        89381
        91.300 (b)(3)(iii) amended; (b)(3)(iv) redesignated as (b)(3)(vi); new (b)(3)(iv) and (v) added
        91012
        91.310 (a) revised
        91012
        91.320 (k)(2)(i) through (vii) redesignated as (k)(2)(ii) through (viii); new (k)(2)(i) added; interim
        86951
        Regulation at 81 FR 86951 eff. date corrected
        89381
        91.505 (a)(2) revised; interim
        86951
        Regulation at 81 FR 86951 eff. date corrected
        89381
        91.520 (e) through (h) revised
        80803
        92 Technical correction
        87812
        Authority citation revised
        90657
        92.2 Amended; interim
        86952
        Regulation at 81 FR 86952 eff. date corrected
        89381
        Amended
        90657
        92.251 (a)(2) introductory text revised; (a)(2)(vi) and (b)(1)(x) added
        92635
        92.253 (a) revised; (d)(5) and (6) amended; (d)(7) added
        80803
        92.257 Revised
        19418
        92.350 (a) amended
        90657
        92.359 Added
        80803
        92.500 (d) revised; interim
        86952
        Regulation at 81 FR 86951 eff. date corrected
        89381
        92.502 (b)(2) removed; (b)(1) redesignated as (b); (c)(3) revised; interim
        86952
        Regulation at 81 FR 86952 eff. date corrected
        89381
        92.503 (b)(2) and (3) revised; (d) added; interim
        86952
        Regulation at 81 FR 86952 eff. date corrected
        89381
        92.504 (c)(1)(vi), (2)(iv) and (4)(ii) amended; (c)(3)(v)(F) added
        80804
        (c)(7) and (8) added; interim
        86953
        Regulation at 81 FR 86953 eff. date corrected
        89381
        92.508 (a)(7)(x) added
        80805
        93 Technical correction
        87812
        Authority citation revised
        90657
        93.2 Amended
        90657
        93.301 (a)(2) introductory text revised; (a)(2)(vi) and (b)(1)(x) added
        92636
        93.303 (a) revised; (d)(5) and (6) amended; (d)(7) added
        80805
        93.350 (a) amended
        90657
        
        93.356 Added
        80805
        93.404 (c)(1)(vi) and (2)(vi) revised
        80805
        93.407 (a)(5)(ix) added
        80805
        Chapter I
        100 Policy statement
        88627
        100.7 Added
        63074
        100.60 (b)(6) and (7) added
        63074
        100.65 (b)(6) and (7) added
        63074
        100.80 (b)(6) added
        63074
        100.90 (b)(5) and (6) added
        63074
        100.120 (b)(3) and (4) added
        63074
        100.130 (b)(4) and (5) added
        63074
        100.135 (d) revised
        63075
        100.400 (c)(6) added
        63075
        100.600 (Subpart H) Added
        63075
        180 Authority citation revised
        38936
        180.671 (a)(1), (2) and (3) revised; interim
        38936
      
      
        2017
        24 CFR
        82 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        5.632 (b)(1) amended
        58339
        5.657 (d) revised
        58340
        5.659 (d) introductory text revised; (e) added
        58340
        15 Authority citation revised
        3622
        15.101 (a) amended; (b)(7) and (8) added
        3622
        (b)(2) amended
        21694
        15.103 (a) amended; (c) introductory text revised
        3622
        15.104 (b) amended
        3622
        15.105 (d)(2)(iv) redesignated as (d)(2)(vi); (d) introductory text, new (2)(iv) and (v) added; (d)(1) amended
        3622
        15.106 (d)(1) revised; (d)(5), (6) and (7) added
        3622
        15.107 (b) removed; introductory text and (c) through (i) redesignated as new (b) and (1) through (9); (a) and new (b)(5) revised
        3623
        Revised
        21694
        15.109a Amended
        21694
        28.10 (a)(1) introductory text and (b)(1) introductory text revised
        24524
        30.5 (c) removed; (d), (e) and (f) redesignated as new (c), (d) and (e)
        24524
        30.10 Amended
        24524
        30.20 (b) revised
        24524
        30.25 (b) revised
        24524
        30.35 (a)(8) and (10) revised; eff. 9-19-17
        7117
        Amended
        12524
        30.36 (b)(3) and (c) amended
        24524
        30.40 (c) amended
        24524
        30.45 (g) revised
        24524
        30.50 (c) amended
        24524
        30.60 (c) revised
        24524
        30.65 (b) revised
        24524
        30.68 (c) revised
        24525
        30.80 (h) amended; (i) removed; (i); (j), (k) and (l) redesignated to (i), (j) and (k)
        24525
        35.105 Removed
        4166
        35.110 Amended
        4166
        35.125 (c)(4)(iii) added
        4167
        35.155 (a) amended
        4167
        35.165 (b)(4) amended
        4167
        35.325 Revised
        4167
        35.715 (d)(4) redesignated as (e); new (e) amended
        4167
        35.720 (c) amended
        4167
        35.730 Revised
        4167
        35.830 Revised
        4168
        35.1130 Revised
        4169
        35.1135 (d) amended
        4170
        35.1215 (b) amended
        4170
        35.1225 Revised
        4171
        35.1330 (a)(4)(iii) revised
        4172
        60 Revised; eff. 1-19-18
        7271
        87.400 (a), (b) and (e) revised
        24525
        Subtitle B
        Chapter I
        180.671 (a)(1), (2) and (3) revised
        24525
      
      
        2018
        24 CFR
        83 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        1.3 Amended
        26360
        8.1 (b) amended
        26361
        8.2 Amended
        26361
        8.4 (c)(2) amended
        26361
        16.2 (b)(2) amended
        26361
        16.3 (a) amended
        26361
        16.4 (a) amended
        26361
        28.10 (a)(1) introductory text and (b)(1) introductory text revised
        32793
        30.20 (b) revised
        32793
        30.25 (b) revised
        32793
        30.35 (c)(1) amended
        32793
        
        30.36 (c) amended
        32793
        30.40 (c) amended
        32793
        30.45 (g) revised
        32793
        30.50 (c) amended
        32793
        30.60 (c) revised
        32793
        30.65 (b) revised
        32793
        30.68 (c) revised
        32793
        40.2 (b)(3) amended
        26361
        40.4 Amended
        26361
        60.101 (l)(3) and (4) revised; interim
        3591
        (l)(1) heading and (5) added; (l)(2), (3), and (4) revised
        28514
        87.400 (a), (b), and (e) revised
        32793
        Chapter I
        180.671 (a)(1), (2), and (3) revised
        32793
      
      
        2019
        (Regulations published from January 1, 2019, through April 1, 2019)
        24 CFR
        84 FR
        Page
        Subtitle A
        28.10 (a)(1) introductory text and (b)(1) introductory text revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.20 (b) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.25 (b) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.35 (c)(1) amended; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.36 (c) amended; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.40 (c) amended; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.45 (g) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.50 (c) amended; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.60 (c) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.65 (b) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        30.68 (c) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9454
        87.400 (a), (b) and (e) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
        Chapter I
        180.671 (a)(1), (2), and (3) revised; eff. 4-15-19
        9453
      
      ○
    
  
